CITY CODE
of
CODY
WYOMING
Code current through: Ord. 2020-13, passed 6-16-2020
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street  *  Suite 310  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Cody, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2020-13, passed June 16, 2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 2010-16
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF CODY, WYOMING MUNICIPAL CODE AS RECODIFIED BY
STERLING CODIFIERS
BE IT ORDAINED by the governing body of the city of Cody, Wyoming, as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the code of
the city of Cody, Wyoming, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing the
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catch line and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the administrative services director,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: That said ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and publications as provided by law.
PASSED ON FIRST READING:     JULY 6, 2010 
PASSED ON SECOND READING:     JULY 20, 2010 
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED
ON THIRD AND FINAL READING:     AUGUST 3, 2010 
    Nancy Tia Brown, Mayor
ATTEST:
Jennifer R. Rosencranse
Administrative Services Director
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CODY CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Introduction
1-1-2: How Code Designated And Cited
1-1-3: Rules And Regulations Incorporated By Reference; Disposition
1-1-1: INTRODUCTION:
This title describes how the city code is constructed and implemented and
describes the general powers of the governing body as authorized in Wyoming
Statutes section 15-1-103. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-1-2: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated as the CODE OF THE CITY OF CODY, WYOMING, and may be so
cited. The code may also be cited as the CODY CITY CODE. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-
2004)
1-1-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE; DISPOSITION:
   A.   At every place in this code, where reference is made, and compliance
required, to any other rules or regulations, such rules or regulations as in
current use at such time as they may be required, are hereby declared to be a
part of this code by this reference, and also a part of such ordinances as may
refer to them, by such reference.
   B.   Whenever possible, copies of all such rules or regulations as in
current use from time to time shall be kept on file in the office of the city
clerk, and also in the office of such other city department as may be
instrumental in requiring compliance with such rules or regulations. (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Provisions Considered As Continuations Of Existing Ordinances
1-2-2: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-2-3: Repealing An Ordinance Of Repeal
1-2-1: PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same in substance
as those of the code and ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of
this code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-2-2: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
If for any reason any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-2-3: REPEALING AN ORDINANCE OF REPEAL:
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be
itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions And Rules Of Construction
1-3-2: Catchlines Of Sections
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and all ordinances of the city, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
ADULT: A person who is not a minor.
BOND: When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
CITY: The city of Cody, in the county of Park, in the state of Wyoming.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Cody, Wyoming.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; Saturday and Sunday
shall be excluded from computation.
COUNTY: The county of Park, in the state of Wyoming.
GOVERNING BODY: The members of the governing body constituting the elected
legislative body of the city, including the mayor who is the presiding officer.
IN THE CITY: Means and includes any territory within the corporate limits of
the city of Cody, Wyoming, and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other
territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general
or special act, except as otherwise specified.
MAJORITY: When used in a context denoting age, the word "majority" means that
period of time when a person is an adult. A person who has reached the
nineteenth anniversary of his birth has reached the age of majority and, as an
adult, has all of the rights and is subject to all the responsibilities
formerly granted or imposed upon a person who had reached the twenty first
anniversary of his birth, either by ordinance, statute or at common law.
MINOR: When used in a context denoting age, the word "minor" means a person who
has not yet reached the nineteenth anniversary of his birth.
MINORITY: When used in a context denoting age, the word "minority" means that
period of time when a person is a minor.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular.
OATH: Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of
the whole, but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of
the whole or a part of such building or land, and shall include any agent of
such owner, and where such owner is a body corporate, it shall include the
managing agent or officer within the city.
PERSON: Includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except real property.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real, personal and mixed property.
SHALL, MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the person cannot write, when his
name is written near such mark and is witnessed by two (2) persons who write
their own names as witnesses.
STATE: The state of Wyoming.
STREET: Means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all
other public thoroughfares in the city.
TENANT, OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, means any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
TIME: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the
past and present.
WRITING, WRITTEN: Includes typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-3-2: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline,
is amended or reenacted. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty; Continuing Violations
1-4-2: Refusal To Pay Fines
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
Wherever in this code, except section
1-4-2 of this chapter, or any ordinance, rule or regulation promulgated by any
officer or agency of the city under authority vested in him or it by law or
ordinance, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or the doing of
any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
the violation of any such provision of this code, or any such ordinance, rule
or regulation shall constitute a misdemeanor and should be punished by a fine
of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to which shall be added
court costs up to the maximum allowed by law.
Each daily violation of this code or any such ordinance, rule or regulation
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2016-11, 7-5-2016)
1-4-2: REFUSAL TO PAY FINES:
Any person against whom any fine or penalty shall be adjudged under the
provision of this code or any ordinance, rule or regulation promulgated by any
officer or agency of the city under authority vested in him or it by law or
ordinance, who shall refuse or neglect to pay the same, may be charged
additionally and/or committed to jail until the fine and costs are fully paid
or otherwise legally discharged or remitted. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Seal
1-5-1: CITY SEAL:
   A.   Description: The seal of the city shall be of the following design,
namely: A seal, the impression of which shall be in circular form, bearing the
words, "SEAL OF THE CITY OF CODY, WYOMING" on the outer edge, and the words,
"INCORPORATED 1901" in the center.
   B.   Use: The seal of the city shall be affixed to all warrants, licenses,
contracts, deeds, resolutions, ordinances, minutes of the governing body
proceedings, and all other papers which are signed by the mayor and attested by
the city clerk. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 6
ELECTIONS 1
SECTION:
1-6-1: State Law Governs City Elections
1-6-2: Wards
1-6-3: Precincts
1-6-4: Council Members
1-6-5: Residency
 
Notes
1 1. For state law as to wards, see WS § 15.1-164.
1-6-1: STATE LAW GOVERNS CITY ELECTIONS:
All city elections shall be held in conformity with the most recently compiled
election laws of the state. (1960 Compilation § 1-303)
1-6-2: WARDS:
The city is hereby divided into three (3) wards, called ward I, ward II and
ward III, the boundaries of which shall be designated in an official ward map
which shall be on display at city hall and shall be approved by a majority of
the council. Said map may be amended from time to time as is required to
maintain the population in each ward as nearly equal as possible. (Ord. 2005-
11, 9-20-2005)
1-6-3: PRECINCTS:
Precincts of the wards as herein established shall be those as established by
the board of county commissioners. (1960 Compilation § 1-405)
1-6-4: COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The city shall have six (6) council members, with two (2) being elected from
each ward by a multimember election district being comprised of the ward. (Ord.
00-12)
1-6-5: RESIDENCY:
The mayor shall be a qualified elector residing within the city and a council
member shall be a qualified elector residing within the ward he was elected to
serve from. The residency requirements shall be required to hold office and
serve once a qualified candidate is elected. (Ord. 00-12)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Introduction
1-7-1: INTRODUCTION:
This chapter describes the incorporation of the city and its designation as a
first class city under Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-301. The articles of this
chapter outline when and how the governing body conducts business and fulfills
its statutory duties according to Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-103 and Wyoming
Statutes title 16 particularly as it relates to public records, documents and
meetings.
The city shall not be governed by the provisions of Wyoming Statutes sections
15-1-125, 15-3-204, 15-3-205, 15-5-208, 15-3-210 and 15-3-212. (Ord. 2004-09,
10-4-2004)
ARTICLE A.  IN GENERAL
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Incorporation
1-7A-2: City Of The First Class
1-7A-1: INCORPORATION:
The town was duly incorporated as a municipal corporation under the laws of the
state in the year 1901. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7A-2: CITY OF THE FIRST CLASS:
The town, pursuant to a proclamation of the mayor, duly certified by the
Honorable Lester C. Hunt, governor of the state, was declared to be a city of
the first class on date of October 17, 1947. Such proclamation being duly filed
for record in the office of the county clerk and ex officio registrar of deeds,
Park County, Wyoming, on November 18, 1947, and recorded in book 126 at page
495 of the records of such county. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
ARTICLE B.  GOVERNING BODY
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Meetings
1-7B-2: Presiding Officer
1-7B-3: President And Acting President Of The Governing Body
1-7B-4: Rules Of Order
1-7B-4-1:    Call To Order; Quorum
1-7B-4-2:    Order Of Business
1-7B-4-3:    Preservation Of Order
1-7B-4-4:    Recognition By Presiding Officer
1-7B-4-5:    Motions Generally
1-7B-4-6:    Voting Of The Governing Body
1-7B-4-7:    Record Of Ayes And Nays
1-7B-4-8:    Ordinances, Resolutions, Etc.; Introduction; Passage And
Suspension Of Rules
1-7B-4-9:    Ordinances, Resolutions, Etc.; Approval And Record
1-7B-4-10:    Style Of Ordinance
1-7B-4-11:    Journal Of Proceedings And Minutes From Meetings
1-7B-4-12:    Allowance Of Bills Or Claims
1-7B-4-13:    Amendment Or Repeal Of Rules
1-7B-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular:
      1.   Regular meetings of the governing body shall be held on the first
and third Tuesday of the month after the election of the mayor and governing
body, unless Tuesday is observed as a legal holiday by the governing body. In
those circumstances, the meeting shall be held on the following day
(Wednesday). Regular meetings shall be held at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the
council chambers at city hall, unless otherwise published. No conditions can be
placed on the right of a member of the public to attend any meetings, except
that a person seeking recognition can be required to give his/her name and
affiliation. An emergency meeting on matters of serious immediate concern can
be held for the purpose of taking temporary action without notice. If action
taken at an emergency meeting is to be made permanent, it must be reconsidered
and acted upon at an open public meeting within forty eight (48) hours. The
presiding officer may order the removal of a person or a group of persons if
any meeting is wilfully disrupted and the orderly conduct of the meeting is
being rendered unfeasible and order cannot be restored.
      2.   Attendance at official meetings shall be governed by Wyoming
Statutes section 15-1-107, which states that a vacancy in the office of mayor
or council member exists if during the term for which elected any mayor or
council member fails to attend four (4) or more consecutive regularly scheduled
meetings of the council without an excused absence as determined by a majority
of the council. An absence shall be determined to be excused or unexcused by
the mayor with consent of the council; in the case of a board or commission,
the absence shall be determined to be excused or unexcused by the president or
chairperson of the board or commission to which the member is appointed.
      3.   This subsection, in addition to elected council members, shall apply
to all board and commission appointees with respect to attendance requirements.
   B.   Special: The presiding officer of the governing body, or a majority of
the qualified members of the governing body, may call a special meeting by
giving notice of the meeting to each member of that body and to each newspaper
of general circulation and radio or television station requesting such notice.
The notice must state the time, place, and business to be transacted at the
meeting. No other business can be considered at a special meeting (Wyoming
Statutes sections 15-1-105 and 16-4-404(b)).
   C.   Emergency Or Executive Sessions: Except as otherwise provided in the
law, all meetings of the governing body and all other boards, commissions and
agencies of the municipality must be open to the public at all times. The right
to go into executive session is restricted by the open meeting laws (Wyoming
Statutes section 16-4-403). Any action taken which is not in conformity with
this law is null and void.
   D.   Attendance By Officers And Employees: The city clerk shall attend all
meetings of the governing body and make an accurate record of all business
transacted at each meeting. The administrator and attorney shall likewise
attend all meetings of the governing body, unless excused by the mayor. (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-2: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the governing body, except as
otherwise provided for in section
1-7B-3 of this article. The presiding officer shall see that the established
order of business is followed and that the meeting is conducted in a dignified
and decorous manner. In general the presiding officer shall follow
parliamentary procedures as adopted by the current version of "Robert's Rules
of Order", in conducting meetings. The mayor shall have one vote on all matters
coming before the governing body upon which a vote is taken, except a vote:
   A.   To override a veto;
   B.   To confirm an appointment. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-3: PRESIDENT AND ACTING PRESIDENT OF THE GOVERNING BODY:
The governing body of the city may elect one of their body as the "president of
the governing body", who shall preside at all meetings of the governing body in
the absence of the mayor. In the absence of the president of the governing
body, the governing body may elect one of their own body to occupy the
president's place temporarily, and who shall be styled "acting president of the
governing body". The president and acting president, when occupying the place
of the mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the governing
body, and all acts of the president and acting president, while so acting,
shall be binding upon the governing body and upon the city as if done by the
mayor. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4: RULES OF ORDER:
1-7B-4-1: CALL TO ORDER; QUORUM:
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the governing body shall be called to
order by the presiding officer. Four (4) members of the governing body shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting. (Ord. 2004-
09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-2: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business at each regular governing body meeting shall be listed on
an official agenda under the direction of the mayor, including any supporting
documents, and shall not in any case be departed from, except by consent of a
majority of the members present. The mayor may use a consent agenda. If a
consent agenda is utilized, any member of the governing body or a person
attending the meeting may remove an item from consent. If any item is removed
from the consent agenda, it will be discussed and voted on separately. (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-3: PRESERVATION OF ORDER:
The mayor or presiding officer shall preserve order, prevent personal
reflections, confine members in debate to the question, and shall decide who
shall be first heard when two (2) members rise at the same time. Any member of
the governing body, when called to order by the presiding officer, shall at
once suspend remarks. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-4: RECOGNITION BY PRESIDING OFFICER:
Each member of the governing body, before speaking on any question, shall
address questions or comments to the presiding officer using the proper title,
and shall not proceed with remarks until recognized and named by the presiding
officer. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-5: MOTIONS GENERALLY:
No question on a motion shall be debated or put to a vote unless the same be
seconded. When a motion is seconded it shall be stated by the presiding officer
before debate or action thereon. Any motion shall be reduced to writing by the
member making it, if the presiding officer or any member shall ask it. (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-6: VOTING OF THE GOVERNING BODY:
Each member of the governing body who shall be present when a question is to be
voted upon shall vote thereon, unless excused by the governing body. A
governing body member may, before the vote is called for, give reasons for not
voting. Any member must assure their actions comply with conflict of interests
laws and shall refrain from voting when a conflict is present (Wyoming Statutes
sections 6-5-101, 15-1-127). (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-7: RECORD OF AYES AND NAYS:
On the question of the passage of an ordinance or resolution, the vote of the
governing body shall be taken by ayes and nays, and a record of the same shall
be made upon the journal, which shall show how each governing body member
voted. Any governing body member can change their vote previous to the
announcement of the vote of the governing body. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-8: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.; INTRODUCTION; PASSAGE AND SUSPENSION
OF RULES:
All ordinances hereafter adopted and passed by the governing body shall be
introduced in writing. Every ordinance shall be publicly read on three (3)
different days. Public reading may be made by title only. At least ten (10)
days shall elapse between the introduction and final passage of every
ordinance. For an emergency ordinance, the requirements of this section may be
suspended by the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the elected and
qualified members of the governing body. No franchise may be granted by
emergency ordinance.
Passage of an ordinance requires the affirmative vote of the majority of
elected members of the governing body. The passage of an emergency ordinance
requires the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the elected and
qualified members of the governing body. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-9: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.; APPROVAL AND RECORD:
All ordinances, bylaws and resolutions shall, within a reasonable time after
the passage thereof, be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and
recorded in a book kept for that purpose. In all cases where a motion is
entered upon the journal of the governing body, the name of the member moving
the same shall also be entered. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-10: STYLE OF ORDINANCE:
The style of an ordinance shall be, "Be it ordained by the governing body of
the city of Cody, Wyoming". (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-11: JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS AND MINUTES FROM MEETINGS:
The city clerk shall keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the governing
body. The journal may consist of three (3) separate books; a minute book, a
resolution book, and an ordinance book. The following materials should be
included: minutes of each meeting, copies of agendas and supporting
information, a record of each motion, including names and disposition, a record
of attendance, the names of all persons appearing before the governing body and
the nature of their request, and meeting times and adjournment. The journal of
the proceedings shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times.
The governing body is required to designate a "legal newspaper" and to publish
once, the minutes of all regular meetings, special meetings, workshops where
governing body action is taken, and titles of all ordinances passed. Within
twelve (12) days after each meeting adjourns, the clerk must furnish a copy of
the proceedings to the newspaper (Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-110(a)). (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-12: ALLOWANCE OF BILLS OR CLAIMS:
No bills or claims against the city shall be allowed except as authorized by
written requisition, except salaries of city officials and necessary payroll
expenses, and until approved by a majority of the governing body. (Ord. 2004-
09, 10-4-2004)
1-7B-4-13: AMENDMENT OR REPEAL OF RULES:
The foregoing rules may be amended or repealed at any regular meeting of the
governing body; provided, that any proposed amendment or repeal has been
proposed in writing at a previous meeting; and provided further, that a
majority of the governing body shall agree to the amendment or repeal and the
action is allowable by Wyoming Statutes. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
ARTICLE C.  APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Enumeration; Generally
1-7C-2: City Administrator
1-7C-3: Duties Of City Administrator
1-7C-4: Oath And Bond
1-7C-5: Salaries
1-7C-6: Duties Of City Attorney
1-7C-7: Bonds
1-7C-8: Clerk And Treasurer
1-7C-1: ENUMERATION; GENERALLY:
The mayor, by and with the consent of the governing body, shall appoint a city
administrator, a city attorney and a municipal judge, and fix their salaries.
The mayor shall also, with the advice and consent of the governing body, make
all appointments to boards and commissions of the city. (Ord. 2007-01, 2-20-
2007)
1-7C-2: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The city administrator shall not receive any compensation for the performance
of his duties other than the compensation fixed by the governing body. The city
administrator is an at will employee and serves at the pleasure of the
governing body. Salary may be changed from year to year and the city
administrator may be discharged at any time by a majority vote of the governing
body. The city administrator shall give at least thirty (30) days' notice in
writing to the governing body before resigning the position. The mayor, with
the consent of governing body, shall immediately proceed to appoint another
person as city administrator. If there is any delay in securing a new or
interim administrator, the mayor shall act as administrator for up to one
hundred eighty (180) days, at no additional compensation, and shall be vested
with authority and charged with the duties and responsibilities of the
administrator until a new administrator is appointed. (Ord. 2007-01, 2-20-2007)
1-7C-3: DUTIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
Except for the positions required in section
1-7C-1 of this article to be filled by the governing body, all employees shall
be employed by the city administrator. The city administrator shall direct and
supervise their activity and shall make recommendations concerning salaries
according to the employee's classification and any adopted wage and salary
schedule. The administrator shall designate all department head positions that
the governing body approves and provides for. The administrator shall have
managerial control over all such departments and may hire and remove all
necessary subordinates whosoever. The administrator shall notify the governing
body of dismissals, terminations and demotions the day the action occurs. The
administrator shall notify the governing body of newly hired employees,
transfers, promotions and resignations in a timely fashion. Except as otherwise
provided, the administrator shall prescribe the powers and duties of all
employees, including department heads and subordinates, and may require any
employee to perform duties in two (2) or more departments. The administrator
shall file with the city clerk a list of the names of all employees, together
with a statement of the salary compensation each is to receive. The city
administrator shall recommend such rules and regulations necessary for the
efficient and economical conduct of the business.
Additionally, the city administrator shall see that all laws and ordinances are
observed and enforced; attend all meetings of the governing body unless
excused; recommend necessary and expedient measures; prepare and submit to the
governing body reports required by it, and reports that the city administrator
considers advisable; keep the governing body fully advised as to the city
financial condition and future needs; prepare the budget annually; submit to
the governing body and be responsible for its administration after its
adoption; and perform all other duties legally imposed on said position. (Ord.
2007-01, 2-20-2007)
1-7C-4: OATH AND BOND:
Each person appointed to any office under this code or other ordinances of the
city shall, before entering upon the performance of the duties of such office,
subscribe an oath or affirmation to honestly and faithfully perform and
discharge the duties of such office to the best of his ability. In addition
thereto, certain officers shall be required to furnish bonds in accordance with
state law. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7C-5: SALARIES:
   A.   The annual salary for the mayor shall be twenty four thousand dollars
($24,000.00) commencing January 1, 2009, and shall be paid in twenty six (26)
biweekly installments.
   B.   Each governing body member shall be paid compensation quarterly in the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for actual attendance at each regular or
special meeting of the governing body, or any committee meeting.
   C.   The annual salary for the municipal court judge shall be twenty-four
thousand five hundred dollars ($24,500) and shall be paid in twenty four (24)
installments. Alternate municipal court judges shall receive compensation at
the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour for each hour, or proportion
thereof, such alternate judge provides services to the city as a municipal
court judge. (Ord. 2016-17, 1-3-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-08, 6-16-2020)
1-7C-6: DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY:
The duties of the city attorney shall be as follows:
   A.   Commence, prosecute and defend all suits to which the city is a party,
in all courts of the city and state.
   B.   Prosecute all suits for the violation of any provision of this code or
other city ordinance.
   C.   Give advice to the mayor and any member of the governing body on legal
questions arising relating to the business of the city. Draw all contracts to
which the city is a party.
   D.   Review and revise all ordinances prior to their final passage by the
governing body.
   E.   Draft and prepare all ordinances when so requested by the mayor, any
member of the governing body or the city administrator.
   F.   Attend the meetings of the governing body.
   G.   Do all legal work relating to the city business and perform such other
duties as may be required by the mayor, the governing body, or city
administrator, or by law. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7C-7: BONDS:
   A.   Who May Act As Sureties: Whenever any bond, recognizance or other
obligation is by law, ordinance, rules or regulations of the city required or
permitted to be tendered or filed, with sureties, and whenever the performance
of any act or obligation, or the refraining from any act, is required or
permitted to be guaranteed, such bond, undertaking, obligation, recognizance or
guarantee may be executed either by a guaranty or surety company qualified to
act as surety or guarantor under the laws of the state, or by two (2) or more
individuals, who shall be qualified as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Qualifications Of Individual Sureties: In case any bond, recognizance
or other obligation of the character hereinbefore mentioned shall be executed
on behalf of the party named therein as principal by two (2) or more
individuals as sureties, such sureties and each of them shall be resident
property holders of the city, and shall justify upon oath to an amount of
property equal to twice the value of the amount of the bond, recognizance or
other obligation executed by them, exclusive of the amount of their debts,
exemptions and other liabilities.
   C.   Approval Required: All bonds as referred to in this section shall be of
a form to be reviewed by the city attorney and the governing body.
   D.   Required; Conditioned Upon: The city clerk or other employees directed
by the governing body, having custody of monies belonging to the city shall,
before entering upon the performance of their respective duties, be required to
furnish a bond in the amount hereinafter prescribed for such office, which bond
shall be conditioned upon:
      1.   The faithful performance by such employee, of all the duties of
their office as prescribed by law;
      2.   The safekeeping of all money which may come into their hands by
virtue of their office.
   E.   Premium Paid By City: When the bond of any employee authorized by the
city having custody of public money shall be furnished by a guaranty or surety
company, the premium due such company for furnishing such bond shall be paid
out of the public funds of the city.
   F.   Form: All bonds required by this article shall be of a form to be
reviewed by the city attorney and the governing body. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7C-8: CLERK AND TREASURER:
The City Administrator shall appoint a city clerk and treasurer for the City of
Cody.
   A.   The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows:
      1.   To keep safely the seal, papers, records and books of the city;
      2.   To attend meetings of the governing body unless excused and record
the minutes thereof;
      3.   To preserve a consecutive record of all the resolutions and
ordinances passed by the city council in a book kept for that purpose;
      4.   To attest the signature of the mayor and affix the seal of the city
to documents as necessary;
      5.   To issue all licenses in accordance with the law.
   B.   The duties of the city treasurer shall be as follows:
      1.   T attest all warrants and orders upon the treasurer and keep an
accurate record thereof;
      2.   To endorse or attach to every bond or other evidence of indebtedness
issued by the city pursuant to the law, a certificate that the same is within
the lawful debt limit of the city and is issued pursuant to law, and to sign
such certificate in his or her official capacity;
      3.   To perform all of the duties of the city treasurer as provided by
the laws of the state, by resolution of the Governing Body, and as directed by
the City Administrator;
      4.   To endorse the date of presentation across the back of any orders
and warrants which are not paid for lack of funds, and the reason for
nonpayment. (Ord. 2020-09, 6-16-2020)
ARTICLE D.  CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Regulations Authorized To Be Imposed By Proclamation
1-7D-2: When Proclamation To Become Effective
1-7D-3: Termination Of Emergency
1-7D-1: REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED TO BE IMPOSED BY PROCLAMATION:
Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor or in the event of his inability to act,
the president of the governing body, determines that an emergency exists as a
result of mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or
damages to persons or property, he shall have power to impose by proclamation
any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and
order of the city:
   A.   To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places;
provided, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical
services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firefighters
and city authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be
exempted from such curfew.
   B.   To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the
city for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be
limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline
or firearms.
   C.   To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
   D.   To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the city. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-7D-2: WHEN PROCLAMATION TO BECOME EFFECTIVE:
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective upon its
issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. (Ord. 2004-
09, 10-4-2004)
1-7D-3: TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY:
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall terminate after forty eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof, or upon
the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists,
whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency may be extended
for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of
the governing body. (Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
CHAPTER 8
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Late Payment Charge For Delinquent Bills
1-8-2: Accounting And Processing Charge On Insufficient Funds Payments
1-8-1: LATE PAYMENT CHARGE FOR DELINQUENT BILLS:
Any charges made by the city for utilities, meters, hookup fees, connection
fees, service charges and other fees and charges made by the city which are not
paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the first billing shall be subject
to a charge of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month, plus administrative
fees as authorized by the governing body until said obligation has been paid.
(Ord. 2004-09, 10-4-2004)
1-8-2: ACCOUNTING AND PROCESSING CHARGE ON INSUFFICIENT FUNDS PAYMENTS:
The city has the right to assess accounting and processing fees as allowed by
law against any drawer who issues an insufficient funds payment to the city for
payment of any charge, invoice, assessment or account. The terms "check",
"drawer", "insufficient funds",and "issue" are defined for purposes of this
section pursuant to the definitions set forth in Wyoming Statutes. (Ord. 2004-
09, 10-4-2004)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES GENERALLY
SECTION:
3-1-1: Required
3-1-2: Form Of Application; Conditions Of Granting; Right Of Entry
3-1-3: Term; Expiration Date; Proration Of Fee
3-1-4: Contents
3-1-5: Posting; Duty Of Licensee To Show License
3-1-6: License Officer; Definition; Duties Generally
3-1-7: License Officer; Authority To Make Inspections
3-1-8: Authority Generally Of Inspectors
3-1-9: Reports Of Inspectors
3-1-10: Issuance Of Provisional Order To Comply
3-1-11: Service Of Notice To Comply
3-1-12: Period Of Compliance With Provisional Order
3-1-13: Hearing Before Expiration Of Compliance Time
3-1-14: Modifying Authority Of License Officer
3-1-15: Failure Or Refusal To Comply With Provisional Order
3-1-16: Suspension Or Revocation By License Officer
3-1-17: Effect Of Revocation Or Suspension
3-1-18: Summary Action By License Officer; Authority To Revoke, Etc.
3-1-19: Summary Action By License Officer; Special Hearing
3-1-20: Appeal From Decision By License Officer; To Mayor And Council
3-1-21: Appeal From Decision By License Officer; Contents Of Appeal
3-1-22: Appeal From Decision By License Officer; Notification Of License
Officer
3-1-23: Appeal From Decision By License Officer; Hearing
3-1-24: Appeal From Decision By License Officer; Effect Of Decision; Service Of
Copy On Appellant
3-1-25: Collection Of Unpaid License Fees
3-1-1: REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, prosecute or carry on any business referred to in
this code, or any other ordinances of the city, or conduct and operate a
business within the limits of the city requiring a license, without first
having obtained a license therefor and having paid to the city the license fee
as provided herein. (1960 Compilation § 19-101)
3-1-2: FORM OF APPLICATION; CONDITIONS OF GRANTING; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Every applicant for any license of the character specified in section
3-1-1 of this chapter shall make written application for such license to the
city council in whatever form the council may prescribe.
Every such license granted as herein provided shall be understood and deemed to
be granted subject to all conditions set forth in the form of application
prescribed by the city council. The chief of police or any police officer of
the city is hereby given the right and authority to enter such licensed places
to search and seize evidence therein as herein provided. (1960 Compilation §
19-102)
3-1-3: TERM; EXPIRATION DATE; PRORATION OF FEE:
   A.   All licenses referred to in this chapter shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight of December 31 next after payment of the license fee. The
license fee shall be due on January 1 of each year and must be paid within
thirty (30) days thereafter. No license shall be issued for any period of time
longer than one year.
   B.   The license fee on any business or occupation, except on retail or
limited liquor licenses, beginning operations after the date of June 30 of
every year, shall pay one-half (1/2) of the regular license fee. (1960
Compilation § 19-103)
3-1-4: CONTENTS:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall show upon its
face:
   A.   The name of the person to whom issued.
   B.   Kind of business.
   C.   Time for which issued.
   D.   Place where business is to be carried on.
   E.   That such license is not transferable, except on city council action.
(1960 Compilation § 19-104)
3-1-5: POSTING; DUTY OF LICENSEE TO SHOW LICENSE:
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted in any place of
business in such place as is conspicuous. It shall be the duty of the licensee
to show the same at any proper time when requested to do so by any police
officer, the mayor, any member of the city council or any city employee charged
to collect the license fee. (1960 Compilation § 19-105)
3-1-6: LICENSE OFFICER; DEFINITION; DUTIES GENERALLY:
The "license officer" is defined as the chief of police or any authorized
member of the police department, who shall make all investigations necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter and any other ordinances of the city relating
to the licensing of businesses and occupations, including retail and limited
liquor licensees. (1960 Compilation § 19-107)
3-1-7: LICENSE OFFICER; AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS:
The license officer is authorized to conduct inspections in the manner
prescribed herein. (1960 Compilation § 19-106)
3-1-8: AUTHORITY GENERALLY OF INSPECTORS:
All persons authorized herein to inspect licensees and businesses shall have
the authority to enter, with or without search warrant, at all reasonable
times, the following premises:
   A.   Those for which a license is required.
   B.   Those for which a license was issued, and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under such license.
   C.   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended. (1960
Compilation § 19-108)
3-1-9: REPORTS OF INSPECTORS:
Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or premises as herein
authorized, shall report all violations of this chapter, this code or of any
other laws or ordinances of the city relating to the licensing of businesses or
occupations to the license officer and shall submit such other reports as the
license officer shall order. (1960 Compilation § 19-109)
3-1-10: ISSUANCE OF PROVISIONAL ORDER TO COMPLY:
When an inspector has reported the violation of this chapter, this code or any
other ordinances of the city relating to the licensing of businesses and
occupations, the license officer shall issue to the affected person a
provisional order to comply. (1960 Compilation § 19-110)
3-1-11: SERVICE OF NOTICE TO COMPLY:
The provisional order, and all other notices issued in compliance with this
chapter, shall be in writing, shall be personally served and shall apprise the
person affected of his specific violations. In the absence of the person
affected or his agent or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to
some structure on the premises. Depositing such notice by registered or
certified mail shall constitute service thereof. (1960 Compilation § 19-111)
3-1-12: PERIOD OF COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONAL ORDER:
The provisional order referred to in this chapter shall require compliance
within five (5) days after personal service on the affected person. (1960
Compilation § 19-112)
3-1-13: HEARING BEFORE EXPIRATION OF COMPLIANCE TIME:
Upon written application by the person affected before the expiration of the
five (5) day period for compliance, the license officer shall order a hearing.
Notice of such hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner
prescribed herein. (1960 Compilation § 19-113)
3-1-14: MODIFYING AUTHORITY OF LICENSE OFFICER:
Upon written application, or on his own motion, the license officer shall have
the authority, in a proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a
new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order.
(1960 Compilation § 19-114)
3-1-15: FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO COMPLY WITH PROVISIONAL ORDER:
Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply with the provisional
order or with any order made after hearing, the license officer shall then
declare and make the provisional order final. (1960 Compilation § 19-115)
3-1-16: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION BY LICENSE OFFICER:
The license officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon
making and declaring a provisional order final. (1960 Compilation § 19-116)
3-1-17: EFFECT OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
Upon revocation or suspension of licenses, no refund of any portion of the
license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately cease all
business at all places under such license. (1960 Compilation § 19-117)
3-1-18: SUMMARY ACTION BY LICENSE OFFICER; AUTHORITY TO REVOKE, ETC.:
When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical to the
public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and thus
give rise to an emergency, the license officer shall have the authority to
summarily order the cessation of business and the close of the premises or
suspend or revoke the license. (1960 Compilation § 19-118)
3-1-19: SUMMARY ACTION BY LICENSE OFFICER; SPECIAL HEARING:
Unless waived in writing, within two (2) days after he has acted summarily, the
license officer shall conduct a special hearing for such action in respect to
the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall be
given the affected person in the manner prescribed in section
3-1-11 of this chapter. (1960 Compilation § 19-119)
3-1-20: APPEAL FROM DECISION BY LICENSE OFFICER; TO MAYOR AND COUNCIL:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license officer after hearing shall
have the right of appeal to the mayor and council by filing a written appeal
with the city clerk within five (5) days following the effective date of the
action or decision complained of. (1960 Compilation § 19-120)
3-1-21: APPEAL FROM DECISION BY LICENSE OFFICER; CONTENTS OF APPEAL:
The appeal referred to in section
3-1-20 of this chapter shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed
from and shall include a statement of facts relied upon to avoid such order.
(1960 Compilation § 19-121)
3-1-22: APPEAL FROM DECISION BY LICENSE OFFICER; NOTIFICATION OF LICENSE
OFFICER:
At the time of filing the appeal referred to in this chapter, a copy thereof
shall be filed by the appellant with the license officer. (1960 Compilation §
19-122)
3-1-23: APPEAL FROM DECISION BY LICENSE OFFICER; HEARING:
The city clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal referred to in
this chapter, the same to be heard by the mayor and council in the council room
in the city hall at a time not less than five (5) days nor more than thirty
(30) days from the date of filing of the appeal with the city clerk. Written
notice, as provided herein, shall be personally served upon the appellant
informing him thereof by the license officer. The city clerk shall also give
such notice to the license officer and such officer shall be entitled to appear
and defend such order. (1960 Compilation § 19-123)
3-1-24: APPEAL FROM DECISION BY LICENSE OFFICER; EFFECT OF DECISION; SERVICE OF
COPY ON APPELLANT:
The findings of the mayor and council on the appeal made under the provisions
of this chapter shall be final and conclusive, and a copy thereof shall be
personally served upon the appellant as required herein, and in the event
personal service cannot be obtained, the same can be mailed to appellant by
registered or certified mail at his last known address. (1960 Compilation § 19-
124)
3-1-25: COLLECTION OF UNPAID LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The amount of any unpaid license fee, the payment of which is required
by this chapter, this code or any other ordinance of the city, shall constitute
a debt due the city.
   B.   The city attorney shall, at the direction of the license officer,
institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid license
fee. (1960 Compilation § 19-125)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-0: Introduction
Article I. In General
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Adoption Of State Alcoholic Beverage Laws
3-2-3: Sales By Fraternal Clubs
3-2-4: Hours Of Sale
3-2-5: Location, Regulation And Restrictions As To Places Of Sale
3-2-6: Sales, Etc., To Or Entry Upon Premises By Minors And Attempts By Minors
To Enter Or Purchase
3-2-7: Keg Registration (Rep. by Ord. 2017-20, 8-15-2017)
3-2-8: Open Containers In Public Streets, School Grounds, Parks, Etc.
Article II. Licenses
3-2-9: Types Of Licenses And Permits
3-2-10: Numbers, Application, Issuance And Regulation Of Licenses And Licensees
3-2-11: Publication Of Notice Of Application For License; Grant Or Denial;
Renewal Preferences; Appeals
3-2-12: License Contents, Signatures And Display
3-2-13: Term, Transfer And Sale
3-2-14: License Fees
3-2-15: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-2-0: INTRODUCTION:
This chapter describes the powers of the Governing Body to issue and regulate
the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages as provided by Wyoming Statutes
title 12, "Alcoholic Beverages". (Ord. 2006-07, 5-2-2006)
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirituous or fermented fluid, substance or compound,
other than malt beverage, intended for beverage purposes which contains more
than one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume.
BUILDING: A roofed and walled structure built or set in place for permanent
use.
CLUB: Any of the following organizations:
   A.   A post, charter, camp or other local unit composed only of veterans and
its duty organized auxiliary, chartered by the Congress of the United States
for patriotic, fraternal or benevolent purposes and, as the owner, lessee or
occupant, operates an establishment for these purposes within the State;
   B.   A chapter, lodge or other local unit of an American national fraternal
organization and, as the owner, lessee or occupant, operates an establishment
for fraternal purposes within the State. As used in this definition, an
"American fraternal organization" means an organization actively operating in
no less than thirty six (36) states or having been in active continuous
existence for not less than twenty (20) years, but does not mean a college
fraternity;
   C.   A hall or building association of a local unit specified in subsections
A and B of this definition, of which all of the capital stock is owned by the
local unit or its members, operating clubroom facilities for the local unit;
   D.   A golf club having more than fifty (50) bona fide members and owning,
maintaining or operating a bona fide golf course, together with a clubhouse;
   E.   A social club with more than one hundred (100) bona fide members who
are residents of the county in which it is located, owning, maintaining or
operating club quarters, incorporated and operating solely as a nonprofit
corporation under the laws of this State and qualified as a tax exempt
organization under the Internal Revenue Service Code and having been
continuously operating for a period of not less than one year. The club shall
have had during this one year period a bona fide membership paying dues of at
least twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year as recorded by the Secretary of the
club, quarterly meetings and an actively engaged membership carrying out the
objects of the club. A social club shall, upon applying for a license, file
with the licensing authority and the commission, a true copy of its bylaws and
shall further, upon applying for a renewal of its license, file with the
licensing authority and commission a detailed statement of its activities
during the preceding year which were undertaken or furthered in pursuit of the
objects of the club, together with an itemized statement of amounts expended
for such activities. Club members, at the time of application for a limited
retail liquor license pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 12-4-301, shall be
in good standing by having paid at least one full year of dues.
COMMISSION: The Wyoming Liquor Division within the Department of Revenue
created under Wyoming Statutes section 12-2-106.
RESTAURANT: Space in a building maintained, advertised and held out to the
public as a place where individually priced meals are prepared and served
primarily for on premises consumption and where the primary source of revenue
from the operation is from the sale of food and not from the sale of alcoholic
or malt beverages. The building shall have a dining room or rooms, a kitchen
and the number and kinds of employees necessary for the preparing, cooking and
serving of meals in order to satisfy the licensing authority that the space is
intended for use as a full service restaurant. "Full service restaurant" means
a restaurant at which waiters or waitresses deliver food and drink offered from
a printed food menu to patrons at tables or booths. The service of only fry
orders or such food and victuals as sandwiches, hamburgers or salads shall not
be deemed as a "restaurant" for the purposes of this section.
ROOM: An enclosed and partitioned space within a building large enough for a
person to enter, but not a cabinet. Partitions may contain windows and
doorways, but any partition shall extend from floor to ceiling.
SELL OR SALE: Offering for sale, trafficking in, bartering, delivering or
dispensing and pouring for value, exchanging for goods, services or patronage,
or an exchange in any way other than purely gratuitously. Every delivery of an
alcoholic liquor or malt beverage made otherwise than by gift constitutes a
"sale".
WHOLESALER: Any person, except the commission, who sells any alcoholic or malt
beverage to a retailer for resale. (Ord. 2006-07, 5-2-2006)
3-2-2: ADOPTION OF STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LAWS:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other City ordinances, the sale of
alcoholic and malt liquors in the City shall be in compliance with Wyoming
Statutes title 12, "Alcoholic Beverages", as amended, as the same shall apply
to the City. A copy of such laws and of any subsequent laws and amendments
thereto shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and the same are
made a part of this section by this reference, as though incorporated herein at
length. (Ord. 2006-07, 5-2-2006)
3-2-3: SALES BY FRATERNAL CLUBS:
No "club", as defined by section 3-2-1 of this chapter, holding a limited
retail liquor license, shall sell alcoholic or malt beverages for consumption
anywhere except the building or space in the building or the premises leased or
owned by such club for the use of its members and guests, and it shall be the
duty and obligation of said club to so check and regulate the sale to members
and guests that any and all alcoholic or malt beverages sold by it shall be
consumed in such building, space or premises. The age restrictions in section
3-2-6 of this chapter shall not apply to club licenses. The Governing Body may,
upon application by the club, allow the club to serve alcoholic or malt
beverages outside its building, but on its premises for a period of time not to
exceed twenty four (24) hours, and subject to such terms, conditions and
limitations as the Governing Body may establish. The Governing Body may, by
resolution, authorize the City Administrator and/or the Administrative Services
Director to approve such permits without action or approval by the Governing
Body, provided that the applicant complies with the terms, conditions and
limitations established by the resolution. In the event that the applicant
wishes to request modifications or exceptions to such terms, conditions and
limitations, such request must be presented to the Governing Body, and the
Governing Body may approve, deny or partially approve such modifications or
exceptions. (Ord. 2017-21, 10-17-2017)
3-2-4: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   All licensees may open at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and shall close and
cease the sale of both alcoholic and malt beverages promptly at the hour of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following day. In addition, licensees shall clear the
licensed building of all persons other than employees by two thirty o'clock (2:
30) A.M.
   B.   The hours of operation designated in subsection A of this section may
be modified on no more than four (4) days each calendar year by a resolution or
agreement by the Governing Body designating those dates during City fairs,
rodeos, pageants, jubilees, special holidays or similar public gatherings when
all licensees may operate their dispensing rooms for a period of up to twenty
four (24) hours beginning at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day, including
Sunday. The Governing Body may place any limitations, restrictions and
conditions on such modified hours as the Governing Body, in its discretion,
deems in the interests of public safety. In addition, the Governing Body may
delegate to the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, the authority to
revoke such modified hours, and close any establishment operating during such
modified hours, if the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines such
closure is necessary for public safety. (Ord. 2017-17, 8-15-2017)
3-2-5: LOCATION, REGULATION AND RESTRICTIONS AS TO PLACES OF SALE:
   A.   The principal place in which alcoholic liquor and malt beverages are
sold under a license shall be located in the licensed building upon the
premises for which the license is issued. Alcoholic beverages secured in the
licensed building by a server may be served only in the building and in an
immediately adjacent fenced or enclosed area as approved by the City. This
adjacent area shall not be in another building and shall be located on the
licensed premises. The City shall, as often as necessary, inspect the licensed
building and adjacent areas where alcoholic beverages are served to ensure that
the licensee is in compliance with sanitation and fire hazard requirements and
other applicable laws. (Ord. 2017-18, 8-15-2017)
3-2-6: SALES, ETC., TO OR ENTRY UPON PREMISES BY MINORS AND ATTEMPTS BY MINORS
TO ENTER OR PURCHASE:
   A.   Except as provided in this section, no licensee or agent, employee or
server thereof shall knowingly permit any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to enter or remain in the licensed building where alcoholic or malt
beverages are dispensed in an establishment where the primary source of revenue
is from the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages, except in the following
situations:
      1.   The establishment has a commercial kitchen which, due to the nature
of the cooking, is required to have or does have hand washing sinks with hot
and cold water, installed to allow convenient use by employees in food
preparation, food dispensing, and which comply with the Wyoming Department of
Agriculture rules and regulations for food safety, and in addition, due to the
nature of the cooking, is required to have or does have one or more of the
following:
         a.   A Type I hood over the cooking appliances as required by the
then-current International Mechanical Code; or
         b.   A commercial grade dishwashing machine that meets National
Sanitation Foundation (NSF) ANSI 3 standards, including a booster heater to
maintain one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit (180°F) water temperature at the
manifold of the dish machine;
      2.   Minors shall not be permitted in the licensed building after the
kitchen stops serving food;
      3.   In an establishment which has a retail liquor license, employees at
least eighteen (18) years of age are permitted in the licensed building in the
course of their employment and may serve alcoholic and malt beverages. Such
employees may remain in the dispensing building no later than eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M.
      4.   Bowling alleys, theatres, event centers, arenas, auditoriums, and
rodeo grounds, and buildings which are used for overnight lodging, so long as
individuals under the age of twenty one (21) are not permitted in any area of
the building in which is dedicated solely or primarily to the sale of alcoholic
beverages, and such area does not otherwise meet any of the exceptions under
this section.
   B.   At no time shall any person under the age of twenty one (21) be allowed
to sit at the bar where alcohol is displayed and dispensed.
   C.   Any establishment that sells alcohol for off-premises consumption shall
maintain such sales in an enclosed and partitioned room separate from portions
of the building in which persons under the age of twenty one (21) are allowed.
No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed in the room
dedicated for off-premises consumption, unless accompanied by a parent, spouse
or legal guardian who is twenty one (21) years of age or older.
   D.   Every person who sells, furnishes, gives or causes to be sold,
furnished or given away any alcoholic or malt beverage to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years who is not his or her own child or legal ward, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   E.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall possess or
consume alcoholic or malt beverage; have any measurable blood, breath or urine
alcohol concentration in his body, or enter or remain in an establishment that
is primarily for off-premises sales of alcoholic liquor or malt beverages
unless accompanied by a parent, spouse or legal guardian who is twenty one (21)
years of age or older. This subsection does not apply to possession of
alcoholic or malt beverages by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years:
      1.   When making a delivery of alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to
his or her employment;
      2.   Who is in the physical presence of his parent or legal guardian;
      3.   Who is a licensee under this title; or
      4.   When serving alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to his or her
employment in a restaurant which holds a license to serve alcoholic or malt
beverages, if the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   F.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who attempts in any
manner to purchase or obtain alcoholic or malt beverages is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   G.   Any person who violates any part of this section, or aids, abets or
incites any violation hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   H.   A motor vehicle driver's license, a registration certificate issued
under the Federal Military Selective Service Act, an identification card issued
to a member of the armed forces, an internationally accepted passport document
with a discernible date of birth and photograph, or an identification card
issued by the Department of Transportation is prima facie evidence of the age
and identity of a person. Proof that a licensee or his employee or agent
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance upon the information
contained in any one of the above documents as identification is a defense to
any criminal prosecution or action for the suspension or revocation of a
license. (Ord. 2017-19, 8-15-2017)
3-2-7: KEG REGISTRATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-20, 8-15-2017)
3-2-8: OPEN CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC STREETS, SCHOOL GROUNDS, PARKS, ETC.:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, carry, exhibit or have
in his possession wines, alcoholic liquors or malt beverages in open or
unsealed containers of any type, in or upon the public streets, sidewalks,
curbs, alleys, school grounds and parks; provided, however, that the Governing
Body and/or its designee, upon application on a written form provided by the
City and upon payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee, may grant a permit
authorizing use and consumption contrary to the foregoing for picnics, bazaars,
fairs, rodeos, special holidays, conventions, tournaments or similar
gatherings. (Ord. 2013-12, 6-4-2013)
ARTICLE II.  LICENSES
3-2-9: TYPES OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Pursuant to Wyoming Statutes title 12, the City may issue the following types
of licenses and permits pertaining to alcoholic beverages:
   A.   Retail liquor license;
   B.   Limited retail liquor license (special club);
   C.   Resort liquor license;
   D.   Restaurant liquor license;
   E.   Twenty four (24) hour malt beverage permit;
   F.   Special malt beverage permit;
   G.   Twenty four (24) hour catering permit;
   H.   Microbrewery permit;
   I.   Winery permit;
   J.   Satellite winery permit;
   K.   Satellite distillery permit;
   L.   Bar and grill liquor license. (Ord. 2017-23, 10-17-2017)
3-2-10: NUMBERS, APPLICATION, ISSUANCE AND REGULATION OF LICENSES AND
LICENSEES:
   A.   The qualifications, restrictions, limitations and numbers of licenses
and permits shall all be governed by Wyoming Statutes title 12, as amended, and
by the provisions of this title.
   B.   All applications for a license, permit, renewal or transfer shall be
made to the Governing Body and shall be made upon the appropriate form prepared
by the State of Wyoming, and furnished to the City. All applications shall be
filed in the Office of the City Clerk. In addition to the information required
by State law, each applicant shall also provide the following information with
the application to the City:
      1.   Applicants for transfers of ownership and for new liquor licenses
including, but not limited to, retail, restaurant, microbrewery, winery and bar
and grill licenses shall disclose to the City all convictions and pleas of
guilty or no contest to any and all felonies, and any and all alcohol related
offenses, including, but not limited to, charges for driving while under the
influence of alcohol, and charges related to the sale or distribution of
alcohol, for the previous ten (10) years. The criminal history shall remain
confidential pursuant to State law, and shall not be disclosed to the public.
If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall submit the criminal
history information. If the applicant is a privately held corporation, each
officer, director and stockholder holding either jointly or severally, ten
percent (10%) or more of the outstanding and issued capital stock of the
corporation shall provide the required criminal history information. If the
applicant is a limited liability company, each officer, manager and member
holding, either jointly or severally, ten percent (10%) or more of the
outstanding ownership of the limited liability company, shall provide the
required criminal history information. If the applicant is a publicly traded
corporation, the on site manager or managers (if there is more than 1) shall
provide the required criminal history information. If the application is
approved, each time a new manager is hired, that manager shall provide the
criminal history information to the City within forty five (45) days of hire.
If the applicant is a nonprofit organization, the organization shall be exempt
from a criminal history background check. A nonprofit organization shall
provide documentation of its nonprofit status to the City in lieu of providing
the criminal history information. Such documentation shall include
documentation from the Internal Revenue Service showing the organization's tax
exempt status, and/or documentation from the State of Wyoming showing the
nonprofit status of the organization.
      2.   Each applicant applying for a new liquor license including, but not
limited to, retail, restaurant, microbrewery, winery, and bar and grill
licenses, or for a transfer of ownership for a retail liquor license, shall
submit a business plan. The City shall provide a written summary providing
general guidance as to what information should be in the plan, including what
information shall be required. (Ord. 2012-03, 2-21-2012)
   C.   The approval of any application for the issuance, renewal or transfer
of any license or permit shall be discretionary with the Governing Body. In
making a decision on any application for a new license, a renewal, or transfer
of ownership, the City shall consider the information in the application,
including, but not limited to, the criminal history, the business plan, and all
other information presented to the City at or prior to the public hearing. The
City may approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for the
issuance, renewal or transfer of any license or permit. (Ord. 2015-11, 10-20-
2015)
   D.   In determining whether to grant or deny an application to issue a
license, transfer a license or renew a license, the Governing Body may consider
several factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   The applicant's compliance with Federal, State and local laws, City
codes, regulations, requirements, criteria and conditions;
      2.   Any violations or noncompliance of the requirements, restrictions
and criteria described in section 3-2-15 of this chapter (regardless of whether
points are assessed under that section);
      3.   The applicant's compliance with any conditions imposed upon the
applicant's license;
      4.   The cooperation, or lack thereof, of the applicant, and applicant's
employees, managers and agents with law enforcement agencies with respect to
incidents involving criminal conduct which occur on the premises where the
licensee operates his or her business;
      5.   The above factors shall be in addition to the factors and
requirements prescribed under Wyoming Statutes 12-4-104, and other applicable
laws. Any one factor or combination of the above factors may serve as a basis
for denying any such application. If a licensee has more than one license at a
given location, the Governing Body may deny the applications to renew all
licenses at such location.
   E.   Definition of Operational - “operational” means offering for sales on
an  ongoing weekly basis to the general public alcoholic liquor and malt
beverages as authorized under a license or permits issued. Licensee must be
open for business, to the public, one day a week for a minimum of four (4)
hours during the months of operation as noted on the Liquor License
application. (Ord. 2016-01, 2-2-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-12, 1-21-2020)
3-2-11: PUBLICATION OF NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; GRANT OR DENIAL;
RENEWAL PREFERENCES; APPEALS:
When an application for a liquor license is made to the City Clerk as is
required by Wyoming Statutes, the procedures as to publication of notice, the
granting or denial of such license, renewal preferences and the right of appeal
shall all be in accordance with Wyoming Statutes title 12. (Ord. 2006-07, 5-2-
2006)
3-2-12: LICENSE CONTENTS, SIGNATURES AND DISPLAY:
Licenses as issued under this article shall be in the form and content as
prepared and furnished by the State. Each license issued by the City shall be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. Each license shall show the
name of the licensee; a description of the place in which alcoholic or malt
beverages shall be sold; the date of issuance; the amount of the fee, and that
the same has been paid. Each licensee shall display his license in a
conspicuous place in the licensed room or place of business. (Ord. 2006-07, 5-
2-2006)
3-2-13: TERM, TRANSFER AND SALE:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a license is good for one year, unless
sooner revoked or transferred. Except as provided herein, no license shall be
transferred or sold, nor shall it be used for any place not described in the
license at the time of issuance.
   B.   After public hearing and with the approval of the licensing authority,
a license or permit may be transferred to or renewed on different premises on
the same basis as the original application. An additional license fee of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) is required for the remaining term. A
transferred license or permit shall expire on the same date as the original
license or permit.
   C.   A licensee, or the executor or administrator of the estate of a
deceased licensee, may assign and transfer the license or permit by a sale made
in good faith. The assignment and transfer shall first have the approval of the
licensing authority, which consideration shall be based in part upon a public
hearing and an application filed under oath by the assignee or transferee
showing the person or entity to be qualified to hold a license or permit under
State law. The approval of the transfer shall not be given by the licensing
authority if proceedings, including an action to collect delinquent Sales Tax
payments pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 12-2-306, are pending to suspend,
revoke or otherwise penalize the original license or permit holder. A transfer
of a license or permit shall require the payment of an additional license fee
to the appropriate licensing authority of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the transfer, and upon assignment the assignee may exercise the
privilege of continuing the business authorized by the license or permit. (Ord.
2006-07, 5-2-2006)
3-2-14: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Every applicant issued a retail liquor license by the provisions of
this article shall pay annually in advance for a license hereunder, the sum of
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   B.   Every applicant issued a limited retail liquor license (special club)
by the provisions of this article shall pay annually in advance for a license
hereunder, the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00).
   C.   Every applicant issued a resort liquor license by the provisions of
this article shall pay annually in advance for a license hereunder, the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   D.   Every applicant issued a restaurant liquor license by the provisions of
this article shall pay annually in advance for a license hereunder, the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The fee for a second dispensing room, as
defined by Wyoming Statutes title 12, is six hundred sixty six dollars sixty
seven cents ($666.67).
   E.   Every applicant issued a twenty four (24) hour malt beverage permit by
the provisions of this article shall pay in advance, the sum of thirty dollars
($30.00).
   F.   Every applicant issued a special malt beverage permit for a public
auditorium, civic center or events center by the provisions of this article
shall pay annually in advance the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
   G.   Every applicant issued a twenty four (24) hour catering permit by the
provisions of this article shall pay in advance, the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00).
   H.   Every applicant who is issued a microbrewery permit by the provisions
of this article shall pay annually in advance a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   I.   Every applicant issued a winery permit by the provisions of this
article shall pay annually in advance for a license hereunder, the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   J.   Any applicant who is issued a satellite winery permit by the provisions
of this article shall pay annually in advance the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   K.   Any applicant who is issued a satellite distillery permit by the
provisions of this article shall pay annually in advance the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
   L.   Any applicant who is issued a bar and grill liquor license by the
provisions of this article shall pay annually in advance for a license
hereunder, the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon initial issuance
and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) upon each annual renewal.
   M.   As of July 1, 2013, a portion of the revenue collected from said liquor
license fees shall be allocated to the Tipsy Taxi Program so long as the
program remains operational. The amount of such allocation shall be determined
each fiscal year through the City budgeting process. (Ord. 2017-22, 10-17-2017;
amd. Ord. 2019-11, 1-21-2020)
3-2-15: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Establishment Of Point System: The City of Cody believes that it is in
the public interest to ensure that liquor license holders operate and maintain
their businesses in compliance with the law. The City also believes it is in
the public's interest to provide for a fair, consistent and equitable process
which avoids arbitrary decisions. The city hereby establishes a point system
for determining appropriate penalties, including, but not limited to, fines,
suspension of license or revocation of the license.
   B.   Violations: Violations of this chapter, and any violations of this
code, state law or other regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages by any
employee or agent of the licensee, while acting in the service of licensee,
shall be imputed to the licensee for the purposes of this section. A licensee
will acquire points upon conviction, or upon a plea of guilty or no contest by
his or her employee or agent to any violation of this code, state law or other
regulation pertaining to alcohol or liquor regulations while employed by or
acting in the service of the licensee.
   C.   Points To Be Assessed To Licensee: The number of points specified below
will be assessed to a licensee as a result of conviction, guilty plea or no
contest plea of the licensee, the licensee's employees or agents acting in the
service of the licensee, or as a result of other violations described below:
 
Type Of Violation Points
Furnishing alcohol to individuals under 21:                                   
 First violation                                                            20
 Any subsequent violation within 24 months of any prior violation           30
Dispensing room violations: age violation 1 ; open beyond permitted hours 2   
:
 First violation                                                            10
 Any subsequent violation within 24 months of any prior violation           20
Failure to pay or report sales tax within 5 days of notice to city of         
delinquency:
 First violation                                                            10
 For each subsequent violation                                              20
Failure to correct or cure violations or deficiencies within specified time
after receiving notice from the city of Cody or state of Wyoming. If no time
is specified in the notice, licensees must comply within 10 business days of 10
such notice, or submit a plan, acceptable to the city, for compliance if
compliance is not reasonably feasible within 10 days
Failure to comply with a suspension order                                    60
Failure to comply with specifications, drawings, plans and conditions of     10
approved permit
Allowing, permitting, engaging in, promoting, or failing to stop other
illegal activities on the licensed premises, including, but not limited to,  60
gambling, prostitution, or public indecency 3
Other violations of city of Cody ordinances, state law or other regulations   
pertaining to the sale or distribution of alcohol or liquor:
 First violation                                                            10
 Any subsequent violation within 24 months of any prior violation           20
 
   D.   Notification Of Licensee Of Alcoholic Beverage Violations: Upon the
city receiving information of a violation by a licensee, the administrative
services director or his or her designee shall provide the licensee with notice
of the violation. Such notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the licensee listed on the licensee's most recent
liquor license application to the city. The notice shall state that a violation
has occurred and that the licensee will be assessed points for that violation.
The notice shall state the nature and date of the violation and the number of
points that have been attributed to the licensee. The notice shall further
state that the licensee may request a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt
of the notification, to be conducted by a hearing officer, to contest the
proposed action. The hearing shall be conducted as described in subsections H
through P of this section.
   E.   Penalties:
      1.   Any licensee acquiring sixty (60) points in a twenty four (24) month
period shall have its license suspended for three (3) consecutive days.
      2.   Any licensee acquiring one hundred twenty (120) points in a twenty
four (24) month period shall have its license suspended for seven (7)
consecutive days.
      3.   It is declared to be a gross violation, both of this section and for
purposes of license revocations provided in title 12, chapter 7 of the Wyoming
Statutes, for a licensee to have its license suspended three (3) times in any
forty eight (48) month period. In the event of a gross violation, the city
council may authorize a petition to the district court pursuant to Wyoming
Statutes section 12-7-201 to revoke a licensee's license, in addition to
imposing the applicable suspension of the liquor license pursuant to this
section.
      4.   Any licensee who makes a wilful false statement to the city of Cody
or the state of Wyoming, including, but not limited to, false information or
statements on an application, document or other submittal or correspondence to
the city of Cody or state of Wyoming, shall be subject to a suspension to be
determined by the city, and the council may authorize a petition to the
district court pursuant to Wyoming Statutes 12-7-201 to revoke the licensee's
license.
      5.   The sanctions provided in this section for points are cumulative,
and therefore, points may result in multiple sanctions. Accumulated points
shall not be excused at the end of the license or calendar year, but shall
instead continue to be counted against the licensee for the periods described
in this section.
      6.   In the event of a license suspension pursuant to this section, the
city council shall select the dates when the licensee shall have its license
suspended, such suspension shall be imposed during the first full week
following the final decision by the governing body, and shall begin on a
Wednesday.
      7.   If an employee of a licensee violates state laws or city ordinances
pertaining to furnishing of alcohol to persons under twenty one (21), or
pertaining to underage persons in the dispensing room, and those violations are
the first or second such violations occurring within that licensee's
establishment, the licensee may reduce the number of points assessed by such
violation if, within forty five (45) days of the violation, the licensee
schedules and completes an approved training program for its employees to
educate them regarding lawful and responsible sales and service of alcohol,
including, but not limited to, prevention of underage drinking. The training
program or course shall be conducted or approved in advance by the state of
Wyoming liquor division or the city of Cody police department. Upon proof of
scheduling and completion of such training, the licensee's points from the most
recent violation shall be reduced proportionally by the percentage of their
staff that completes the training. For example, if fifty percent (50%) of the
staff employed by the licensee provides proof acceptable to the city of
completing the training, then the licensee's points from the last violation
shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%). The employees who take the training
shall include, at a minimum, the employee(s) who received a citation or whose
action or inaction caused the violation, unless that employee is no longer
employed by the licensee. The licensee may also count and receive credit for
employees who have taken an approved training program or course in the twelve
(12) months immediately prior to the violation and who are still employed by
the licensee at the time of the violation. In order to receive the reduction in
points pursuant to this section, the licensee shall submit payroll records
showing the number of employees, and names of employees who work for the
licensee. If the licensee employs staff in a capacity completely unrelated to
and separate from its restaurant and alcohol serving business, the licensee
shall include those employees on its payroll records which it submits to the
city, and shall designate those employees as "nonalcohol related". Those
employees shall be excluded from the calculation of the percentage of the staff
which completed the training. For example, if the licensee operates a motel or
hotel in addition to its restaurant and/or bar, those employees employed
exclusively as hotel/motel staff (i.e., maid service, check-in staff,
maintenance staff) shall be excluded. Any and all employees who work in the
restaurant and/or bar and who handle alcohol in any manner shall be included in
the calculation of the percentage of the employees. The employees shall
include, but not be limited to, hosts/hostesses, servers, wait staff,
bartenders, bouncers/security staff and bar managers.
   F.   Notification Of Suspension Or Revocation: A licensee who has
accumulated sufficient points to warrant suspension or revocation of a license
shall be notified in writing of the proposed sanction, the reason for such
sanction, including the dates and types of the specific violations. The written
notice shall inform the licensee that the licensee may request a hearing before
an independent hearing officer.
   G.   Hearing Not Requested: If the licensee does not request a hearing, the
administrative services director will, upon the expiration of ten (10) days
from the licensee receiving notice of the violation, send notification to the
licensee assessing the points and shall assess the penalty against the licensee
as indicated above. If the violation includes a suspension or revocation, the
administrative services director shall specify the effective dates of the
suspension or revocation.
   H.   Hearing Requested: If the licensee wishes to have a hearing, the
licensee shall request such hearing in writing within ten (10) days of the date
of the notice of violation. The written request shall be submitted to the
administrative services director, and shall state the specific issues for which
the licensee is seeking review. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the
hearing shall take place within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
licensee's request for a hearing. The date of the hearing may be extended
beyond the forty five (45) day period at the mutual agreement of both parties.
   I.   Hearing Officer Appointed: The governing body shall select and appoint
an impartial and objective hearing officer to conduct a hearing called for by
these provisions. The hearing officer shall be an independent contractor, and
not an employee of the city, and shall be entitled to a reasonable fee for his
or her services and reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in
connection therewith. The fees, expenses and costs of the hearing officer shall
be shared equally between the city and the licensee.
   J.   Hearing Appearance: The licensee may appear at the hearing in person
and through counsel. The licensee will be given an opportunity to present
evidence and argument on the relevant issues. The rules of evidence for the
hearing shall be governed by the Wyoming administrative procedure act, Wyoming
Statutes section 16-3-112.
   K.   Licensee Bears Burden Of Proof: At the hearing, the licensee shall bear
the burden of proving by preponderance of the evidence that the assessment of a
suspension or other sanction against the licensee is in error, or in violation
of this code or state law.
   L.   Record Of Proceeding: The city shall make a record of the proceeding.
   M.   Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be the presiding officer at
the hearing, and shall have authority to conduct the hearing, administer oaths,
make rulings on evidence to be received or considered, subpoena witnesses,
compel the testimony of witnesses, regulate the course of the hearing, hold
conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues, require written
briefs from the parties clarifying the respective legal or factual positions;
grant continuances for good cause shown; punish contempt by removal from the
hearing location and take any other action authorized by law, consistent with
these ordinances, or required to fulfill his or her duties.
   N.   Rules Of Civil Procedure: The rules of civil procedure for the state of
Wyoming, insofar as the same may be applicable, and not inconsistent with the
laws of the state of Wyoming, or with these ordinances, shall apply to the
proceedings under this section.
   O.   Findings Of Fact: Within twenty (20) days after the hearing, the
hearing officer shall issue proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law,
which the hearing officer shall deliver to the city and to the licensee. The
governing body shall then act on the hearing examiner's proposed findings of
fact and conclusions of law within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing
officer's decision.
   P.   Failure To Appear At Hearing: If the licensee requests a hearing, and
then fails to appear for the hearing, and fails to give notice of his intent to
withdraw his request for the hearing at least two (2) business days prior to
the hearing, the licensee shall be responsible for all fees, costs and expenses
of the hearing officer, and other costs and expenses incurred by the city in
preparation for the hearing and at the hearing itself, including attorney fees.
If the licensee fails to appear for the hearing, the failure to appear shall be
deemed a waiver of the request for a hearing, and the council shall proceed
with the proposed sanction without a hearing at any time.
   Q.   District Court Review: Action by the city council to suspend a
licensee's license shall be subject to review in the district court upon
exhaustion of the hearing process pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-
21-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. WS 12-5-203.
2 2. WS 12-5-101.
3 3. WS 12-5-204, 6-4-101, 6-4-201, 6-7-102, 6-4-302.
CHAPTER 3
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-3-1: License Required
3-3-2: Application; Governing Body Policy In Consideration Of Issuance
3-3-3: Fees; License Duration
3-3-4: Insurance Coverage
3-3-5: State And Federal Motor Carrier Regulations
3-3-6: License Transferability
3-3-7: License Revocation
3-3-8: Schedule Of Rates
3-3-9: License; Driver's
3-3-10: Background Checks
3-3-11: Taxicab Signage
3-3-12: Taxicabs; Condition And Seating Capacity
3-3-13: Taxicab Stands
3-3-14: Violations; Penalty
3-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate or cause
to be operated any "taxicab", which is defined as any motorized vehicle or
animal drawn carriage, for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire or
donation of monies within the city without first having obtained a license
therefor from the city as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-2: APPLICATION; GOVERNING BODY POLICY IN CONSIDERATION OF ISSUANCE:
The application for such license shall be made to the administrative services
director and shall be issued by the administrative services director with the
approval of the governing body.
It is declared to be the policy of the governing body that there shall be
issued only such licenses to taxicab operators as the public convenience and
necessity require, and further, to issue such licenses only to those persons
who are responsible and trustworthy in every way and agree to render adequate
service to meet the needs of the public for taxicab service within the city. In
acting upon all applications for such licenses, the governing body shall take
into consideration, in addition to the question of public convenience and
necessity, the question of the applicant's qualifications for rendering
adequate service to the public, his/her character, integrity and financial
responsibilities. When complete applications for additional taxicab operator's
licenses are received by the administrative services director, he/she shall
serve notice upon any other licensed operators of the time set for hearing upon
the application, which time shall be the next regular meeting of the governing
body; provided, that if any such application and required attachments is
received within less than ten (10) days before the next regular meeting of the
governing body, the matter may be set for hearing at the following regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the governing body. Failure to completely
disclose all information requested on an application or a misrepresentation of
information on such application may result in the denial of a taxicab license.
The decision of the governing body upon any application shall be final. (Ord.
2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-3: FEES; LICENSE DURATION:
The fee for a license to operate taxicabs as provided in this chapter shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first taxicab and fifty ($50.00) for each
additional taxicab per year that is to be operated. All such licenses issued
shall be on a calendar year basis from January 1 to December 31. Fees shall not
be prorated for licenses issued midyear. Licenses which are not renewed by
December 31 shall expire. In such instances the license cannot be renewed,
however the operator may submit an application for a new license. (Ord. 2010-
23, 12-7-2010; amd. Ord. 2019-08, 1-21-2020)
3-3-4: INSURANCE COVERAGE:
Before issuance of a taxicab license, or any renewal thereof, the operator
shall furnish to the city a certificate or other evidence that all taxicabs to
be operated under the license are covered by the following insurance:
All taxicab operators shall provide public liability insurance with a combined
single limit coverage of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for public liability, property damage and bodily injury.
Proof of insurance shall be evidenced by a current certificate kept on file
with the administrative services director throughout the term of the license.
Operators shall notify the administrative services director or his/her designee
within ten (10) working days of the effective date of any change in the
insurance coverage, the expiration of the policy or the cancellation or
nonrenewal of the insurance in whole or in part and provide proof of new
coverage meeting the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2016-07, 6-7-2016)
3-3-5: STATE AND FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER REGULATIONS:
All taxicabs that fall within the Wyoming department of transportation or
United States department of transportation rules and regulations and are
governed by those rules and regulations shall provide evidence of compliance
with such rules and regulations before the issuance of a taxicab license, or
any renewal thereof.
Compliance with state or federal motor carrier regulations does not exempt any
operator from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-6: LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY:
Licenses issued hereunder are declared to be personal privileges and shall not
be assignable or transferable to any other operator. An operator may, however,
substitute one taxicab for another during a license year upon application to
the administrative services director or his/her designee. Such transfer may be
approved by the administrative services director or his/her designee and does
not require governing body approval. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-7: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The governing body hereby reserves the right to revoke any and all licenses
granted for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter and title 6 of
this code, and in the event such taxicab is operated in an unlawful manner or
for unlawful purposes or for any and other good causes shown. (Ord. 2010-23,
12-7-2010)
3-3-8: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
A printed or typewritten copy of the rates and process charged for
transportation of persons or property by taxicab shall be kept on file with the
administrative services director or his/her designee and conspicuously posted
in each taxicab and in the office of the licensed operator.
Any change in the rates and process shall be filed in writing with the
administrative services director or his/her designee fifteen (15) days prior to
the effective date of the change. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-9: LICENSE; DRIVER'S:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a licensed taxicab without first
complying with the following requirements:
   A.   Be eighteen (18) years of age or over;
   B.   Possess a valid state of Wyoming driver's license;
   C.   Must have no convictions for driving under the influence or driving
while intoxicated within the last five (5) years and no more than two (2) in
the last ten (10) years prior to the application date and have no more than
five (5) moving violation convictions within the last five (5) years prior to
the application date; no other felony or serious driving related convictions or
guilty pleas and have no serious accidents in which the driver was at fault. A
"serious accident" is defined as an injury requiring immediate medical care or
when a fatality occurs.
There shall be an ongoing obligation for the operator to disclose in writing to
the administrative services director or his/her designee any pending charges or
new convictions against a driver which will affect the above requirements.
If a new driver is added under an existing taxicab license the operator shall
notify the administrative services director or his/her designee in writing
within ten (10) days of the addition and provide a copy of the driving record
for the new driver. It is the responsibility of the operator to ensure that all
their drivers meet the above requirements. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-10: BACKGROUND CHECKS:
To determine the suitability of prospective applicants, the city shall require
all operators and drivers to obtain a criminal history and driver history from
each state where the driver has been licensed for the past ten (10) years. Upon
application for a taxicab license the administrative services director or his/
her designee shall review the records provided by the applicant and each driver
listed on a taxicab license application. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-11: TAXICAB SIGNAGE:
Each taxicab licensed shall have, while in operation, painted, vinyl or
magnetic letters and numbers readable from a distance of twenty feet (20') with
the name and phone number of the operator on both the left and the right sides
of the taxicab. If more than one taxicab is operated by the same operator each
taxicab shall be designated by a different number and such number shall also
appear on both the left and right sides of the taxicab. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-
2010)
3-3-12: TAXICABS; CONDITION AND SEATING CAPACITY:
No motor vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab unless it is properly licensed
and registered with the state of Wyoming and is equipped with proper brakes,
lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, safety restraint devices such
as belts and/or safety harnesses, and windshield wipers in good condition.
Every taxicab operating under this chapter is subject to inspection at the
discretion of the chief of police or his/her designee, to ensure continued
maintenance and safe operating conditions.
The number of passengers carried by a taxicab at any time shall not exceed the
seating capacity of the vehicle. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-13: TAXICAB STANDS:
All taxicabs operated by any licensed operator may be parked, when unemployed,
at such location as designated by the chief of police as provided in section
6-1-14 of this code. Such location shall be properly marked as reserved taxicab
space and not for use by the public. (Ord. 2010-23, 12-7-2010)
3-3-14: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is punishable pursuant
to section
1-4-1, "General Penalty; Continuing Violations", of this code. (Ord. 2010-23,
12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 4
PAWNBROKERS 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Record Of Property Received; Required; Content, Preservation Of Records
And Notification
3-4-3: Rates Regulated
3-4-4: Disclosure And Advertising
3-4-5: Limitation On Agreements And Practices
3-4-6: Prohibited Practices
3-4-7: Penalties
3-4-8: License Required
 
Notes
1 1. WS §§ 33-73 through 33-75.
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
MONTH: That period of time from one date in a calendar month to the
corresponding date in the following calendar month and, if computations are
made for a fraction of a month, a day shall be one-thirtieth (1/30) of one
month.
PAWN FINANCE CHARGE: The sum of all charges, payable directly or indirectly by
the customer and imposed directly or indirectly by the pawnbroker as an
incident to the pawn transaction.
PAWN TRANSACTION: The act of lending money on the security of pledged goods or
the act of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed period of time.
PAWNBROKER: A person engaged in the business of making pawn transactions.
PAWNSHOP: The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
PLEDGED GOODS: Tangible personal property other than choses in action,
securities or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited
with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the
course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction.
REDEMPTION PERIOD: That period of time from transaction date to maturity date
of a pawn transaction. (Ord. 82-1)
3-4-2: RECORD OF PROPERTY RECEIVED; REQUIRED; CONTENT, PRESERVATION OF RECORDS
AND NOTIFICATION:
   A.   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business an accurate
detailed description of all personal property, bonds, notes and other
securities received or purchased and mentioning particularly any descriptive or
identifying marks that may be on such property, bonds, notes or other
securities, together with the name, residence and accurate description of the
person by whom they were left. Such entries must be made on the date such
property is taken in, using ink or indelible pencil, and no entry shall be
erased or obliterated. All such records shall be clean and legible and shall be
made upon special record sheets prepared for that purpose, which shall be
approved by the city clerk. On Monday of each week, a copy of the record sheets
for the preceding seven (7) day period shall be delivered to the chief of
police.
   B.   Persons subject to this chapter shall file notification with the
administrator of the Wyoming uniform consumer credit code and pay fees,
pursuant to the provisions of article 6, part 2, of the code.
   C.   All books and records shall be kept in accordance with accepted
accounting practices and such records shall be preserved or made available in
this state for a period of four (4) years from date of the transaction, or two
(2) years from final entry made thereon, whichever is later. (Ord. 82-1)
3-4-3: RATES REGULATED:
   A.   No pawnbroker may contract for, charge or receive any amount as a
charge in connection with a pawn transaction other than a pawn finance charge.
No pawn finance charge shall exceed twenty percent (20%) per month on the
unpaid principal balance of the pawn transaction.
   B.   The amount financed in any one pawn transaction to any one customer
shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
   C.   Except in the case where a minimum charge is contracted for, not more
than one-half (1/2) of the pawn finance charge for the two (2) month maturity
period may be considered to be earned at the time the transaction is entered
into and is not subject to refund in the event of prepayment. Following
expiration of the first month from transaction date, and upon entering the
second month of the transaction, the second month's charge accrues and may be
considered to be earned at that time.
   D.   At all times there shall be on display in plain sight a fourteen inch
by twenty inch (14" x 20") poster setting forth the interest rates and charges
being made by the pawnbroker pursuant to this section. (Ord. 82-1; amd. Ord.
83-6)
3-4-4: DISCLOSURE AND ADVERTISING:
   A.   Information to be disclosed shall be made pursuant to applicable
provisions of federal reserve regulation Z of the truth in lending act and the
Wyoming uniform consumer credit code.
   B.   A pawnbroker shall not engage in false or misleading advertising
concerning the terms or conditions of credit with respect to a pawn
transaction. Advertising which complies with the federal consumer credit
protection act does not violate this subsection. (Ord. 82-1)
3-4-5: LIMITATION ON AGREEMENTS AND PRACTICES:
   A.   Even though a pawn transaction subject to this chapter creates a
debtor-creditor relationship, no pawnbroker shall make any agreement requiring
personal liability to a customer in connection with a pawn transaction, and no
customer has an obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a
pawn transaction. The only recourse of a pawnbroker where the customer has
pledged goods is to the pledged goods themselves.
   B.   The maturity date of a loan or redemption or repurchase agreement on a
bond transaction shall be thirty (30) days. (Ord. 82-1; amd. Ord. 86-2)
3-4-6: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
No pawnbroker shall:
   A.   Divide or separate a pawn transaction into two (2) or more transactions
for the purpose or with the effect of obtaining a total pawn finance charge
exceeding that authorized by this chapter;
   B.   Accept a pledge from any person under the age of nineteen (19) years;
   C.   Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, or any right or protection
afforded a customer under this chapter;
   D.   Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or
damage;
   E.   Fail to return pledged goods to a customer upon payment of the full
amount due the pawnbroker on the pawn transaction; or
   F.   Make any charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction.
(Ord. 82-1)
3-4-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including
engaging in the business of operating a pawnshop, without first securing the
licenses prescribed under section
3-4-8 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsection A of this
section, if any person engages in the business of operating a pawnshop without
first securing the licenses prescribed in section
3-4-8 of this chapter, or if any pawnbroker contracts for, charges or receives
a pawn finance charge in excess of that authorized by this chapter, the pawn
transaction shall be void and the customer is not obligated to pay either the
amount financed or the pawn finance charge in connection with the transaction.
Upon the customer's demand, the pawnbroker is obligated to return to the
customer, as a refund, all amounts paid in connection with the transaction by
the customer and the pledged goods delivered to the pawnbroker in connection
with the pawn transaction or their value if the goods cannot be returned. If a
customer is entitled to a refund under this section and a pawnbroker liable to
the customer refuses to make a refund within a reasonable time after demand,
the customer shall have an action against the pawnbroker and in the case of a
successful action to enforce such liability, the costs of this action, together
with the attorney fees as determined by the court, shall be awarded the
customer.
   C.   A pawnbroker who fails to disclose information to a customer entitled
to information required to be given, pursuant to section
3-4-4 of this chapter, is liable to that person in an amount equal to the sum
of:
      1.   Twice the amount of the pawn finance charge in connection with the
transaction; or
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is greater; and
      3.   In the case of a successful action to enforce the liability under
this subsection, the cost of the action, together with reasonable attorney fees
as determined by the court. (Ord. 82-1)
3-4-8: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall at any time carry on the business of a pawnbroker
without making application for and obtaining a city license therefor and paying
in advance the annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   Unless a person has first obtained a license from the administrator of
the Wyoming uniform consumer credit code, authorizing him to engage in business
of making supervised loans 1 , he shall not engage in business as a pawnbroker.
(Ord. 82-1)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 40-14-341(a).
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
Article I.  Peddlers
3-5-1: Declared Nuisance, Unlawful
3-5-2: Police To Enforce
Article II.  Temporary Or Transient Merchants
3-5-3: Definitions
3-5-4: Unlawful To Do Business Without License
3-5-5: License; Application; Fee; Record To Be Kept
3-5-6: Penalty
ARTICLE I.  PEDDLERS
3-5-1: DECLARED NUISANCE, UNLAWFUL:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise not
having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of said private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing
of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. This section shall not apply to local charitable, religious or
educational organization members actually going in and upon private residences
for the purposes hereinabove specified. (Ord. 88-10)
3-5-2: POLICE TO ENFORCE:
The chief of police and police department are hereby required and instructed to
suppress any nuisance as described in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 88-
10)
ARTICLE II.  TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The words "temporary or transient merchant", for the purposes of this article,
shall include all persons, firms and corporations, both as principal and agent,
who engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business, either in
one locality or more or by traveling from one or more places in this city,
selling goods, wares or merchandise and who for the purpose of carrying on such
business, hire, lease or occupy a building, structure or car, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 94-7)
3-5-4: UNLAWFUL TO DO BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any temporary or transient merchant to engage in, do or
transact any business within the city without having first obtained a license
from the city clerk as provided in this article. (Ord. 94-7)
3-5-5: LICENSE; APPLICATION; FEE; RECORD TO BE KEPT:
   A.   Any temporary or transient merchant desiring to engage in, do or
transact business in the city shall file an application for license for that
purpose with the city clerk, which application shall state his name, his
proposed place of business, the kind of business proposed to be conducted and
the length of time for which he desires to conduct business. Except as provided
by subsection B of this section, the temporary or transient merchant shall pay
to the city a license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). The city clerk
shall issue to the temporary or transient merchant a license to do business at
the place described in the application and the kind of business to be done
shall be described in the license. A duplicate copy of the license shall be
given by the city to the Park County clerk at the time of issuance. No license
shall be good for more than one person, unless the person shall be the member
of a copartnership, nor for more than one place of business, and shall be good
for a period of one year from the date of its issuance. The city clerk shall
keep a record of the licenses in a book which shall at all times be open to
public inspection.
   B.   The license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) under subsection A
of this section may be modified by the city council for an event, a fair or a
celebration. The modification shall apply to all transient merchants conducting
business at the event, fair or celebration. The city council shall notify the
city treasurer of the modification. The city clerk shall issue a license that
describes the event, fair or celebration and the kind of business to be done.
The license shall be good only for the event, fair or celebration and only for
the kind of business identified. The city clerk shall keep a record of the
modified licenses for an event, fair or celebration in a book that is open to
public inspection at all times. (Ord. 94-7)
3-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, entity or corporation violating the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 94-7)
CHAPTER 6
ADULT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-6-1: General Provisions
3-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to
regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating
the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent, nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
   B.   Findings: Based on evidence presented regarding the detrimental social
and economic effects on persons and properties immediately surrounding
established sexually oriented businesses and after having reviewed said
evidence and studies, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theaters, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991), and on studies and summary of studies in other communities, including,
but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles,
California; Whittier, California; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; and New York, New York; and also on findings
from the report of the attorney general's working group on the regulation of
sexually oriented businesses (June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota); and also on
the reports, memos, affidavits and other documents originally provided to the
city of Evanston, Wyoming, by Detective Dan Kimett of the Denver, Colorado
police department on July 27, 1997, and a transcript of the testimony of
Sergeant Pete Carey of Colorado Springs, Colorado police department originally
provided to the city of Evanston, Wyoming, at a public meeting held on July 28,
1997, the governing body finds:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are often uncontrolled by any other mechanism in
the city to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the
activities that may occur on their premises.
      2.   The evidence shows that sexually oriented businesses are frequently
used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution. Sexual acts,
including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented
businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or
cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
      3.   The transcript of documented evidence and testimony of officer Pete
Carey shows that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature,
have a deleterious effect on both existing businesses around them and the
surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing, among other adverse
secondary effects, increased crime and downgrading of property values.
      4.   The evidence shows that sexually oriented businesses, due to their
nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly
when they are operating in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing
to crime, lower property values, urban blight and downgrading of the quality of
life in the adjacent area.
      5.   The studies referred to in the beginning of this section show that
real estate professionals are of the opinion that a concentration of adult
businesses can be expected to have an adverse economic effect on the value of
nearby commercial and residential property.
      6.   The evidence shows increased crime and unhealthful conduct tend to
accompany, concentrate around and be aggravated by sexually oriented
businesses, including, but not limited to, prostitution, pandering, public
indecency, public disturbances and exposing minors to harmful materials.
      7.   Sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, are a legitimate
health concern of the city, which requires reasonable regulations of sexually
oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well being of the
citizens.
      8.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      9.   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult video
arcades and also promotes the safety of law enforcement personnel.
      10.   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
   C.   Definitions:
    ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated, slug operated, or for any form of consideration, electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which devotes more than thirty percent (30%) of its stock in
trade or of its interior floor space to, or more than thirty percent (30%) of
its advertising expenditures to the promotion of, the sale, rental or viewing,
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
      1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or
      2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities".
      3.   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental or material
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as the provisions of subsection 2 of
this definition are otherwise met.
   ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      1.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
      2.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
      3.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      1.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right
of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
      2.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
   EMPLOYEE: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise, and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises,
or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
      1.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      2.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      3.   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      4.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation or any other treatment
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with
"specified sexual activities", or where any person providing such treatment,
manipulation or service related thereto, exposes their "specified anatomical
areas".
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state
of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude
model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state of
Wyoming, or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation, a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation, nor
shall it include a modeling class operated in a structure:
      1.   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
      2.   Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
      3.   Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernable turgid state.
   PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity.
   SEMINUDE OR IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION: A state of dress in which clothing
covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      1.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      2.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: 1. The human male genitals in a discernable
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
      2.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
      1.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      3.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections 1 and 2 of this definition.
   D.   Classification: Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
      1.   Adult arcade;
      2.   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
      3.   Adult cabaret;
      4.   Adult motel;
      5.   Adult motion picture theater;
      6.   Adult theater;
      7.   Massage parlor;
      8.   Sexual encounter establishment;
      9.   Escort agency; or
      10.   Nude model studio.
   E.   Location Of Sexually Oriented Business:
      1.   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than an
open business/light industrial D-3 zone, as defined in title 10, chapter 10,
article C of this code.
      2.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred feet (500') of:
         a.   Any religious institution;
         b.   Any school;
         c.   The boundary of any residential district;
         d.   Any public park or recreation area;
         e.   A property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or
         f.   A boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth
organization.
      3.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred feet (500') of
another such business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, massage parlor or any sexual encounter establishment.
      4.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the
operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes the
substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
      5.   For the purposes of subsection E2 of this section, measurement shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, or
objects from the property line of the lot or parcel containing the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the lot or parcel of the premises of a use listed in subsection E2 of this
section. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.
      6.   For the purposes of subsection E3 of this section, the distance
between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, or objects from the
property line of the lot or parcel containing the premises where a sexually
oriented business is located.
      7.   For sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating on the effective
date hereof, they shall not be required to comply with subsections E1 through
E6 of this section.
   F.   Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Video In Video Booths: A
misdemeanor is committed by a person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, if the person fails
to comply with the following requirements:
      1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager or employee's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
      2.   All viewing rooms and booths shall remain unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and,
at all times no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
had been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      3.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time.
      4.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured
at the floor level.
      5.   The illumination described in subsection F4 of this section shall be
maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
      6.   No openings of any kind shall be allowed to exist between viewing
rooms or booths.
      7.   No employee shall knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permit
or allow a patron to commit on the premises an act of "public indecency" as set
forth in Wyoming Statutes section 6-4-201.
   G.   Nude Model Studios:
      1.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the
person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or
visible to any other person.
      2.   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of
nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of
a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
      3.   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
   H.   Public Nudity: Public nudity is prohibited within the city, including
within any sexually oriented business.
   I.   Regulations Pertaining To Adult Theaters And Cabarets:
      1.   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or intentionally
appear, entertain or perform in a seminude condition in an adult theater or
adult cabaret unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at
least ten feet (10') from any patron or customer and on a stage elevated at
least two feet (2') from the floor.
      2.   It shall be a misdemeanor for a patron or customer to pay or give
directly any gratuity to any employee, before, during or after an employee has
performed or entertained in an adult theater or cabaret. A patron who wishes to
pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place the gratuity in a container
that is at all times located separately from the performer.
      3.   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to have
physical contact with a customer or patron while on the premises. It shall be a
misdemeanor for a customer to have physical contact with any employee while
said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business.
      4.   Subsection I1 of this section shall not apply to an employee of a
sexually oriented business, who, while acting in the scope of their employment
as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender, comes within ten feet (10')
of a patron.
   J.   Prohibition Against Minor In A Sexually Oriented Business: A person
commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly or with reasonable cause to know,
permits or allows:
      1.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be admitted to or
remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business unless accompanied by
his or her parent or guardian.
      2.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase goods or
services at the business premises without the specific consent of his or her
parent or guardian.
      3.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years to work at the
business as an employee.
   K.   Hours Of Operation: A person commits a misdemeanor if the person
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, except for an
adult motel, and allows such business to remain open for business at any time
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
particular day.
   L.   Exemptions: It is a defense to prosecution under subsections G and H of
this section that a person over the age of eighteen (18) appearing in a state
of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a proprietary school licensed by the state of Wyoming; a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
      2.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational program in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      3.   In a structure:
         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
         c.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   M.   Advertising:
      1.   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business, and advertises the presentation of or
depicts or exhibits any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute or
local ordinance.
      2.   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business, and displays or otherwise exhibits
the materials or goods of such sexually oriented business in advertising which
is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to
advertising of the existence or location of sexually oriented business.
      3.   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve a sexually oriented
business from complying with any other relevant requirements of this code.
   N.   Injunction: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for
injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually
oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. (Ord. 00-02)
CHAPTER 7
OIL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION
SECTION:
3-7-1: Compliance With Chapter
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Drilling Permit And Drill Site Development Plans
3-7-4: Inspections
3-7-5: Adoption Of State Rules And Regulations; Rubbish, Litter, Etc.; Return
Of Land To Original Topography
3-7-6: Spacing Requirements
3-7-7: Insurance And Bond
3-7-8: Annual Inspection Permit; Permit And Inspection Fees
3-7-9: Compliance With State Rules And Regulations
3-7-10: Zoning
3-7-11: Additional Conditions And Requirements
3-7-12: Penalties
3-7-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do or perform, or cause
to be done or performed, any work or labor of any kind upon or in connection
with the drilling or producing of oil, gas or other petroleum substances within
the corporate limits, except as permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BLOWOUT PREVENTER: Well equipment, as defined by and required by the state oil
and gas commission, for installation on a well.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Cody, Wyoming.
CITY INSPECTORS: All officers of the city who have responsibility for enforcing
this chapter, or their duly authorized representatives.
CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: Shall include those persons appointed by
the mayor to serve on such commission.
DISPOSAL WELL: Any well drilled or actually used for injection of saltwater or
other substances into the earth at a point other or different than the point of
extraction or production thereof from the earth, such disposal well to be
located outside the city limits.
DRILLING: Boring a hole in the earth for the purposes of exploring for,
developing or producing petroleum. "Drilling" includes all operations through
the completion of a well.
DRILLING SITE: The premises used during the drilling, maintaining, operating
and producing of a well or wells located thereupon.
WELL: An oil well, gas well, injection well or disposal well, as defined by the
Wyoming conservation law. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-3: DRILLING PERMIT AND DRILL SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
   A.   Drilling Permit Required: Subsequent to May 4, 1981, it shall be
unlawful and an offense for any person to drill or to maintain and operate any
oil, gas or disposal well within the corporate limits, without first having
secured a permit to do so as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Drilling Permit Application; Transfer; Permittee To Assume Risks: Every
person desiring to drill or to maintain and operate any oil, gas or disposal
well within the city shall file an application therefor, in writing, upon the
form required by the city and signed by the applicant, or his agent authorized
to sign the same. Such application shall specify the well location with
reference to a known bench mark and the quarter section, section, township and
range. A copy of the well survey, as prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the state and registered with the state oil and gas commission, will be
submitted with the application.
      1.   Should a change in ownership of the oil, gas or disposal well occur
after a drilling permit has been issued, the drilling permit as issued shall be
considered to be transferable to the person purchasing and taking over
operation of the oil, gas or disposal well; provided, that such person meets
and complies with the provisions of this chapter, to include, but not be
limited to, those provisions relating to bonds and insurance required in
section
3-7-7 of this chapter.
      2.   The city is not a guarantor of the competence of the permittee as to
drilling operations. Such permit is not an expression by the city that such
proposed oil operation can be done with safety to the operator or other persons
or property, all of which such risks are assumed by the permittee.
   C.   Drill Site Development Plans: In the interest of protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and in order to protect the
quality of residential life within the city, the city shall not issue a
"drilling permit", as defined by this section, until the city council has
reviewed and approved the drill site development plan in accordance with the
following regulations:
      1.   The person making application shall prepare and submit to the city
two (2) drill site development plans, the first of which shall be a drill site
development plan covering and including that phase of the oil well operation,
including drilling operations, and the second of which shall cover the
completed or producing well phase and which site development plans shall
contain the following information:
         a.   Written legal description.
         b.   Scale drawing of the property and appropriate dimensions.
         c.   Scale, north arrow, date and legend.
         d.   Name, address and telephone number of property owner and
applicant.
         e.   Location and size of existing easements, utilities and rights of
way.
         f.   Location and dimension of all vehicular entrances, exits and
drives.
         g.   General drainage system.
         h.   Size of site.
         i.   Location of all physical facilities, to include proposed wells,
structures, portable toilets and relationship to all buildings within a six
hundred sixty foot (660') radius.
         j.   A statement describing all pollution prevention equipment to be
utilized. It shall be the policy of the city to require blowout prevention
devices on every drilling operation covered hereunder.
         k.   Location of all drilling mud pits.
      2.   The city council shall hold an official public hearing, giving at
least seven (7) days' notice of such public hearing, the purpose of which
public hearing shall be for review and consideration of approving or denying
the drill site development plan as submitted. At the time of such public
hearing, the city council shall have the authority, when in the interests of
the public peace, health and safety, to amend the plan as originally submitted.
The drill site plan shall then be considered to be approved as amended or
denied, and containing those additional restrictions and regulations as placed
on the plan by the city council.
      3.   The land within the area covered by the drill site development plan
shall be developed only in accordance with the drill site development plan as
finally approved by the city council. Any change, erasure, modification,
revision or deviation from that plan shall be considered invalid and a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, unless such change, erasure,
modification, revision or deviation shall have first been submitted to the city
and approved according to the above procedure. It is further provided that
should a change in property ownership occur after approval of the drill site
development plan, the drill site development plan as approved by the city
council shall be honored and maintained in its entirety.
      4.   Prior to operation and maintenance thereof, the person having made
application shall prepare and submit to the city a second drill site
development plan, which shall cover the completed or producing well phase of
the well operation, and which drill site development plan may be the original
drill site development plan as submitted to the city, with amendments made
thereto, or may be a new and original drill site development plan; however, in
either case, such drill site development plan shall contain the following
information:
         a.   Location of flow line and pipeline rights of way to be used.
         b.   Specifications and location of pipe to be used for oil, gas or
water lines.
         c.   Location of ingress and egress to be utilized by the applicant,
and to include all vehicular entrances, exits and drives.
         d.   Type of screening device or construction that will be utilized to
minimize, as is reasonable, the visual impact of aboveground devices. The
proposed fencing, gates and security to be installed or used to discourage
access to the site.
         e.   The location and size, which shall be no more than twenty four
inches by thirty inches (24" x 30"), of a sign which shall contain the name,
address and emergency phone number of the oil producing company, the
responsible person or organization, and which sign shall be posted at the
drilling site for use in any emergency notice which might arise.
      5.   The planning and zoning commission shall, within seven (7) days of
receipt, review and consider the second drill site development plan as
considered. The planning and zoning commission shall, upon receipt of the
second drill site development plan, inform all adjacent property owners of the
filing of the second drill site development plan. At the time of such
consideration, the planning and zoning commission shall have the authority,
when in the interests of the public peace, health and safety, to amend the plan
as originally submitted prior to granting their approval. The site development
plan shall then be considered to be approved as amended, and containing those
additional restrictions and regulations as placed on the plan by the planning
and zoning commission. The site development plan shall then be considered to be
approved as amended, unless a protest is filed with the building inspector
within seven (7) days of the decision complained of, in which case the
protestant shall have the right to appeal to the city council.
      6.   The filing of the second drill site development plan shall not be
required of wells in operation prior to May 4, 1981.
      7.   If both the first drill site development plan and the second drill
site development plan are submitted at the same time, both plans shall be
considered by the city council at the same public hearing. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-
1981)
3-7-4: INSPECTIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the city or its authorized representatives
may inspect any well operation at any time after issuance of a drilling permit
for the purposes of ensuring conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
Any applicant for a drilling permit hereunder shall be deemed to have granted
the agents of the city the right of entry at their sole risk onto those
properties covered by the drilling permit for the purposes of carrying out the
inspections as required by the city, which shall be made by the city or an
authorized representative of the city, and which shall be:
   A.   An inspection to be made during the drilling operations, which
inspection shall cover those facets of the drilling operations covered by the
drilling operation site plan.
   B.   An inspection during the producing or injection operation, which
inspection shall cover those facets of the drilling operations covered by the
drilling operation site plan.
   C.   An inspection following abandonment of the well and removal of the well
equipment, which inspection shall be to ensure that the land is returned as
nearly as practicable to its previous original topography. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-
1981)
3-7-5: ADOPTION OF STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS; RUBBISH, LITTER, ETC.; RETURN
OF LAND TO ORIGINAL TOPOGRAPHY:
   A.   There are hereby adopted by the city the rules and regulations of the
Wyoming oil and gas conservation commission, of which not less than one copy
has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
   B.   The premises upon which any oil, gas or disposal well is drilled,
operated or maintained shall be kept free of all accumulations of rubbish,
litter, unused equipment or discarded materials and other wastes, insofar as
the same may be reasonably done in the conduct of operations covered by this
chapter.
   C.   All lands upon which a drilling operation is or has been operated
within a reasonable length of time, not to exceed one year, shall be returned,
as nearly as practicable, to the previous original topography and natural
state, unless the applicant has paid damages for removal for anything other
than ground cover, in which case the applicant must, in lieu of returning the
land to its natural state and topography, provide ground cover in the interests
of abating erosion thereof. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-6: SPACING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential Areas; Structures: No well or drilling operation shall be
located, drilled or operated within four hundred feet (400') of any occupied
residential dwelling unit located within any residentially zoned district. In
all other zoning districts of the city, no well or drilling operation shall be
located, drilled or operated within two hundred feet (200') of any existing
occupied structure. It is further provided, however, that in the event
permission is secured from one hundred percent (100%) of the owners thereof,
which permission or approval shall be evidenced by the signing of a petition
consenting to the drilling, operating and location of such well, which petition
shall be filed with the first drill site development plan, such well in that
case may not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any of
the above named structures.
   B.   Schools, Hospital Buildings: No well shall be drilled, operated or
maintained, nor shall any operations in connection therewith be carried on or
conducted, within six hundred sixty feet (660') of any public school or
hospital building within the city, unless the governing body owning such
structure consents in writing to a lesser distance, which distance may be set
by such governing body. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-7: INSURANCE AND BOND:
At the time of filing an application for a drilling permit as required by this
chapter, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a copy of the certificate
of insurance issued by some corporate insurance company licensed to do business
within the state, evidencing current insurance of the owner, his driller,
agents and employees, conditioned for the payment of all damages due to injury
to persons or damage to property resulting from the drilling, operation or
maintenance of the proposed well, or any structure, machinery, equipment,
pipelines or appurtenances used in connection therewith, in an amount not less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Such policy shall further
provide that it cannot be cancelled until thirty (30) days' written notice of
such cancellation shall have been given to and filed with the city clerk. Such
applicant shall further deposit with the city clerk cash or a corporate surety
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), executed by some insurer
licensed to assure restoration of the land and plugging of such well upon its
abandonment according to the rules and regulations and under the supervision of
the state oil and gas conservation commission and pursuant to this code and
other ordinances of the city. Such sum shall be forfeited to the city in the
event of any substantial violation or noncompliance by the owner or driller, or
his agents or employees, with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the
abandonment of such well otherwise, the same shall be refunded or returned in
full to such applicant upon abandonment of the well operation. (Ord. 81-10, 5-
4-1981)
3-7-8: ANNUAL INSPECTION PERMIT; PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
   A.   Required; Fees: Annual inspection permits for the operation and
maintenance of all completed and operating oil and gas wells, now existing or
hereafter drilled, are hereby required and shall be issued upon the payment of
the annual inspection fee provided for herein. Such annual inspection fee shall
be paid on or before January 1 of each year of operation after the issuance of
the drilling permit, or if no such permit was required or obtained, within
sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof. Fees for the drilling of an
oil or gas well and for annual inspections shall be as follows:
      1.   Permit for the drilling of an oil or gas well: Four hundred dollars
($400.00).
      2.   Annual inspection fee for an oil or gas well: Fifty dollars
($50.00).
   B.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon payment of the annual inspection fee and upon
meeting the drill site development requirements contained in section
3-7-3 of this chapter, if such drill site development plan is required, the
city clerk shall issue the annual permit required by this section. (Ord. 81-10,
5-4-1981)
3-7-9: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The applicant for a drilling permit or annual inspection permit, the drilling
contractor and their agents or employees shall comply with all orders, rules
and regulations of the state oil and gas conservation commission, where
applicable, including, but not limited to, all rules and regulations of such
commission with respect to drilling, plugging and abandonment of such wells.
(Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-10: ZONING:
Oil, gas or disposal wells shall be permitted as a matter of right in all zones
within the city, with respect to the requirements imposed by the zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-11: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the conditions applying to oil well drilling operations
contained herein, the city council hereby declares that, in the interest of
protecting the people of the city and the use and enjoyment of their property
and providing for their comfort, health, safety and general welfare, the
following conditions and restrictions are adopted:
   A.   Power; Painting Of Equipment: All well operations which are placed upon
the pump shall be powered by electricity so long as electricity is available.
If electricity is not available, a muffled engine will be used. All permanent
equipment shall be painted, where possible and kept in a neat condition. All
production operations shall be as free from noise as possible, with the
installation of such equipment as available at the time of permit approval.
   B.   Noise: All well and equipment work, excluding drilling or service rig
operation, shall be conducted in a manner to minimize noise.
   C.   Mufflers: An internal combustion engine or electrical equipment may be
used in the drilling or pumping operations of the well, and if an internal
combustion engine is used, mufflers shall be installed on the mud pumps and
engine so as to reduce noise to a minimum.
   D.   Hours Of Operation: All well work, excluding drilling operations, will
be confined to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M., except in the case of an emergency.
   E.   Signs: No sign shall be constructed, erected, maintained or placed on
the premises, or any part thereof, except those required by law or this chapter
to be displayed in connection with the drilling, maintenance or operation of
the well.
   F.   Landscaping: The site shall be landscaped to screen the aboveground
structures from the vision of people on adjacent or surrounding premises. (Ord.
81-10, 5-4-1981)
3-7-12: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined in a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each
day such violation is committed or continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense and is punishable as such. In addition, violation of any of
the provisions hereof shall be a basis for injunction at the suit of the city,
or at the suit of any person adversely affected thereby. (Ord. 81-10, 5-4-1981)
CHAPTER 8
SOUND TRUCKS 1
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Noncommercial Use
3-8-3: Commercial Advertising
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15.1-3(16).
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the
human voice, music or other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment", as used
herein, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when
used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or
warning devices of other vehicles used for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle or horsedrawn vehicle, having mounted thereon,
or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. (1960 Compilation § 25-
201)
3-8-2: NONCOMMERCIAL USE:
   A.   Registration Required: No person shall use or cause to be used a sound
truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial
purposes in the city before filing a registration statement with the city clerk
in writing. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall
state the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant.
      2.   Address of place of business of applicant.
      3.   License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
applicant.
      4.   Name and address of person who owns the sound truck.
      5.   Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck.
      6.   Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound
truck.
      7.   The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
      8.   A general statement as to the sections of the city in which the
sound truck will be used.
      9.   The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
      10.   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck.
      11.   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment to be used.
   B.   Registration Statement And Amendment: All persons using or causing to
be used sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration
statement filed pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section
within forty eight (48) hours after any change in the information therein
furnished.
   C.   Registration Statement And Identification: The city clerk shall return
to each applicant under this section, one copy of such registration statement
duly certified by the city clerk as a correct copy of the application. Such
certified copy of application shall be in the possession of the person
operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's amplifying
equipment is in operation, and such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown
to any police officer of the city upon request.
   D.   Regulations For Use: Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the city with
sound amplifying equipment in operation, shall be subject to the following
regulations:
      1.   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
      2.   The permitted hours of operation shall be between the hours of
eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. and one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M., and four
thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., except during the
night rodeo season when the hours may be from eleven thirty o'clock (11:30)
A.M., to one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M., and from four thirty o'clock (4:30)
P.M., until the time of the night rodeo parade on Sheridan Avenue, and in any
event not later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      3.   Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound
truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least
seven (7) miles per hour, except when such truck is stopped or impeded by
traffic. When stopped by traffic the sound amplifying equipment shall not be
operated for longer than one minute at each stop.
      4.   Sound shall not be issued within two hundred feet (200') of the Cody
Hospital, the Cody Medical Center, any doctor's clinic, or any school while the
same is in session, or any church while worship services are being carried on
therein, or any courthouse in which court is then in session.
      5.   The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd,
indecent or slanderous.
      6.   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will be audible
for a distance in excess of two hundred feet (200') from the sound truck and so
that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a
nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. (1960 Compilation § 25-202)
3-8-3: COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING:
   A.   License Required; Fee: No person shall operate or cause to be operated
any sound truck in the city for commercial advertising purposes with sound
amplifying equipment in operation, unless a license has been obtained from the
city clerk. The fee for said license shall be two dollars ($2.00) payable
annually in advance.
   B.   Application For License: Persons applying for the license required
under this section shall file with the city clerk an application in writing
giving on the application the information required in the registration
statement under subsection 3-8-2A of this chapter.
   C.   Issuance Of License: The city clerk shall issue a license under this
section upon the payment of the required license fee, unless the application
required in this section reveals that the applicant would violate the
regulations prescribed in subsection 3-8-2D of this chapter or the provisions
of some other provision of this code or other ordinance of the city.
   D.   Possession And Display Of License: A licensee shall keep such license
in his possession in the sound truck during the time the sound truck's
amplifying equipment is in operation. The license shall be promptly displayed
and shown to any police officer of the city upon request.
   E.   Regulations For Use: No person shall operate, or cause to be operated,
any sound truck for commercial sound advertising purposes in violation of the
regulations set forth in subsection 3-8-2D of this chapter. (1960 Compilation §
25-203)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Enforcement Of Health Laws And Ordinances; Mayor's Right Of Entry
4-1-2: Communicable Disease Control
 
Notes
1 1. WS §§ 35-166 through 35-186.
4-1-1: ENFORCEMENT OF HEALTH LAWS AND ORDINANCES; MAYOR'S RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The mayor shall require enforcement of this title and of all other ordinances
and laws pertaining to public health and contagious diseases. To this end, he
is hereby authorized to enter at any reasonable time, in person or by deputy,
any building, premises or vehicle within the city or its police jurisdiction
and to command the aid of the police department, if necessary, to obtain such
enforcement. (1960 Compilation § 7-103)
4-1-2: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL:
The procedures for the control and elimination of communicable or contagious
diseases within the city shall be those procedures set out in the rules and
regulations of the state board of health. At least one copy of such rules and
regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and in the
office of the health officer. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code
for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of such
rules and regulations. (1967 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
4-2-1: Establishment; Composition; Term
4-2-2: Powers And Duties Generally
4-2-3: Duty Of General Public To Cooperate With And Obey Board Of Health
4-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERM 1 :
The mayor is hereby authorized to establish a board of health, to consist of
three (3) qualified, practicing physicians in the city, and their duties shall
be as hereinafter provided, and who shall hold office during any emergency or
at the pleasure of the city council. (1960 Compilation § 7-101)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15.1-3(27).
4-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
   A.   The board of health shall take cognizance of the interest of the health
and life of the people of the city, make sanitary investigations, and inquiries
respecting the causes of disease, especially of epidemics, source of malady and
the effects, locality, employment, conditions, habits and other circumstances
bearing upon the public health. It shall be their duty, together with the
police officials of the city, to investigate regarding all contagious or
infectious diseases that are a menace to the public safety, and shall make
proper rules and regulations in respect to these matters as may be useful in
the discharge of their duties and contribute to the promotion of health and
security of life within the city.
   B.   The board of health shall cause inspections to be made by police
officials, and in person, at such times as it may deem best, of all hospitals,
prisons or public business places and private residences as to the disposal of
excreta, heating and ventilation, and other circumstances in any way affecting
the health of their inmates or occupants, and in addition, shall have full
power and control over any infectious or contagious disease, and shall make
such orders and suggestions and such remedy as it may deem advisable for the
removal of any conditions detrimental to the health of the city. (1960
Compilation § 7-102)
4-2-3: DUTY OF GENERAL PUBLIC TO COOPERATE WITH AND OBEY BOARD OF HEALTH:
It shall be the duty of all persons within the city to give any and all
information that may be reasonably requested by the board of health, or any
police official concerning any threatened danger to the public health, and to
obey any and all rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health, and
each and every person aforesaid shall cooperate to prevent the spread of
disease under such rules and regulations as may be from time to time
promulgated by the board of health. (1960 Compilation § 7-102)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
4-3-1: Violation Prohibited
4-3-2: Nuisance Conditions Defined
4-3-3: Notice To Abate Nuisance; Compliance Required
4-3-4: Enforcement; Initiation Of Complaint; Notice To Abate Nuisance;
Contents; Procedure
4-3-5: Hearing Procedure
4-3-6: Removal; Voluntary Consent; Affidavit
4-3-7: Disposal; Assessment Of Costs
4-3-8: Search Warrant
4-3-9: Abatement; Court Action Authorized
4-3-10: Title To Impounded Vehicles
4-3-11: Notice Of Removal
4-3-1: VIOLATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, property owner or occupant to maintain or permit
the existence of any nuisance, as defined herein, on any property within the
city. Any person in violation of this section shall, in addition to any penalty
that may be imposed for the violation of this code, be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and be required to reimburse the city for expenses
incurred in the abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-2: NUISANCE CONDITIONS DEFINED:
Each of the following conditions described shall constitute a public nuisance.
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be
deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances
described and prohibited by this code.
   A.   Vegetation; Maximum Height Permitted: Any weeds, grass, or plants
growing to a height exceeding twelve inches (12") anywhere in the city,
including platted lots (whether developed or undeveloped), easements and rights
of way. Weeds shall not be placed in streets, alleys, gutters, city rights of
way, public property or property belonging to another. Weeds shall be placed in
city garbage containers, or taken to an appropriate and lawful disposal site.
The following shall be exempt from the height regulation in this chapter:
planted trees, bushes, flowers, planted material growing in gardens or planting
beds, including fruit or vegetable gardens, standing crops (including grass or
hay grown for grazing pasture for livestock or intended to be cut and baled for
livestock feed); naturally occurring plant life in any area in the city that is
both undeveloped and unplatted; and "native areas" and the natural vegetation
contained therein. "Native areas" are those areas of natural ground cover of
one- half (1/2) acre or larger, under single ownership, provided, however, that
there shall be a twenty foot (20') fire break where the parcel adjoins
developed property, and where the parcel adjoins any public right of way,
street, alley or highway. The area within the fire break shall be maintained
according to the same maximum height for vegetation as described in this
subsection. "Native areas" shall not include any areas or properties,
regardless of size, with any buildings, structures, sheds, barns, shelters,
mobile homes, garages, fences, signs, gardens, crops or any other manmade
improvements of any kind.
   B.   Derelict, Junked, Etc., Vehicles: Unlicensed, derelict, or junk
vehicles and parts or remains thereof parked upon private property, public
property, public streets, alleys, easements, rights of way or other ways are
declared to be nuisances. The presence of an unlicensed vehicle, wrecked,
dismantled, derelict or inoperative vehicle, on private or public property, is
declared to constitute a public nuisance that may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The tearing down, stripping or
junking of such vehicles shall be permitted only where and when such use is
specifically authorized, permitted or licensed under other ordinances of the
city and in strict accordance therewith; or which use is conducted entirely
within the confines of an accessory garage building, then only provided that
such vehicle is the property of the owner or occupier of the lot and that such
use is not a commercial use of the property, unless such use is authorized by
other ordinances of the city.
      1.   Derelict Vehicles: A vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be deemed to
be "derelict" if the vehicle is:
         a.   Partially or wholly dismantled;
         b.   In a condition that prevents legal operation;
         c.   Junked or intended to be recycled or scrapped.
      2.   Definition Of Vehicles: For purposes of this chapter, "vehicles"
shall include vehicles, motor vehicles, multipurpose vehicles, trailers and
snowmobiles as defined in either Wyoming Statutes 31-1-101 or 31-5-102; and
watercraft as defined in Wyoming Statutes 41-13-101.
      3.   Exception: The section defining and prohibiting derelict vehicles
shall not apply to the following:
         a.   Vehicles that are enclosed within a secure building;
         b.   Vehicles that are kept and confined within a lot, and the area
within which the vehicles are kept is fenced on all sides, and the fence is a
lawful six foot (6') fence or wall which complies with city ordinances, and
which provides a solid visual screen; and the vehicles are maintained and
stored in an orderly manner which does not create fire hazard, does not
otherwise create a risk to the health and safety of the public, and does not
devalue or detract from the use or enjoyment of property in the immediate
vicinity;
         c.   A vehicle maintained in a lawful place and manner by a
governmental agency;
         d.   An antique motor vehicle as defined in Wyoming Statutes 31-1-101;
         e.   A vehicle which is covered by an intact car cover which is
securely attached to the vehicle and which covers the entire vehicle, with the
exception of the wheels. Each vehicle shall have its own cover. In areas zoned
as residential (AA, A, B and C zones), residents shall not have more than two
(2) covered vehicles.
         f.   A racecar that is currently actively engaged in racing and
equipped for racing with roll cage, windows removed, driver's name, sponsors
and number displayed. Demolition racecars shall be considered derelict vehicles
two (2) weeks after the demolition race in which they were used.
         g.   An automobile repair shop may only have derelict vehicles on the
premises for the time necessary under agreement for repair with business
customers.
   C.   Junk: Any iron, glass, weeds, metal, lumber, stumps, grass, trash,
hedge trimmings, cut tree branches, paper, cloth, construction debris,
refrigerator, freezer, electronic equipment or appliance which is not being
utilized for its intended use, or other waste or discarded material of any
nature or substance whatsoever or any scrap or salvage materials which are left
or permitted to remain for a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days upon
any real property within the city or any city property within or without the
corporate limits of the city or upon or within the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, public utilities and rights of way
shall constitute a nuisance. Businesses operating in the commercial D-2 or D-
3 zones may keep junk so long as such junk is reasonably intended for use
within the scope of the business operated on the subject lot or property, and
so long as it is kept, maintained, secured and stored in an orderly manner.
Industrial E zone may keep junk so long as the business has received approval
for its site plan from the planning and zoning commission, and the junk is
kept, maintained, secured and stored in an orderly manner.
      1.   For purposes of this section, "junk" shall not include new or unused
building materials, or building materials that are in adequate and reasonable
condition to allow them to be used, and so long as such building materials are
kept, maintained, secured and stored in an orderly manner.
   D.   Foul, Offensive Or Harmful Conditions: Any cellar, vault, private
drain, pool, privy, sewer, grease trap, or any other condition on a property or
lot, including, but not limited to, uncontrolled dust, which endangers public
health and safety, creates an unreasonable fire hazard, or causes hurt, harm,
damage or injury to any one or more individuals, or to other's property in the
city or those immediately adjacent to the city shall constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 2015-16, 1-19-2016)
4-3-3: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be the duty of any person receiving the notice of a public
nuisance as provided in this chapter to comply with the provision of the notice
and to abate such nuisance within fifteen (15) days after delivery of such
notice, and if such person shall fail or refuse to abate such nuisance within
fifteen (15) days from receipt of such notice without just cause, such failure
is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such
nuisance persists shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   It is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor for any person, after
having received notice as provided in this chapter, to remove any vehicle or
junk from private property to any other private property upon which storage is
not permitted, or onto any public property.
   C.   If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, and after
notice as provided by section
4-3-4 of this chapter, the city may abate the nuisance, and the cost of
abatement may be charged to the owner of the nuisance or assessed against the
land upon which the nuisance exists or both.
   D.   For purposes of this chapter, the term "delivery" shall refer to the
date a notice is hand delivered to the property owner or an occupant who is at
least eighteen (18) years at the last known address of the property owner; or
the date of delivery as shown on a certified mailing receipt; or the last date
of publication if service is by publication. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-4: ENFORCEMENT; INITIATION OF COMPLAINT; NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE;
CONTENTS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any person may initiate a complaint against a property owner or
occupant if, in their opinion, a nuisance condition as defined in this title,
exists on a property or lot within the city of Cody. The written complaint
shall be on a form to be provided by the city of Cody, and shall be signed by
the complaining party, dated and shall be delivered to the city of Cody police
department for investigation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the initiation of an investigation by a peace officer, community
service officer or other employee of the city of Cody without such a complaint.
   B.   Whenever the city administrator, the chief of police, or their
respective designees, receive a written, signed complaint as described above,
that any condition is a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or in the
event that a peace officer or community service officer employed by the city of
Cody observes a condition which appears to be a public nuisance as defined in
this chapter, the city administrator, chief of police or their designee shall
investigate such complaint, and if the officer determines that a nuisance
exists, the officer shall attempt to give written notice to the owner of the
condition, if his or her address is known, to the owner of the land where the
condition is located, and to any other person or entity known by the city
administrator or chief of police to have a security interest in the vehicle or
junk. The notice shall be attempted by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or personal service, if the address of the individual or entity is
known. In the case of vehicles, where practical, the notice shall also be
affixed to the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be
easily seen. Where affixing the notice to a vehicle is impractical, and in the
case of junk, the notice shall be posted at the site or on the premises where
the nuisance exists. Such notice shall be in effect for the next twelve (12)
consecutive months, and the owner of the lot, parcel or vehicle shall be
responsible for controlling the vegetation or other nuisance condition as
prescribed above for the duration of the twelve (12) month period, without the
need for renotification. After the initial notice, any subsequent period of
noncompliance shall also be a violation of this section.
   C.   Such notice shall include substantially the following information:
      1.   A statement that a certain condition is a nuisance within the
provisions of section
4-3-2 of this chapter; in the case of a vehicle, the notice should include the
make, year and vehicle identification number if reasonably possible;
      2.   A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise,
on which the nuisance exists;
      3.   A statement that such nuisance must be abated within fifteen (15)
days from the delivery of the notice;
      4.   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, the city may abate the nuisance, and the cost of abatement may be
charged to the owner of the nuisance or assessed against the land upon which
the nuisance exists or both;
      5.   A statement that a hearing upon the allegation of a public nuisance
and the assessment of costs may be requested by giving written notice to the
clerk of municipal court within ten (10) days from the date of delivery of the
notice, and that a request must specify the property concerning which the
request is made, the requesting party's name and address, and the nature of the
interest held by the requesting party; that upon request a hearing will be
scheduled to determine if a public nuisance exists and as to the assessment of
administrative costs and the costs of abatement; that if a hearing is not so
requested the right to a hearing, and the issue of whether a nuisance exists
shall be waived;
      6.   A statement that failure to abate the nuisance may result in a city
abatement and/or criminal charges.
   D.   In the event that notice cannot be served by certified mail or in
person as described above, service shall be made by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in Park County. The notice by publication shall contain
the same information required in the notice described above. The notice shall
be published at least twice, with each notice appearing at least seven (7) days
apart. Notice by publication may contain multiple listings of public nuisances.
   E.   Proof of notice shall be made by certification of any officer or
employee of the city, or affidavit of any person over eighteen (18) years of
age, naming the person to whom notice was given and specifying the time, place
and manner thereof. Proof of notice shall be made in each case and maintained
for a period of two (2) years from the date of abatement of the nuisance for
which notice has been given. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   A request for a hearing upon the allegation of a public nuisance and
the assessment of costs shall be made in writing and delivered to the municipal
court clerk within ten (10) days from the date of delivery of the notice to
abate. Such request shall specify the property concerning which the request is
made, the requesting party's name and address, and nature of the interest held
by the requesting party in the vehicle or junk.
   B.   In the event of a public nuisance as defined in section
4-3-2 of this chapter of which notice has been given, and which remains
unabated for more than fifteen (15) days after delivery, the city administrator
or chief of police or their designee is granted authority to abate, remove or
cause the removal of the nuisance; provided however, that if a proper request
for hearing is filed, abatement shall only proceed upon order of the municipal
court judge or hearing examiner.
   C.   In the event a request for hearing is filed as provided, a hearing
shall be held before a hearing examiner designated by the governing body. The
purpose of the hearing shall be to confirm or deny the existence of a public
nuisance and for taking such further action as is authorized under this
chapter. Notice of the time, place and hour of the hearing shall be sent at
least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing to the requesting parties and the
city attorney.
   D.   At such hearing, all parties and the city shall be afforded an
opportunity to present evidence, to cross examine and present argument;
provided that all persons testifying shall be sworn; irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded; and the decision of the hearing
examiner shall be based upon the evidence submitted at the hearing. The hearing
examiner shall allow evidence according to the rules generally applicable to
contest case hearing under the Wyoming administrative procedure act.
   E.   At or after such hearing, and in the event of confirmation that a
public nuisance exists, the hearing examiner may resolve or order that the city
administrator and/or city employees or agents remove or otherwise abate the
nuisance; provided, however, that if the circumstances justify, in the opinion
of the hearing examiner, the time for abatement may be delayed. In the event a
nuisance is confirmed, administrative removal costs may also be assessed at the
hearing. If it is found that a public nuisance does not exist, abatement
authority shall be denied and costs shall not be assessed.
   F.   Appeals from adverse decisions rendered by the hearing examiner may be
made to the district court in the same manner as an appeal from an adverse
decision rendered by an agency in a contested case under the provisions of
Wyoming Statutes section 16-3-114. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-6: REMOVAL; VOLUNTARY CONSENT; AFFIDAVIT:
The owner of any vehicle or junk or the owner of real property where any junk
or vehicle has been abandoned may voluntarily consent to the removal of such
property by the city. In order to give such consent, all owners of the property
shall execute an affidavit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, stating
that there are no other owners of the property or lienholders having a security
interest in the property; that the owners will reimburse the city for the
actual costs of removal or such other costs as are established by the city
administrator for such removal; and that such reimbursement will be made to the
city within thirty (30) days of removal. Such affidavit shall constitute a
statement by the owners signing such affidavit that they will indemnify the
city for any loss or expense alleged by any other party as a result of removal
or disposal. The execution of such affidavit shall also release the city from
any obligation to account or pay over to the owners any amount the city
receives for the property. The owner's consent to the removal of any junk or
vehicle by the city, and the city's subsequent removal of junk and/or vehicles
from the owner's property, shall not in any way be deemed a continuing
obligation or responsibility on the part of the city to maintain the property,
and shall not relieve the property owner of their obligation and responsibility
to continue to maintain the property. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-7: DISPOSAL; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   Any vehicle or junk which is impounded or removed and taken into
custody, as provided in this chapter, may be disposed of according to the
provisions of Wyoming Statutes section 7-2-105, or 31-13-108, 31-13-109 and 31-
13-110.
   B.   The city administrator, or the city administrator's designee, shall
determine the costs of removal and disposal in each case. The city
administrator shall take into account the amount of time spent by city
employees, the cost and time involved for the use of city equipment and fuel,
and the costs and expenses for disposing of the vehicles, junk and/or other
materials constituting the nuisance. The city administrator may contract with a
company, firm or individual who is not an employee of the city to remove or
abate the nuisance, and the cost of such removal shall be assessed against the
property owner. The city may take any action allowed by law to collect the
actual costs of removal and storage of any property constituting a public
nuisance. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from waiving the cost of
removal.
   C.   Upon the owner's failure and/or refusal to comply with the written
notice to remove the nuisance within the specified time period, the city
administrator or chief of police or their designee may, in addition to issuing
the owner a citation, after the expiration of the time to request a hearing, or
if a hearing is requested, after the hearing examiner or municipal judge find
that a nuisance exists, authorize the removal of such nuisance, and the owner
of the lot or parcel from which the nuisance is removed shall be liable for all
costs of the removal.
   D.   The city administrator or chief of police or their designee may
initiate legal proceedings for the collection of costs of removal against the
owner of the lot or parcel, upon the owner's failure and/or refusal to pay the
costs within thirty (30) days following demand for payment by the city. (Ord.
2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-8: SEARCH WARRANT:
   A.   The chief of police or his or her designee may make application to the
municipal court for authority to enter upon land to examine vehicles, junk,
weeds or any other condition for the purpose of making a determination as to
whether a public nuisance exists and/or securing information as to the
ownership of a vehicle or junk thought to constitute a public nuisance and/or
securing information as to the identity of the person or persons in control of
the land where the vehicle or junk is situated. This section shall not in any
way be construed to limit the authority of law enforcement to lawfully enter
upon and search premises without a warrant to the extent such entry and search
is authorized by and consistent with the United States and Wyoming
constitutions.
   B.   The municipal court has authority to issue search warrants and other
process necessary to enforce this chapter.
   C.   A warrant shall issue only upon affidavit sworn to before a person
authorized by law to administer oaths and establishing the grounds for issuing
the warrant. If the judge is satisfied that the grounds for the application
exist or that there is probable cause to believe that they exist, he shall
issue a warrant identifying the purpose of the search, and naming or describing
the place to be searched. The warrant shall be directed to the chief of police
or any officer authorized to enforce or assist in enforcing the laws of the
city or state. The warrant shall state the grounds or probable cause for its
issuance and the names of the persons whose affidavits have been taken in
support thereof. It shall command the officer to search, within a specified
period of time not to exceed ten (10) days, the property identified. The
warrant shall direct that it be served between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless the court, upon reasonable cause shown, authorizes
the execution at other times. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-9: ABATEMENT; COURT ACTION AUTHORIZED:
The city attorney is authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of
the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property, entity or individual for which the charge for abating a nuisance
under this chapter has remained unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after a
bill therefor has been rendered to the owner of the property involved. (Ord.
2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-10: TITLE TO IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
Title to any impounded vehicle not reclaimed by the registered owner or any
lienholder within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice shall vest in the
city. A change in the title may be obtained by the city pursuant to the
authority of this chapter and the procedure established in state statutes to
obtain a change in title. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
4-3-11: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
   A.   Upon removal of any vehicle by the city, a written report of the
removal shall be sent to the last address of the owner, if known, otherwise
such notice shall be sent to the Wyoming department of revenue and taxation.
The report shall include a description of the vehicle, the date, time and place
of removal, the grounds for removal and the place of impoundment of the
vehicle.
   B.   Proof of providing the report shall be made by the certificate of any
city employee involved in the impoundment of the vehicle, specifying the person
to whom the report was directed and the date and manner the report was
provided.
   C.   Such report shall not be required if the retail value of the vehicle is
less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) as reasonably determined by the chief
of police or his designee. (Ord. 2012-04, 5-1-2012)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS 1
SECTION:
Article I. In General
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Premises To Be Clean And Orderly; Unreasonable Accumulation Of Materials
4-4-3: Occupied Dwelling, Etc., Prima Facie Evidence Garbage Being Produced;
Removal Of Garbage; Accumulations Declared Nuisance
4-4-4: Storing Or Littering, Etc., Garbage Or Refuse In Streets, Gutters, Etc.,
Prohibited
4-4-5: Inflammable Material
4-4-6: Large Item Pick Up And Tree And Brush Removal
4-4-7: Removal Of Waste
4-4-8: Disposition Of Leaves, Grass Clippings And Metal Objects
4-4-9: Unlawful To Burn Rubbish
Article II. Receptacles
4-4-10: Receptacles Required; Specifications, Etc.
4-4-11: Restaurants, Boarding Houses, Etc., May Be Required To Keep Garbage In
Separate Containers
Article III. Collection And Removal
4-4-12: Removal Of Certain Garbage And Grease Under Special Contract
4-4-13: Fee Schedule
4-4-14: Payment Of Bills
4-4-15: Use Of Receptacles By Nonresidents Prohibited
Article IV. Weeds
4-4-16: Purpose; Violation A Fire Hazard And Nuisance
4-4-17: Weeds To Be Mowed And Removed
4-4-18: Liability For Enforcement; Notice To Comply
4-4-19: City May Have Weeds Cut; Cost Constitutes Lien On Property
4-4-20: Penalty
Article V. Vehicles Transporting Loose Materials
4-4-21: Covered Cargo Required
4-4-22: Duty Of Owner Of Truck Or Vehicle
4-4-23: Prima Facie Evidence
4-4-24: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 35-10-101 et seq.
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS IN OPERATION: All property used for the purpose of
conducting business, either for profit or nonprofit, and is serviced with an
electric and/or water meter. Businesses in operation who occupy more than one
connected or adjoined properties and are conducting the same business in each
may be treated as one business on all properties, and may be subject to only
one fee. Vacant properties that are connected and/or adjoined and are owned by
the same person or entity shall pay an appropriate fee for each property.
GARBAGE: All kitchen refuse, rejected or waste food, meats, fish, fowl, offal,
carrion or other refuse accumulation of fruit, vegetable or animal matter that
attends the preparation, use, cooking of, or dealing in, or storing of meats,
fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or anything whatsoever which may decompose and
become foul, offensive, unsanitary or dangerous to health.
REFUSE: All hay, straw, shavings, paper, plastic, ashes, rubbish, containers,
boxes, glass, cans, cartons, bottles and residue from the burning or other
destruction of all combustible material whatsoever, and any and all other
material commonly known as rubbish or refuse of any kind or character, or by
any name known, except as herein excluded.
RESIDENCE: A dwelling or dwellings of multiple units providing living
facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping,
eating and/or cooking and/or is provided with an electric and/or water meter.
(Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-2: PREMISES TO BE CLEAN AND ORDERLY; UNREASONABLE ACCUMULATION OF
MATERIALS:
It shall be the duty of every person, whether owner, lessee or occupant, of any
lot, building or premises, including place of business, hotel, restaurant,
dwelling house, apartment, townhouses, condominiums, tenement or other
establishment, at all times to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly
condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of materials other than those
ordinarily attendant upon the use for which such premises are legally intended.
Any such accumulation is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance, and a
nonconforming use of the premises. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-3: OCCUPIED DWELLING, ETC., PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE GARBAGE BEING PRODUCED;
REMOVAL OF GARBAGE; ACCUMULATIONS DECLARED NUISANCE:
Occupancy of any residence or any place of business in operation shall be prima
facie evidence that refuse or garbage is being produced on such premises. All
places of residence or business in operation within the city limits shall have
refuse service from the city and pay the applicable charges. Services will only
be provided to the legal tenant or legal property owner, unless authorized by
the administrative services director, or his/her designee. If a residence is
not occupied or commercial business is not in operation, and the electric and/
or water meter has been removed, the portion of the bill representing the fee
for the Park County landfill may be removed, but a minimum fee of one dumpster
or roll-out will be charged to the account holder on a monthly basis.
Exceptions: Storage units, airport hangars, attached or detached garages or
shops where solid waste services are billed on the main residence/commercial
account may be exempted from monthly charges if requested and approved by the
administrative services director with the concurrence of the public works
director, or their designees. Regarding the storage units exemption, the city
administrator and/or his/her designee may require monthly garbage collection
and payment therefor at the monthly commercial rate for one times (1x) per
week. The city administrator or their designee will require said payment if
evidence from the sanitation drivers, with confirmation from the solid waste
supervisor, indicates garbage collection services are required. (Ord. 2014-03,
5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-4: STORING OR LITTERING, ETC., GARBAGE OR REFUSE IN STREETS, GUTTERS, ETC.,
PROHIBITED:
No hay, straw, shavings, paper, plastic or other combustible materials, sod,
grass clippings, weeds, ashes, garbage, bottles, broken glass, nails, tacks,
wire, cans, rocks, stones, mattresses or other furniture, or any other refuse,
waste materials, or objects shall be placed, thrown, scattered, deposited or
swept into any street, gutter, sewer intake, alley, vacant lot, lake, reservoir
or other property. Any accumulation of refuse or garbage on any premises
outside of city receptacles in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
is prohibited hereunder, except for during the large item pick up period, as
designated by the governing body. Any person who allows garbage or refuse to
accumulate on his/her premises so as to constitute a nuisance or menace to the
public health or safety of the inhabitants of the city, shall forthwith be
subject to the provisions of chapter 3 of this title relative to nuisances, and
the abatement thereof and the penalties therein provided. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-
2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-5: INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL:
All paper or other inflammable material, as well as all cartons and boxes,
whether of paper, plastic, pasteboard, wood or other material, must be knocked
down, must be baled or securely tied in bundles, or when so approved by the
street and alley department, must be placed in the trash and garbage
receptacles. Exceptions to this regulation will only be permitted during the
designated large item pick up periods designated by the governing body. (Ord.
2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-6: LARGE ITEM PICK UP AND TREE AND BRUSH REMOVAL:
At times designated by the mayor and approved by the governing body, a large
item pick up and tree and brush removal program may be available for general
cleanup.
   A.   Large Item Pick Up: Generally, the large item pick up will be available
all year round excluding the weeks of city observed holidays. One large item
pick up per month and a maximum of six (6) large item pickups per calendar year
will be allowed per residential customer paying for solid waste services within
the city. Eligible items must be placed in the street next to the curb in front
of the resident's dwelling. Items shall not be placed in such fashion that
blocks other residents' driveways or impedes traffic. The administrative
services director, or his/her designee, shall maintain a copy of the current
program outlining those items that are eligible for pick up at city hall for
citizens to view or receive a copy thereof.
   B.   Trees And Brush: Generally, the tree and brush program will be
available from November through March each year. One tree limb and brush pick
up per month will be allowed per residential customer paying for solid waste
services within the city. Tree limbs must be less than ten inches (10") in
diameter. Tree limbs and brush must be stacked in an orderly fashion and placed
in the street next to the curb in front of the resident's dwelling. Tree limbs
and brush shall not be placed in such fashion that blocks other residents'
driveways or impedes traffic. The administrative services director, or his/her
designee, shall maintain a copy of the current program outlining the details of
the program.
   The services outlined above will be subject to fees and charges as outlined
in section
4-4-13. Requests for services made outside of the time periods or limitations
stated may be considered by the city, but will be subject to a fee equivalent
to the current cost of personnel per hour per each request. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-
2014, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 6-16-2020)
4-4-7: REMOVAL OF WASTE:
The owners or persons responsible therefor shall not permit any unnecessary
accumulation, and shall be held responsible for the immediate removal of all
trash and refuse to the county landfill as follows, unless special arrangements
are made with the city, which arrangements shall include both removal of such
materials, and the payment to administrative services for such removal:
   A.   Discarded automobile parts, furniture, stoves, etc.
   B.   Establishments dealing in wood, hides or furs, slaughter or packing
houses, junkyards, tire shops, auto wrecking yards, etc., shall be kept clean
and orderly at all times. Premises shall be kept clear by periodic removal, by
the proprietors, of all discarded or removable refuse.
   C.   Christmas tree vendors shall remove all refuse.
   D.   Refuse from billboards shall be removed to the county landfill by the
licensed billposters.
   E.   Silt and similar deposits from automobile wash racks shall be removed
to the county landfill by the establishments creating such deposits.
   F.   Other than a light spread of manure which may be applied on lawns or
gardens for fertilizing purposes, manure shall not be kept on any premises for
any purpose, or kept in piles for later use, but must be either plowed under or
removed by the owner, occupant or agent.
   G.   All plaster, broken concrete, stone, wood, roofing materials, wire or
metal binding, sacks, or loose, discarded or unused materials of all kinds,
resulting from the wrecking, construction or reconstruction of any room,
basement, wall, fence, sidewalk or building, shall be promptly removed or
stored in such manner as not to be scattered about by wind or otherwise, and,
as soon as possible, removed, by the person responsible for such work. Such
person shall be held liable for any scattering of such refuse upon adjacent
property.
   H.   Any accumulation of refuse that is highly explosive or inflammable,
which might endanger life or property shall be removed to such place as
approved by the city; such removal to be handled by the establishments
responsible therefor.
   I.   All other refuse which may be classified as regular accumulation of
waste resulting from any factory, warehouse, trade or industry, shall be
removed to the county landfill by those responsible therefor.
   J.   Authorized street closures and events, such as a circus, sporting
event, festival activity, arts and crafts show or carnival, shall arrange to
pay for the removal of all refuse and garbage in connection therewith, at the
time the authorization is given. Costs for such services will be recommended by
the public works director and approved by the city administrator. (Ord. 2014-
03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-8: DISPOSITION OF LEAVES, GRASS CLIPPINGS AND METAL OBJECTS:
The following rule shall be complied with in placing the following items for
collection and removal:
   A.   All leaves and grass shall be bagged and placed within the receptacle
for collection. In certain residential locations, at the sole discretion of the
city administrator or his/her designee, the city shall provide receptacles
marked "yard waste". In locations where these receptacles are provided, yard
waste shall not be bagged, but shall be deposited directly into the container.
In these locations, if solid waste (domestic garbage) is found to be mixed with
"yard waste" the containers will not be collected until the standards solid
waste collection day and the resident will be charged an extra collection
charge as outlined in subsection 4-4-13D of this chapter. Yard waste containers
will only be collected from May 1 through October 31.
   B.   All metal objects, excluding and excepting tin cans, aerosol cans and
similar type objects which are common household refuse, shall be removed to the
county landfill by those responsible therefor. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-
1-2014)
4-4-9: UNLAWFUL TO BURN RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn rubbish, garbage, refuse or any
waste, combustible substances or materials within the city limits. It shall be
unlawful for any person to burn papers, leaves, brush, grass or any untreated
wood products without a burn permit. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
ARTICLE II.  RECEPTACLES
4-4-10: RECEPTACLES REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS, ETC.:
The city, as part of its refuse and garbage collection, shall furnish a
receptacle for the regular deposit of garbage and refuse as herein required. No
such receptacle shall be allowed to overflow and be so constructed that refuse
may be blown or scattered about in any way. All garbage and refuse shall be
promptly deposited in such receptacles, and kept in no other place. (Ord. 2014-
03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-11: RESTAURANTS, BOARDING HOUSES, ETC., MAY BE REQUIRED TO KEEP GARBAGE IN
SEPARATE CONTAINERS:
Restaurants, or other establishments where the accumulation of garbage is
especially great, shall be required by the public works director to bag such
garbage. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
ARTICLE III.  COLLECTION AND REMOVAL
4-4-12: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN GARBAGE AND GREASE UNDER SPECIAL CONTRACT:
Certain garbage or grease shall be removed from specified establishments under
special contract with the owners of such establishments and private
contractors. Said garbage and grease shall be kept in closed sanitary
containers, apart from other refuse, and taken out of the city on a routine
basis. Such removal shall be made in closed, watertight containers approved by
the city. (Ord. 2016-10, 6-21-2016)
4-4-13: FEE SCHEDULE:
There is hereby levied and assessed a service charge against persons and/or
businesses in the city requiring garbage and debris disposal as outlined in
section 4-4-3 of this chapter, for all bills generated after June 1, 2016, as
follows:
   A.   Monthly Charge For Residences: For a residence, there shall be a basic
monthly minimum charge as follows:
      RESIDENTIAL RATES
 
                      Monthly City Solid Monthly County Landfill Monthly Fee1
                      Waste Fee          Fee
Dumpster              $12.06             $ 8.62                  $20.68
1 roll-out container  12.06              8.62                    20.68
2 roll-out containers 14.90              9.96                    24.86
3 roll-out containers 20.00              14.30                   34.30
 
Note 1 (for Total Monthly Fee):
a.    In addition, there shall be a basic monthly minimum charge of $1.30 for
recycling operations regardless of the user's production and usage of recycling
services.
b.   In addition, there shall be a basic monthly minimum charge of $0.70 for
large item pick up as outlined in section 4-4-6, regardless of the actual usage
of large item pick up services.
   B.   Monthly Charge For Commercial Businesses: For all commercial
businesses, the city shall assess a basic monthly minimum charge as provided
below. If a user requires different combinations of services or the city
determines the user's production and usage requires a different combination of
services, the monthly charges shall be as follows:
COMMERCIAL RATES
 
 Collections Per Week Monthly City Solid Monthly County Landfill Monthly Fee1
                      Waste Fee          Fee
            1 $  27.78$  19.86$  47.64
            2 53.06    37.94    91.00
1 dumpster  3 78.61    56.22    134.83
            4 103.89   74.29    178.18
            5 129.17   92.37    221.54
            6 154.73   110.64   265.37
            1 53.06    37.94    91.00
            2 103.89   74.29    178.18
2 dumpsters 3 154.73   110.64   265.37
            4 205.56   146.99   352.55
            5 256.12   183.15   439.27
            6 306.95   219.50   526.45
            1 78.61    56.22    134.83
            2 154.73   110.64   265.37
3 dumpsters 3 230.84   165.07   395.91
            4 306.95   219.50   526.45
            5 383.07   273.92   656.99
            6 459.18   328.35   787.53
            1 103.89   74.29    178.18
            2 205.56   146.99   352.55
4 dumpsters 3 306.95   219.50   526.45
            4 408.62   292.20   700.82
            5 510.01   364.70   874.71
            6 611.68   437.40   1,049.08
            1 129.17   92.37    221.54
            2 256.12   183.15   439.27
5 dumpsters 3 383.07   273.92   656.99
            4 510.01   364.70   874.71
            5 636.96   455.48   1,092.44
            6 763.91   546.26   1,310.17
            1 154.73   110.64   265.37
            2 306.95   219.50   526.45
6 dumpsters 3 459.18   328.35   787.53
            4 611.68   437.40   1,049.08
            5 763.91   546.26   1,310.17
            6 916.13   655.11   1,571.24
            1 180.00   128.72   308.72
            2 357.51   255.65   613.16
7 dumpsters 3 535.01   382.58   917.59
            4 712.80   509.71   1,222.51
            5 890.30   636.64   1,526.94
            6 1,067.81 763.57   1,831.38
            1 205.56   146.99   352.55
            2 408.62   292.20   700.82
8 dumpsters 3 611.40   437.21   1,048.61
            4 814.47   582.41   1,396.88
            5 1,017.80 727.82   1,745.62
            6 1,220.59 872.82   2,093.41
 
Note:
1.    In addition, each commercial or business establishment shall be assessed
a basic monthly minimum charge of $4.40 for recycling operations, regardless of
the number of dumpsters the commercial entity is billed for on a monthly basis,
and regardless of the user's production and usage of recycling services.
   C.   Optional Small Commercial And Miscellaneous Service Rate: Any
commercial or business establishment that is unable to utilize the dumpsters/
roll-outs provided by the city due to the type of waste produced such as, but
not limited to, carpet, carpet pads, construction debris, or other materials
not authorized to be placed within a dumpster, the commercial or business
establishment may request from the city administrator and/or his/her designee
to determine if the commercial or business establishment is suitable to be
assessed a basic monthly minimum charge as provided under the residential
rates. The business establishment must be able to show proof of contract with
another solid waste provider to handle their primary waste products. The
optional small commercial and miscellaneous service rate will only be offered
to those businesses and establishments that can provide proof that the
containers provided by the city cannot be utilized.
   D.   Additional Fee: Any person or commercial or business establishment
requiring garbage and debris pick up where the dumpsters and/or roll-out
containers are not readily accessible from the alley or a street shall be
charged an additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each pick up. If a
person or commercial business establishment fails to put out a dumpster or
roll-out container in time for a regularly scheduled pick up and they require a
special pick up, a charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid. All
requests for pick up made after two o'clock (2:00) P.M. will be charged an
additional fifteen dollars ($15.00), for a total of thirty dollars ($30.00) per
pick up if a crew is available for the pick up request. If there is no
availability of a crew for pick up and the request is made after two o'clock
(2:00) P.M., the request will not be fulfilled until the next business day.
   E.   Placement And Removal Of Roll-Out Containers: Any person or business
using a roll-out container shall place the same at the curb area immediately in
front of the user's property not more than twelve (12) hours before a scheduled
pick up and shall remove same to the user's property away from the street to a
protected area within twelve (12) hours of a scheduled pick up. Violations of
this section shall be punished pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-10, 6-21-2016; amd. Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
4-4-14: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
All bills for the rates and charges of all utility services furnished by the
city shall be due fifteen (15) days from the billing date. All bills shall be
delinquent on the sixteenth day thereafter. Delinquent procedures shall
commence after the thirty fifth day after the bill date. The city reserves the
right to disconnect other metered utilities servicing the same property, such
as water and/or electric, on the forty fifth day after the bill date, or on the
next scheduled disconnect date. There will be no exception for businesses that
have third party contractual agreements with other companies to pay bills for
solid waste services. In the case of extreme hardship, customers may request an
adjustment/agreement to make payments with the director of administrative
services, or his/her designee. All provisions regarding the payment of bills
and fee structures as outlined in title 8, chapter 1, "Electricity", of this
code will be applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10, 6-21-2016)
4-4-15: USE OF RECEPTACLES BY NONRESIDENTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to bring garbage which is generated or
accumulated outside the city limits of the city into the city and dump the same
at any place, or to place the same in a receptacle that has been provided for
the use of individuals or businesses within the city paying for garbage
collection services. This prohibition shall not apply to those who are paying
for residential or commercial garbage collection services within the city.
Any individual found violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished and/or fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-10, 6-21-2016)
ARTICLE IV.  WEEDS
4-4-16: PURPOSE; VIOLATION A FIRE HAZARD AND NUISANCE:
The purpose of this article is primarily to safeguard the health of this
community. Violation of this article is also deemed to constitute a fire hazard
and a nuisance. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-17: WEEDS TO BE MOWED AND REMOVED:
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any
lot or premises, to mow or otherwise destroy and remove the weeds that may grow
upon such lot or premises, as well as upon the parking space between such
property and the street, and also upon that portion of the alley adjoining such
premises. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-18: LIABILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE TO COMPLY:
The city requires compliance with this article. The owner, lessee or occupant
of any premises shall be held liable for such compliance; and if such person
shall refuse or fail to destroy and remove any weeds upon any premises under
his/her care and control, he/she shall be served with verbal or written notice
requiring removal of such weeds within three (3) days from the date of such
notice. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-19: CITY MAY HAVE WEEDS CUT; COST CONSTITUTES LIEN ON PROPERTY:
Upon failure to comply with notice as mentioned in section 4-4-18 of this
chapter, the city may have such weeds destroyed and removed, charging the cost
thereof as a special bill for refuse removal. Should such bill not be paid
within thirty (30) days of invoice, the same shall become a lien against such
property, and collectible as such. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-20: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Punishment as herein required shall not
relieve such violator from paying the expense of the city hereinbefore provided
for. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
ARTICLE V.  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LOOSE MATERIALS
4-4-21: COVERED CARGO REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any loose cargo by truck or
other motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such cargo is covered or
secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public and private
property. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-22: DUTY OF OWNER OF TRUCK OR VEHICLE:
The duty and responsibility imposed by section 4-4-21 of this chapter shall be
applicable alike to the owner of the trucks or other vehicles, the operator
thereof and the person from whose residence or establishment the cargo
originated. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-23: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
In the prosecution charging a violation of section 4-4-21 of this chapter, lack
of adequate covering or securing shall in itself constitute proof a violation
has been committed. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-4-24: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
Any individual found violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished and/or fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2014-03, 5-6-2014, eff. 6-1-2014)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-14, 9-20-2016)
CHAPTER 6
SMOKING PROHIBITED
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Prohibition
4-6-3: Violation; Penalty
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY OF CODY FACILITIES: Any enclosed building or structure that is owned and
operated by the city of Cody, which includes, but is not limited to, city hall
at 1338 Rumsey Avenue, city maintenance shop at 119 19th Street, city electric
shop at 225 19th Street, convention center at 1240 Beck Avenue, swimming pool
at 1228 Beck Avenue, multi-sports center at 1526 23rd Street, stock center
(Cody chamber - Shoshone recreation) at 836 Sheridan Avenue, and the Girl Scout
House at 945 9th Street.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
SMOKING: The lighting, holding or carrying of, or emitting or exhaling the
smoke of, a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. (Ord. 93-1; amd. Ord. 94-4)
4-6-2: PROHIBITION:
Smoking is unlawful and prohibited at all times in all city facilities. (Ord.
93-1; amd. Ord. 94-4)
4-6-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to which shall be
added costs of five dollars ($5.00). Each daily violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 93-1; amd. Ord. 94-4)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT 1
SECTION:
5-1-1: Police Jurisdiction
5-1-2: Application Of Chapter
5-1-3: Supervision Of Police Officers
5-1-4: Duties Generally
5-1-5: Powers Of Constables
5-1-6: Impersonation
5-1-7: Obstructing, Resisting Arrest, Aiding Persons To Escape Custody
5-1-8: Refusal To Assist
5-1-9: Discipline
5-1-10: Disposal Of Abandoned, Lost, Etc., Property
5-1-11: Unlawful Interference With A Police Dog
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15-1-103 (xxxiv).
5-1-1: POLICE JURISDICTION:
In all cases wherein it shall be deemed necessary in order to protect the
rights of the citizens of the city, as regards health nuisances and unsanitary
conditions, police jurisdiction in the enforcement of the laws and ordinances
of the city shall include all persons, property or premises within the
authority allowed by state law, or as defined by a mutual aid agreement. (Ord.
2004-09, 10-4-2004)
5-1-2: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter apply to the chief of police, regular or special
police officers, night watchmen or any other officers whose duties are in the
nature of a police officer. (1960 Compilation § 16-406)
5-1-3: SUPERVISION OF POLICE OFFICERS:
All police officers of the city, regular or special, shall be under the
supervision of the chief of police. (1960 Compilation § 16-401)
5-1-4: DUTIES GENERALLY:
In addition to all other duties and responsibilities that may be formulated in
policy, regulations and rules, the chief of police and police officers shall
have the following duties:
   A.   To wear a shield of his office and to carry out and execute all duties
which may be required by the city council, ordinance, resolution, policy, rule
or regulation, and laws of the state of Wyoming;
   B.   To make arrests with proper process, for any offense against the
ordinances of the city or laws of the state, and bring the offender to trial
before the proper officer, and to arrest without process in all cases where
such offense shall be committed or attempted on view;
   C.   To swear out a complaint against anyone known to have committed a
crime;
   D.   To arrest any person found under suspicious circumstances unless such
person gives a satisfactory account of himself. (1960 Compilation § 16-402;
amd. Ord. 88-2)
5-1-5: POWERS OF CONSTABLES:
The chief of police and all police officers duly qualified shall have all the
powers granted to constables by the laws of the state. (1960 Compilation § 16-
403)
5-1-6: IMPERSONATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be the
chief of police or any member of the police department by wearing a shield of
office or otherwise. It shall be unlawful for any person without first being
authorized to do so, to exercise or attempt any duty, power or function of the
chief of police or any member of the police department. (1960 Compilation § 8-
601; amd. Ord. 88-2)
5-1-7: OBSTRUCTING, RESISTING ARREST, AIDING PERSONS TO ESCAPE CUSTODY 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise
interfere with the chief of police or any member of the police department in
the discharge of his official duties, or to resist or attempt to prevent any
such officer from arresting any person violating any provision of this code or
any other city ordinance, or to attempt to rescue or in any manner assist in
the escape of any person in the custody of the chief of police or member of the
police department. (1960 Compilation § 8-602)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 6-5-201 et seq.
5-1-8: REFUSAL TO ASSIST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to assist the chief of police or
any member of the police department in making an arrest or in quelling any
disturbance when requested so to do. (1960 Compilation § 8-603)
5-1-9: DISCIPLINE:
A police officer shall be a peace officer, and any police officer who shall
fail to perform his duty promptly and fearlessly, who commits a crime,
favoritism, oppression, cruelty or disregards orders of a superior, or violates
any rules, policies or regulations of the police department or exhibits conduct
not becoming to a peace officer may be disciplined, suspended, reduced in grade
or discharged as the chief of police may determine is appropriate.
All employees of the police department shall be under the supervision of the
chief of police and he has the authority to discipline, suspend, reduce in
grade or discharge employees as he may determine is appropriate for any
violation of the rules, policies and regulations of the police department.
(1960 Compilation § 16-404; amd. Ord. 88-2)
5-1-10: DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED, LOST, ETC., PROPERTY:
   A.   When any abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed property has been in the
possession of the city for ninety (90) days and the same has not been claimed
by the lawful owner, then the city may dispose of same as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Any such property, except firearms, valued at over two hundred dollars
($200.00), shall be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the
time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place or three (3)
public places within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the sale. If the
police department has the name and address of the purported lawful owner, at
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, a copy of such notice shall be sent by
certified mail to the owner at his or her last known address.
   C.   All property, except firearms, valued at less than two hundred dollars
($200.00), may be sold at public sale as provided above, or may be donated by
the city to a charitable or nonprofit organization for its use or further
distribution to the needy.
   D.   All firearms may be retained by the police department for use in its
arsenal. Any such weapons that are deemed unusable or not fit for such arsenal
may be destroyed, at the discretion of the chief of police.
   E.   Whenever any property is sold, disposed of or destroyed pursuant to
this section, a report of such transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the action taken.
   F.   The proceeds of any public sale of property, after the deduction of the
cost and expenses of sale, shall be deposited in the general fund of the city
treasury.
   G.   Any police officer, city employee or other agent shall not be held to
answer or be liable for any damages and any action brought by the lawful owner,
his legal representative or any other person legally entitled to the possession
of any property which was sold or disposed of as provided by this section.
(Ord. 78-14; amd. Ord. 88-2)
5-1-11: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH A POLICE DOG:
   A.   "Police dog" means any dog used or kept for use by a police officer in
discharging any legal duty or power of his or her office.
   B.   A person commits the crime of unlawful interference with a police dog
if, acting without the permission of the police department or other agency or
person owning the police dog, he or she intentionally:
      1.   Injures or kills any police dog; or
      2.   Provokes with the intent to cause fear or anger, physically
mistreats, or attempts to injure any police dog; or
      3.   Interferes with or meddles with any police dog while such animal is
being used by the department or with any officer or member thereof while such
officer or member is using such animal in the performance of any of the
functions or duties of the department, or of the officer or member.
   C.   The violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), to which shall be added costs of ten dollars ($10.00),
and/or a jail sentence not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 96-6)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Aircraft In Flight; Loud And Unnecessary Noise; Dropping Paper, Etc.,
From Aircraft
5-2-2: Tobacco; Purchase, Possession Or Use By Minor Prohibited
5-2-3: City Employees Generally; Interference With Work, Molesting Equipment,
Etc.
5-2-4: City Property
5-2-5: Disorderly Conduct And Disturbing The Peace
5-2-6: Disorderly Places
5-2-7: Public Intoxication
5-2-8: Exploding Combustibles, Etc.
5-2-9: False Alarm Of Fire
5-2-10: Falsely Calling For Police Protection
5-2-11: Iceboxes, Refrigerators, Etc.; Removal Of Doors, Locks, Etc., Upon
Abandonment
5-2-12: Malicious Mischief
5-2-13: Narcotics; Sale, Use, Possession, Etc.
5-2-14: Drug Paraphernalia
5-2-15: Peeping Toms
5-2-16: Poison; Labeling, Etc.
5-2-17: Prisoners
5-2-18: Right Of Entry, Etc., Into Certain Premises
5-2-19: Shoplifting; Altering Or Removing Price Tags And Markers
5-2-20: Vagrancy
5-2-21: Curfew
5-2-22: Attempt; Conspiracy; Renunciation Of Criminal Intention
5-2-23: Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds
5-2-24: Noise
5-2-1: AIRCRAFT IN FLIGHT; LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE; DROPPING PAPER, ETC.,
FROM AIRCRAFT:
When any aircraft is in flight above the City, the pilot thereof, or any other
person therein, shall not make or cause any loud or unnecessary noise to be
made by such aircraft, its motor, or any apparatus attached to or contained in
such aircraft; nor shall such pilot, or other person, permit the use of any
radio, mechanical device or apparatus for the intensification or amplification
of the human voice, or any sound or noise for advertising purposes. Such pilot
or any other person therein shall not drop or release any paper or advertising
matter therefrom. (Ord. 420)
5-2-2: TOBACCO; PURCHASE, POSSESSION OR USE BY MINOR PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions:
    ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: Means a product that employs any mechanical heating
element, battery or electronic circuit regardless of shape or size, that can be
used to deliver doses of nicotine vapor by means of heating a liquid nicotine
solution, plant, wax, solution or other substance contained in a cartridge or
other delivery system, including but not limited to, electronic cigarettes,
vaping pens or vaping mods.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Means any product made or derived from tobacco that
contains nicotine, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, electronic
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   B.   Purchase: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall purchase
tobacco products or electronic cigarettes, or misrepresent his or her identity
or age, or use any false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing tobacco products or electronic cigarettes.
   C.   Possess: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
to possess or use any tobacco products or electronic cigarettes.
   D.   Defense: It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under subsection
C of this section that the defendant possessed or used the tobacco product or
electronic cigarette in the home of, or under the direct supervision of, his
parent or guardian.
   E.   Sell, Offer For Sale Or Give Away: No individual shall sell, offer for
sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or electronic cigarettes to any
person under the age of eighteen (18).
   F.   Violations: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-07, 5-1-2018)
5-2-3: CITY EMPLOYEES GENERALLY; INTERFERENCE WITH WORK, MOLESTING EQUIPMENT,
ETC.:
No person shall interfere in any way with any City employee in the performance
of his work, nor displace any stakes or landmarks deposited or installed by any
employee, nor in any way molest any tools, instruments or equipment of any
employee, nor in any way molest any tools, instruments or equipment used by
such employee in the duties assigned to him. (1960 Compilation § 1-907)
5-2-4: CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   Injuring, Etc.:
      1.   No person shall injure, damage, destroy or deface any tree, shrub,
plant, flower, lawn, fence, bridge, street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk,
water line, sewer line, electrical line, equipment, tool, or any other
property, improvement, building or structure of the City.
      2.   The City may post regulations regarding conduct on City property.
Any person who violates a posted regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2003-08, 11-17-2003)
   B.   Posting Bills: No person shall affix any placard or other paper upon
any structure within or upon any property of the City, nor upon any such fence
or enclosure thereof. (1960 Compilation § 1-902)
   C.   Occupying Without Lease, Etc.: No person shall occupy any land owned by
the City, within or outside of the City limits, for any purpose whatsoever,
without first having secured a lease or other official agreement from the City
Council, to so occupy. (1960 Compilation § 1-906)
   D.   Fires In Streets, Etc.: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn
leaves or branches from trees or shrubbery, or trash or refuse of any kind,
upon any of the streets or alleys or any public property of the City. (1960
Compilation § 1-905)
   E.   Removal Of Sod, Gravel, Etc.: No person shall dig, remove or cause to
be removed any sod, stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, alley or
public ground in the City, without first having obtained permission therefor of
the Mayor or Council. (1960 Compilation § 1-904)
   F.   Interference With Electric Light System: No person, other than the
authorized officials or employees of the City, shall fasten or attach any
device or other thing to any electric light pole or line, or in any manner
interfere with or molest the electrical distribution system of the City. (1960
Compilation § 1-908)
5-2-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   No person shall cause, or participate in causing, any disturbance of
the peace in the City. Any person or assemblage of persons shall be deemed
guilty of disturbance of the peace if they shall:
      1.   Disturb the peace of a community or its inhabitants by unreasonably
loud noise or music or by using threatening, abusive or obscene language or
violent actions with knowledge or probable cause to believe he or she will
disturb the peace;
      2.   Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct;
      3.   Aid or abet in any fight, or ask, invite or defy another to fight or
quarrel, or to use abusive language and thereby intentionally create a risk of
assault;
      4.   Commit an act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb, health or
safety;
      5.   Use profane, obscene or offensive provocative language directed
toward another, or others, and calculated to provoke a breach of the peace. For
purposes of this section, the term "provocative language" shall mean insulting
or "fighting words" or those words by which their very utterance inflict injury
or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace;
      6.   Perform any act or gesture of rude, improper or indecent behavior,
directed at another, and calculated to provoke a breach of the peace;
      7.   Make or use any gesture, display, provocative words, profane,
obscene, or abusive language which would reasonably tend to incite or abet a
person to engage in fighting or other violent or tumultuous conduct;
      8.   Incite or attempt to incite a riot. For purposes of this section,
the term "riot" shall mean a tumultuous disturbance of the peace by persons
assembled and acting in a manner that jeopardizes or threatens the safety,
security or health of the people in the City, or threatens to or actually
causes damage to property, whether private or public, either in assemblage
while executing a lawful enterprise in a violent or turbulent manner or in
assemblage while executing an unlawful enterprise in a violent or turbulent
manner;
      9.   Intentionally disrupt any lawful assembly or meeting of persons
without lawful authority;
      10.   Interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation or business
by acts of violence or by any other disorderly conduct as described herein;
      11.   Place himself or herself, or congregate with others in or on any
public way so as to reasonably tend to halt or interfere with the free and
regular flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such
public way when ordered by the police or other lawful authority; or
      12.   Urinate or defecate in any public way or place which is public in
nature or any place open to public view. (Ord. 2012-17, 12-4-2012)
5-2-6: DISORDERLY PLACES:
   A.   No person shall keep, maintain, operate, occupy, aid, abet or
participate in, permit or allow the keeping, maintaining, operating, use, or
occupying of any room, house, building or other place where any of the
following occur: any common or ill governed or disorderly house, drunkenness,
quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous games, or disorderly conduct
whatsoever on the premises, or any disturbance in which the peace of the
neighbors or others in the vicinity shall be disturbed. Any person violating
this section shall be deemed guilty of disturbance of the peace, and if such
person is licensed under this Code, such license may be revoked by the City
Council upon conviction of such person in the Police Court of the City for
violating the provisions of this section.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person being the owner, occupant, tenant or
guest of an owner, occupant or tenant of any property of any kind whatsoever,
whether temporary or permanent, to knowingly suffer any conduct thereon with
knowledge or probable cause to believe that said conduct will disturb the peace
of any other person, and the owner, tenant, occupant or guest of an owner,
tenant or occupant of any such premises on which such disturbances occur, shall
be presumed to have knowingly suffered the same.
   C.   It shall not be a violation of this section if the alleged conduct
arises from noise arising out of the normal and ordinary conduct of business.
   D.   The Governing Body may authorize individuals or groups to amplify
music, sound or voices for events in accordance with chapter 6 of this title,
subject to such terms and conditions as the Governing Body, in its discretion,
deems appropriate. (Ord. 2012-18, 12-4-2012)
5-2-7: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It is unlawful for any person to be under the influence of alcohol to a degree
which renders himself a hazard to walk or be upon any street or thoroughfare or
in any public place or in or on any vehicle within the city. Every person
within the limits of the city who is found drunk or in a state of intoxication
to a degree which renders himself a hazard to himself or to others, or in a
condition that annoys or frightens passersby on streets or sidewalks or other
public places, or is found sleeping or unconscious in that condition in any
public place, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-03, 3-2-2010)
5-2-8: EXPLODING COMBUSTIBLES, ETC.:
No person shall explode or discharge any combustibles or explosives in the
city. (1960 Compilation § 8-501)
5-2-9: FALSE ALARM OF FIRE:
No person shall turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm of fire. (1960
Compilation § 10-109)
5-2-10: FALSELY CALLING FOR POLICE PROTECTION 1 :
Any person who out of mischief, meanness, revenge, for a joke, or for other
unnecessary reasons, calls by telephone or other means, the police force or the
chief of police or any police officer thereof, to any place, falsely
pretending, or falsely giving such officer or officers to understand that he is
needed or wanted in any place as such officer, shall be deemed guilty of
disorderly conduct. (1960 Compilation § 8-606)
 
Notes
1 1. For regulations generally concerning the police department, see chapter 1
  of this title.
5-2-11: ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS, ETC.; REMOVAL OF DOORS, LOCKS, ETC., UPON
ABANDONMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking
device, which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the
door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from such icebox, refrigerator or
container. (1960 Compilation § 25-101)
5-2-12: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to wantonly, mischievously,
maliciously or wilfully take, steal, damage or destroy the property of another.
(1960 Compilation § 8-206; amd. Ord. 95-5)
5-2-13: NARCOTICS; SALE, USE, POSSESSION, ETC. 1 :
It is unlawful for any person, not so authorized by law, to be in possession
of, use, sell, barter, give away, or in any manner distribute, marijuana,
cocaine, opium, chloral hydrate, or any other narcotic, opiate or drug or
derivatives of any of them, or any product, the effect of which is to induce
sleep or delirium.
Any person who shall be the owner, agent or occupant of any building, place or
premises, within or upon which, whether with or without his knowledge, any of
such products, drugs or derivatives, or any of them, are found, kept, sold,
handled or used in any way whatsoever not authorized by law, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1960 Compilation §§ 8-301, 8-302)
 
Notes
1 2. WS §§ 35-348, 35-371.
5-2-14: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
It is unlawful for any person to use, or possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packing, repacking, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. (Ord. 2004-12,
12-21-2004)
5-2-15: PEEPING TOMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to invade, or attempt to invade, the
privacy of another person by resorting to "peeping", which is hereby defined as
the stealthy, clandestine or surreptitious visual invasion, or attempted visual
invasion, of a person's privacy. (1960 Compilation § 8-207)
5-2-16: POISON; LABELING, ETC. 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, barter, give away or in
any manner distribute any deadly poison without having the same plainly labeled
"poison". A written record shall be kept of all purchasers of such poison.
(1960 Compilation § 8-302)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 33-319.
5-2-17: PRISONERS:
   A.   Aiding In Escape: It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid or
to attempt to aid any person confined in the city jail or other place wherein
prisoners may be confined for violating city ordinances to escape from such
jail or place or other place of confinement. (1960 Compilation § 8-604)
   B.   Delivering Articles To Without Permission: It shall be unlawful for any
person to take into the city jail, or deliver to any prisoner, any weapon,
tool, intoxicating drink, or other article, or attempt to do so, without the
consent of the officer in charge of such prisoner. (1960 Compilation § 8-605)
5-2-18: RIGHT OF ENTRY, ETC., INTO CERTAIN PREMISES:
The mayor, city council, chief of police or any police officer of the city
shall have the authority at any time to enter any place, room, vehicle or
premises which they have reason to believe is being used for gambling or
immoral purposes. Such officials or officers may lawfully enter or cause same
to be entered, by force, by breaking doors or otherwise and cause the arrest,
with or without warrant, of all suspicious persons found therein. (1960
Compilation § 8-105)
5-2-19: SHOPLIFTING; ALTERING OR REMOVING PRICE TAGS AND MARKERS:
   A.   A person who wilfully conceals or takes possession of property offered
for sale by a wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment,
without the knowledge or consent of the owner and with intent to convert the
property to his own use without paying the purchase price, is guilty of
shoplifting.
   B.   A person who alters, defaces, changes or removes a price tag or marker
on or about property offered for sale by a wholesale or retail store, or other
mercantile establishment, with intent to obtain the property at less than the
marked or listed price, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   A peace officer, merchant or merchant's employee who has reasonable
cause to believe a person is violating the provisions of this section may
detain and interrogate the person in regard to the suspected violation in a
reasonable manner and for a reasonable time. In a civil or criminal action for
slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, assault, battery or wrongful
detention based upon a detention and interrogation pursuant to this section, it
is a defense that the peace officer, merchant or merchant's employee had
reasonable cause to believe the person was violating this section and the
detention and interrogation were conducted in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable time. (Ord. 90-16)
5-2-20: VAGRANCY 1 :
Every idle and dissolute person without visible or known means of living, who
has the physical ability to work, and who does not make the proper inquiry for,
and use due diligence to secure employment or labor, when employment is offered
to him, also every person who shall:
   A.   Beg or solicit alms;
   B.   Roam from place to place without definite lawful business;
   C.   Roam the streets at late or unusual hours;
   D.   Lead an idle, immoral or dissolute life;
   E.   Associate with people of known bad character;
   F.   Lodge in any shed, shop, public park, or place other than kept for
lodging thereof;
   G.   Loiter about any hotel, rooming house, liquor store or saloon without
any lawful means of support; is deemed to be a vagrant and guilty of vagrancy.
(1960 Compilation § 8-204)
 
Notes
1 1. WS §§ 15.1-3(15), 6-221.
5-2-21: CURFEW:
   A.   Children Under Sixteen Years Of Age: It is unlawful for any minor child
under the age of sixteen (16) years to be present, loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, walk, run or play in or about the public streets, highways, roads,
alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. until five o'clock (5:00)
A.M., except that on Friday and Saturday throughout the year, and on every
night during the months of June, July and August, such curfew time shall be
extended to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight until five o'clock (5:00) A.M.;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to:
      1.   A minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
      2.   A minor performing his or her employment, or going to or returning
home from, without any detour or stop, his or her place of employment;
      3.   A minor attending an official school or religious activity, or going
to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school or
religious activity.
   B.   Liability Of Parents, Etc.: Any parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor child under the age of sixteen (16)
years who knowingly shall permit such child to be upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, park, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots
or other unsupervised places in violation of subsection A of this section shall
be deemed guilty of wilful neglect of such child as a misdemeanor. Any
violations of subsection A of this section will be deemed prima facie evidence
of wilful neglect as set out in this section. (Ord. 95-4)
5-2-22: ATTEMPT; CONSPIRACY; RENUNCIATION OF CRIMINAL INTENTION:
   A.   Attempt; Renunciation Of Criminal Intention:
      1.   A person is guilty of an attempt to violate an existing ordinance
if:
         a.   With the intent to violate the ordinance, he does any act which
is a substantial step towards commission of the same. A "substantial step" is
conduct which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the person's
intention to complete the ordinance violation; or
         b.   He intentionally engages in conduct which would constitute the
violation had the attendant circumstances been as the person believes them to
be.
      2.   A person is not liable under this section if, under circumstances
manifesting a voluntary and complete renunciation of his criminal intention, he
avoided the commission of the violation attempted by abandoning his criminal
effort. Within the meaning of this subsection, renunciation of criminal purpose
is not voluntary if it is motivated, in whole or in part, by circumstances, not
present or apparent at the inception of the person's course of conduct, which
increase the probability of detection or apprehension or which make more
difficult the accomplishment of the criminal intention. Renunciation is not
complete if it is motivated by a decision to postpone the criminal conduct
until a more advantageous time or to transfer the criminal effort to another
but similar objective or victim.
   B.   Conspiracy; Renunciation Of Criminal Intention: A person is guilty of
conspiracy to violate an existing ordinance if he agrees with one or more
persons that they or one or more of them will commit a violation and one or
more of them does an overt act to effect the objective of the agreement.
      1.   A person is not liable under this section if after conspiring he
withdraws from the conspiracy and thwarts its success under circumstances
manifesting voluntary and complete renunciation of his criminal intention.
      2.   A conspiracy may be prosecuted by the city if the agreement was
entered into, or any act evidencing the conspiracy or furthering the purpose
took place within the city limits.
   C.   Grading: The penalty for attempt or conspiracy is the same as the
penalty for the crime which is attempted or is an object of the conspiracy.
(Ord. 2004-13, 12-21-2004)
5-2-23: UNLAWFUL INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other
entity, to manufacture, distribute, dispense, ingest, use, possess, purchase,
attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give,
trade or barter, any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or
substances, including their salts, isomers, homologues and salts of their
isomers and homologues:
      1.   Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compounds,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plants, its seeds
or extracts;
      2.   Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
      3.   (6ar,10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2- yl)-
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-210 or 1,1-
dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8- tetrahydrocannabinol);
      4.   2 (3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as
CP-47,497), and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues
of CP-47,497;
      5.   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
      6.   1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-200);
      7.   1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (also known as JWH-250);
      8.   1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-019);
      9.   1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-398);
      10.   N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP);
      11.   1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
      12.   Any similar structural analogs of the above chemical compounds;
      13.   Any other synthetic cannabinoids.
   B.   It is not an offense under subsection A of this section if the person
was acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the City of Cody to
enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
   C.   If any of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds are found
in the possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law
enforcement officials.
   D.   This section shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed
or to drugs or substances which have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration or which are specifically permitted by Wyoming law.
   E.   The City of Cody shall have the authority to seek an injunction to
compel compliance of any business which fails to or refuses to comply with this
section.
   F.   If any provision of this section is held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the remaining provisions of this section which shall remain
effective absent the invalid provision, and to this end, the provisions of this
section are declared to be severable.
   G.   Any violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or a jail term not to exceed six
(6) months, or both. (Ord. 2010-24, 12-7-2010)
5-2-24: NOISE:
   A.   Definitions:
    UNREASONABLE NOISE: Shall mean any sounds of such level and duration as to
be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or that would
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. City agents,
police officers and Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to make a prima
facie determination as to whether a sound constitutes an unreasonable noise,
which determination may be based upon, but need not be limited to, a
consideration of the following factors:
      1.   The time of day when the sound occurs;
      2.   The frequency (repetition) and duration of the sound;
      3.   The proximity and sensitivity of neighboring land uses (e.g.,
residential dwellings, care centers, and hospitals being more sensitive than
convenience stores and public activity areas);
      4.   The size of any gathering of persons creating or contributing to the
sound;
      5.   The presence or absence of sound amplification equipment; and
      6.   Any other factors tending to show the magnitude and/or disruptive
effect of the sounds.
   B.   Unreasonable Noise Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to make, continue
or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise, and no person shall
knowingly permit such noise upon any premises or in or upon any vehicle owned
or possessed by such person or under such person's control or operation. For
purposes of this section, proof that the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the unreasonable noise occurred was present at the time of the violation
shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person was in control of the
premises and knowingly permitted the violation to occur.
   C.   Exemptions: The limitations of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Authorized emergency vehicles;
      2.   Construction equipment operating between the hours of six thirty
o'clock (6:30) A.M. and either eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M. or one hour
after sunset, whichever is later;
      3.   City and State public works maintenance and repair activities (e.g.,
snow plowing, excavating water line breaks, etc.);
      4.   Any activity that has been identified and specifically authorized by
the City through the zoning site plan review process, as evidenced by a
specific condition authorizing the exemption or variance from the requirements
of this section;
      5.   Activities conducted or sponsored by the City (such as concerts in
parks, parades, fireworks displays, etc.);
      6.   Church or school chimes or bells; and
      7.   Events specifically approved by the Governing Body, or by authorized
City staff, such as dances, concerts, shows, festivals and carnivals.
   D.   Violations: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-08, 5-1-2018)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-0: Introduction
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Authorized Impoundment; Tranquilizing; Destruction
5-3-3: Financial Bonding Requirements For Costs Of Holding Impounded Animals
5-3-4: Notice To Owner, Redemption
5-3-5: Disposition Of Unclaimed Or Infected Animals
5-3-6: Animals At Large
5-3-7: Breaking Open, Etc., Sheltering Facility
5-3-8: Animal Waste
5-3-9: Wild Animals Prohibited; Exceptions
5-3-10: Dangerous, Vicious Animals
5-3-11: Animal Cruelty
5-3-12: Animal Fighting
5-3-13: Noisy Animals
5-3-14: Carcasses To Be Removed
5-3-15: Regulations Concerning Female Dogs And Cats In Heat
5-3-16: Abandonment Of Animals
5-3-17: Interference
5-3-18: Duties Of A Community Service Officer
5-3-19: Rabies Control
5-3-20: Rabies Emergency Measures
5-3-21: Feeding Of Deer
5-3-22: Penalty For Violation Of Chapter
5-3-0: INTRODUCTION:
In general, this chapter generally deals with the enforcement of regulating
dogs, cats, livestock, wild or exotic animals within the corporate limits of
the city, and preventing, abating and removing nuisances or annoyances and
offensive conditions created by the keeping or maintaining of such animals as
authorized by Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-103. For purposes of this chapter,
the word "animal" shall include "every dumb living creature" as defined by
Wyoming Statutes. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL: Every living dumb creature, including dogs, cats, livestock, wild or
exotic animals.
ANIMAL PARK OR EXERCISE AREA: Any area of city property specifically designated
by the governing body as property upon which dogs and cats may run freely while
under the command and supervision of their owners or a member of the owner's
immediate family, or other authorized person.
BIT OR BITTEN: The skin has been penetrated by an animal's teeth, or saliva
from the animal has come in contact with an open wound or mucous membrane.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: An animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to
human beings or other animals. Proof of the fact that an animal has bitten or
attacked a person or other animal at any place where that person or animal is
legally entitled to be, is evidence that an animal is dangerous.
LEASH: A length of webbing, cord, chain or similar restraint, which is securely
attached to the animal's collar or harness.
LIVESTOCK: Animals kept or raised for use and/or profit.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation having the care
of an animal or caged bird, or permitting such to habitually be or remain on,
or be lodged or fed within his or her house, yard or premises.
PERMIT: A permit for wild animals, bees or exotic pets.
VACCINATE: The inoculation of an animal with antirabies vaccine, which shall be
administered by any licensed veterinarian, the cost of such vaccination to be
paid by the owner of the animal.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal that has killed or inflicted serious injury to a
person or domesticated animal, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement,
serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or
which has continued to exhibit dangerous behavior that resulted in a previous
finding of dangerous animal by a court; provided the owner has been given
notice of that finding. This also means any animal that, in the absence of
intentional provocation, is involved with a sustained attack upon a person, not
allowing the victim any means of escape, regardless of the injury or defensive
action required.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal occurring, growing or living in a natural state; not
domesticated, cultivated or tamed. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-2: AUTHORIZED IMPOUNDMENT; TRANQUILIZING; DESTRUCTION:
If any animal is found to be in violation of this chapter, a police officer or
any other officer or employee of the city, as designated by the chief of police
or city administrator, may capture and cause the same to be confined in a
secure pen, sheltering facility or other place provided for that purpose. No
animal so captured and confined shall be released until the owner or person
entitled to the possession thereof has paid to the city a fee for taking up and
receiving each such animal, together with a fee per day for each and every day
such animal was kept so impounded by the city. If any animal is presenting an
immediate danger, it is made the duty of the police officer or any other
employee of the city to dispose of or tranquilize the animal.
In the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, any police officer of the
city, or the community service officer, is authorized to enter upon the private
property of any person and take possession of an animal when in fresh pursuit
of such animal at the time the animal goes upon private property. Such police
officer or community service officer is authorized to enter upon the private
property of any owner of any animal under such circumstances in order to
ascertain and secure compliance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-01,
2-7-2006)
5-3-3: FINANCIAL BONDING REQUIREMENTS FOR COSTS OF HOLDING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Any owner or custodian of an animal that has been impounded because of alleged
neglect or abuse, or because of investigation of charges of cruelty to animals
or animal fighting, may prevent transfer of ownership of the animal by a
sheltering facility by posting a bond with the court in an amount sufficient to
provide for the animal's care and keeping for at least thirty (30) days,
including the day on which the animal was taken into custody. Such bond will be
filed with the court within ten (10) days after the animal is impounded. At the
end of thirty (30) days, if the owner or custodian desires to prevent a
disposition decision of the animal by the sheltering facility, the owner or
custodian shall post a new bond with the court within ten (10) days after the
prior bond's expiration. However, the court may order the immediate disposition
of the animal by euthanasia if, in the opinion of a veterinarian, the animal is
experiencing extreme pain or suffering. At the end of the time for which
expenses are covered by the bond, the sheltering facility may determine
disposition of the animal unless there is a court order prohibiting such
disposition. The owner or custodian shall be liable for the cost of the care,
keeping and/or disposal of the animal. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-4: NOTICE TO OWNER, REDEMPTION:
Not later than two (2) days after the impounding of any dog or cat, the owner
shall be notified or, if the owner of the animal is unknown, written notice
shall be posted for six (6) days at the Park County law enforcement center
describing the animal and the place and time of taking. The owner of any animal
so impounded may reclaim the animal upon payment of all fees and costs incurred
by the city and sheltering facility for impounding and processing the animal.
(Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-5: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the police officer or community service officer
to keep all unclaimed dogs and cats so impounded for a period of six (6) days.
If, at the expiration of the six (6) days the animal has not been redeemed, it
shall become the property of the city. As property of the city, an animal may
be maintained at the sheltering facility as long as space is available, adopted
by new owners, or, if necessary, humanely euthanized by proper authorities, at
the discretion of the evaluation committee, chief of police or the community
service officer.
   B.   Any animal not carrying identification by which the owner of the animal
could be ascertained, which animal appears to be suffering from rabies, or
other infectious or dangerous disease, or suffering from grievous injury, shall
not be impounded but will be taken immediately to a qualified veterinarian at
the expense of the owner if that person can be later identified. If it is
determined by the veterinarian that such animal is suffering from rabies or
other infectious and dangerous disease, or suffering from grievous injury, then
the animal may be humanely euthanized without further notice. The owner of any
animal so disposed, if known, will be responsible for the costs of disposal.
   C.   At the discretion of the chief of police or community service officer,
the carcass of such animal will not be returned to its owner, but will be kept
for evidence, autopsy or otherwise disposed of.
   D.   Care and/or disposal of an animal by any method specified in this
section does not relieve the owner thereof of liability for any violations and
any accrued charges.
   E.   Other than dogs and cats, at the discretion of the chief of police or
community service officer, an animal that is not otherwise placed for adoption
or returned to the owner may be sold upon giving at least eight (8) days'
previous notice to whom it may concern, of the time and place of the sale, by
two (2) consecutive publications thereof in a newspaper of general circulation,
published in the city, which notice shall describe the animals by brand or
otherwise, with reasonable accuracy; provided, however, that any such animal
may be redeemed by the owner, at any time before the sale by payment of the
fees and charges. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-6: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Any animal off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of
and on leash held by the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family or
other authorized person, or temporarily tethered by leash in an area open to
the public so as not to cause an obstruction in any fashion, will be considered
in violation of this chapter except as follows:
      1.   Obedience trained animals participating in obedience training, field
trials, shows or other similar competitions, when such animals are under the
control of voice commands, and are obedient to those commands, and do not come
into physical contact with other persons or animals.
      2.   Authorized animals that are under the control of voice commands, and
are obedient to those commands, that do not come into physical contact with
other persons or animals and are being trained for search and rescue, law
enforcement, or assistance animals with permission from the chief of police.
      3.   Animals in areas specifically designated for off leash use. Such
areas shall be designated by resolution adopted by the governing body of the
city of Cody.
      4.   Venomous animals or other animals that may cause injury to others
must be kept in a secure container when being transported in or through a
public place.
   B.   Any such animal found "at large" in the city may be impounded by the
community service officer or an authorized person of the city. Owners of any
animal anywhere within the city limits shall be liable for all damage done to
private or public property by such animal whether by accident or otherwise.
(Ord. 2012-10, 6-5-2012)
5-3-7: BREAKING OPEN, ETC., SHELTERING FACILITY:
No person shall, directly or indirectly, break open or assist in breaking open,
any pen or enclosure, with the intention of releasing any animal confined
therein pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-8: ANIMAL WASTE:
   A.   The owner of every animal shall immediately retrieve and remove all
feces deposited by his or her animal while off the owner's premises. This
section shall not apply to parades permitted by the city or animal drawn
carriages or vehicles licensed or permitted by the city to operate within the
city boundaries unless specifically directed by the governing body.
   B.   No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city shall
permit any waste or feces from the animal to accumulate, collect or remain on
the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property where the owner or
custodian resides, so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous
or offensive living condition on such property or to adjacent or neighboring
property of others. (Ord. 2015-15, 11-3-2015)
5-3-9: WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to own or
possess any wild animal or exotic animal within the corporate city limits,
except that this section shall not apply to the keeping of small cage birds,
aquatic, amphibian or nonpoisonous reptilian animals, or such small rodents as
hamsters, guinea pigs or gerbils solely as pets. It also shall not apply to any
zoological garden, theatrical exhibit or circus, nor to any legally
incorporated college, university or school, nor to any private or government
research laboratories.
   B.   The city may authorize the possession of specific wild or exotic
animals to be kept within the corporate limits, subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   A wild animal request form, provided by the police department, must
be completed and submitted to the chief of police or his/her designee. A
separate form shall be submitted for each species.
      2.   At the time a wild animal request form is submitted, the applicant
must attach a copy of the importation/possession permit issued by the Wyoming
game and fish department for the subject animals.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days following submission of the completed wild
or exotic animal request form to the chief of police, he/she will issue a
written determination approving or denying the request. The chief of police may
issue an approval subject to reasonable conditions or requirements. The written
determination shall be mailed to the applicant at the address listed on the
request form.
      4.   Appeal of the chief of police's determination shall be made to the
governing body. The appellant must provide written notice of the appeal to the
governing body and the chief of police within ten (10) days after the chief of
police issues the written determination. The notice must include the reasons
for the appeal, and any information relevant for the governing body to consider
in a review of the chief of police's determination. The chief of police shall
provide a written response to the governing body within ten (10) days after
receipt of the notice of appeal. The governing body may either set the appeal
to be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting or it may decide the appeal
on the basis of the written information provided by the appellant and the chief
of police. The governing body shall issue a written determination to the
appellant and chief within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The written determination of the governing body shall be a final decision.
(Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-10: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person owning or having possession, custody, charge or
control of any dangerous or vicious dog or other animal to cause or permit that
animal to run loose about the person's property in a manner endangering any
person lawfully entering such property, or cause or permit the animal to be
unrestrained upon or about any public street, sidewalk, park, schoolyard, or
property of other persons.
No vicious animal or animal sick with or liable to communicate rabies or other
contagious or infectious diseases, which, in the judgment of the chief of
police, or his or her designee, poses a risk of harm to humans or other animals
which is equivalent to or similar to the risk posed by rabies, shall be allowed
in the city limits, except if such animal is under confinement at a
veterinarian clinic for observation and treatment by a veterinarian. If any
dangerous animal, vicious animal or sick animal, as hereinabove set forth,
shall be found within the city limits and cannot be safely taken up and
impounded, such animal may be humanely euthanized by any police officer,
community service officer or other properly trained and authorized person
approved by the chief of police, or his or her designee. A police officer may
use firearms to euthanize such animal if, in the judgment of the officer, the
animal poses a threat of imminent harm to the safety of the general public or
the officer, or if the animal cannot be taken up safely by the police officer
or community service officer.
A police officer or community service officer may issue or deliver a citation
or complaint and summons to the animal owner or custodian. In addition, at the
time the officer delivers the citation or complaint or summons, or at any time
before the court enters a verdict, a police officer or community service
officer may take custody of any dangerous or vicious animal and confine such
animal until the municipal court has entered a verdict and determined the
appropriate disposition of the animal. If the police officer or community
service officer takes custody of the animal, the animal shall be confined in a
secure facility such as a veterinarian's office, an animal shelter, or other
facility chosen by the chief of police, or his or her designee. The animal
owner or custodian, or both, shall be liable for the costs of such confinement.
If the police officer or community service officer believes the owner or
custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety,
the owner or custodian may confine the animal in a manner directed by the chief
of police, or his or her designee, until such time as evidence shall be heard
and a verdict rendered. Regardless of the initial decision by the police
officer or community service officer at the time the citation is issued, the
chief of police, or his or her designee, at any time prior to the court
rendering a verdict, may order that the animal be taken into custody, and
confined as described above. No animal shall be found to be dangerous or
vicious if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was
committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's
owner or custodian, or was provoking, tormenting or physically abusing the
animal, or who can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or
assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the
performance of its duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found
to be a dangerous or vicious dog. Any animal determined to be vicious will be
euthanized. Any animal determined to be dangerous may be euthanized. (Ord.
2009-17, 7-21-2009)
5-3-11: ANIMAL CRUELTY:
No person shall cause by action, omission of action or neglect, the wilful and
malicious infliction of pain, suffering or death of an animal by permitting or
allowing such to continue when there is a reasonable remedy or relief. No owner
or custodian shall abandon or fail to provide an animal with sufficient, good
and wholesome food and water, proper shelter, protection from the weather and
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and
treatment. "Proper shelter" means natural or artificial shelter appropriate to
the local climatic conditions for the species concerned, as necessary for the
health of the animal.
If a shelter with a chain is used as a primary enclosure for an animal kept
outdoors, the chain must be placed or attached to avoid entanglement with
chains of other animals or any other object. A chain should be at least three
(3) times the length of the animal, measured from the tip of its nose to the
base of its tail, and must allow the animal convenient and safe access to
shelter and water.
No person shall leave an animal in an unattended vehicle without adequate
ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme
temperatures which adversely affect its health or welfare.
No person shall wilfully kill, maim, inhumanely trap, poison or disfigure any
domestic or wild animal, except pests of public health importance within the
city limits. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-12: ANIMAL FIGHTING:
No person shall cause, sponsor, arrange, hold or encourage a fight between
animals for the purpose of monetary gain or entertainment. For the purposes of
this section, a person encourages a fight between animals if he/she is
knowingly present at, or wagers on such a fight; owns, trains, transports,
possesses, breeds, sells, transfers or equips an animal with the intent that
such animal will be engaged in such a fight; or allows any animal used for such
a fight to be kept, boarded, housed, or trained on or transported in, any
property owned or controlled by him or her; or uses any means of communication
for the purpose of promoting such a fight; or possesses any animal used for
such a fight or any device intended to enhance the animal's fighting ability.
(Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-13: NOISY ANIMALS:
   A.   No person shall own or keep any animal which makes continual or
repeated barking, screeching, yowling, howling, yelping, neighing, braying,
mooing, crowing, quacking, pawing, stamping or other noises in excessive,
continuous or untimely fashion that otherwise disturbs the peace of others.
   B.   Any such noisy animal may be impounded at the discretion of the
community service officer or a police officer to prevent further peace
disturbance, and said officer can go upon the property or premises where said
animal is located to take possession or control of the offending animal. (Ord.
2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-14: CARCASSES TO BE REMOVED:
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal which shall in any manner
come to its death within the city, to immediately remove the body or carcass of
the animal and dispose of it in a legal manner. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-15: REGULATIONS CONCERNING FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:
The owner of any female dog or cat shall keep such animal, when in heat, under
confinement, in such manner as not to attract male dogs and cats. If such
female animal in heat shall be unsuccessfully confined and in fact does attract
male animals to the premises where such female animal in heat is kept or
confined, the female animal shall be defined and declared to be a nuisance.
Whenever any such nuisance shall come under the notice of the community service
officer or a police officer of the city, it shall be the officer's duty to
immediately abate such nuisance, if practical, by securing and confining such
animal or causing the owner to do so. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-16: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
No person shall dump, abandon or in any manner release any animal within the
city. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-17: INTERFERENCE:
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any police officer, community
service officer, or any agent thereof, in the performance of their duty as
herein provided. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-18: DUTIES OF A COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER:
The community service officer or an agent or designee of the chief of police is
charged with the duty of impounding all animals in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. Such individual shall be a special police officer and shall be
and is authorized to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-01,
2-7-2006)
5-3-19: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   No person shall harbor, keep or possess a fox, coyote, wolf, raccoon or
skunk within the city.
   B.   Every owner or harborer of any cat, dog or ferret within the city shall
cause such animal to have a current vaccination against rabies for the time
period a vaccination is valid and shall cause to be securely fastened about the
neck of each cat or dog at all times a collar or harness to which shall be
securely fastened a rabies tag.
   C.   No owner or harborer of any cat or dog shall permit or allow said
animal to wear or to be displayed on any such animal a tag issued for another
animal which received a rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-20: RABIES EMERGENCY MEASURES:
   A.   In the event of a rabies emergency, the city will follow the most
current version of the "Compendium Of Animal Rabies Prevention And Control", as
issued by the National Association Of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc.
(NASPHV), to prevent rabies from occurring in the community and to respond if
an emergency situation exists. The governing body, upon recommendation from the
chief of police or designee, shall determine if an emergency exists and
publicly issue criteria for the community to follow based upon the compendium.
   B.   In the event of a rabies emergency, any cat, dog or ferret found within
the city and not displaying a current rabies vaccination tag and any ferret,
fox, coyote, wolf, raccoon or skunk found within the city shall be destroyed
immediately by or under the supervision of the community service officer,
unless the chief of police, a police officer or the community service officer
determines that such animal shall be held for observation and after such
observation, the animal shall be destroyed unless otherwise directed by the
chief of police.
   C.   In addition to the above subsections, in the event of a rabies
emergency, any animal that is without a current rabies vaccination that has
bitten a person within the city shall be immediately destroyed under the
supervision of the community service officer and the animal's head shall be
shipped to the state veterinary laboratory for rabies testing. All costs and
expenses for said destruction, shipping and testing shall be paid by the owner
of the animal. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-7-2006)
5-3-21: FEEDING OF DEER:
   A.   Feeding Deer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
distribute or allow any device or any fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt,
vegetables, seed or birdseed or other materials (food) outdoors on any public
or private property which feeds or attracts deer.
      1.   Removal Of Food: It shall be the duty of each property owner or
occupant to remove any and all food placed on the property in violation of this
section. Failure to remove such food within twenty four (24) hours after
written notice from the city, or otherwise continuing to feed deer after
receiving notice from the city, shall constitute a violation of this section.
      2.   Removal; Modification Of Feeding Device: It shall be the duty of
each property owner or occupant to remove any device placed on the property
from which deer actually feed. Alternatively, the property owner or occupant
may modify such a device to prevent deer from having access to or feeding from
the device, or make such other changes to the property that prevent deer from
having any access to the device. The failure to remove such a device or to make
such modifications within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the city
shall constitute a separate violation of this section.
      3.   Presumption: There shall be a rebuttable presumption that either of
the following acts are for the purpose of feeding deer:
         a.   The placement of fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable or
other materials in an aggregate quantity of less than two (2) quarts at a
height of less than six feet (6') off the ground;
         b.   The placement of fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable or
other materials in an aggregate quantity of two (2) quarts or more in a drop
feeder, automatic feeder, or a similar device regardless of the height of the
fruit, grain, mineral, plant, salt, vegetable or other material.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Planted material growing in gardens, or standing crops;
      2.   Naturally growing materials, including, but not limited to, fruit
and vegetables;
      3.   Stored crops provided the stored crop is not intentionally made
available to deer;
      4.   Deer feeding authorized by the city council or the Wyoming game and
fish department for a specified public purpose;
      5.   The normal feeding of livestock and/or the practice of raising crops
and crop aftermath, including hay, alfalfa and grains, produced, harvested,
stored or fed to domestic livestock in accordance with normal agricultural
practices;
      6.   The cultivation of a lawn or garden; or
      7.   The feeding of birds where the bird food is made unavailable to the
deer. (Ord. 2011-17, 5-17-2011)
5-3-22: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Any owner or other person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to which shall be added court costs up to the
maximum allowed by law. (Ord. 2009-16, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2011-18, 5-17-2011)
CHAPTER 4
WEAPONS 1
SECTION:
5-4-1: Discharging Generally
5-4-2: Drawing Or Threatening To Use A Deadly Weapon
5-4-3: Carrying Concealed Or Wearing Weapons Openly
5-4-4: Furnishing Deadly Weapons And Certain Cartridges To Minors
5-4-5: Legal Hunting On Annexed Lands
 
Notes
1 1. WS §§ 6-237 – 6-246.
5-4-1: DISCHARGING GENERALLY:
No person shall discharge any firearm or air gun of any type or description
within the city, except by permission of the chief of police or the city
council, granted for special occasions, except in proper position for firing
salutes or by command of a proper military or police officer in the performance
of official duty, or in a shooting range or gallery authorized by the governing
body. Special occasions for which permission may be granted shall include, but
not be limited to, parades, festivals, demonstrations, exhibits, mock
gunfighter performances, wild west shows and rodeos. (1960 Compilation § 8-501;
amd. Ord. 00-6)
5-4-2: DRAWING OR THREATENING TO USE A DEADLY WEAPON 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to draw or to threaten to use upon any
other person any pistol, dirk, knife, slingshot, or any other deadly or
dangerous weapon; provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any person drawing or threatening to use such deadly or dangerous weapon in
defense of his person or property. (1960 Compilation § 8-502)
 
Notes
1 2. WS § 6-238.
5-4-3: CARRYING CONCEALED OR WEARING WEAPONS OPENLY 1 :
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry any
dirk, slingshot, gun, knife, dagger, sword in case, or other dangerous or
deadly weapon concealed, or to carry or wear such weapons openly, with the
avowed purpose of injuring any other person, or of disturbing the peace of the
city or any of the inhabitants thereof.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the duly
appointed law enforcement officers of the city, county or state, or of the
United States, in the lawful discharge of their duties as such officers. (1960
Compilation §§ 8-503, 8-504)
 
Notes
1 3. WS § 6-239.
5-4-4: FURNISHING DEADLY WEAPONS AND CERTAIN CARTRIDGES TO MINORS 1 :
   A.   Under Twenty One Years: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell,
barter, give away, or to dispose of in any other way, to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, any pistol, dirk, knife, concealed upon the
person.
   B.   Under Sixteen Years: It shall further be unlawful to sell, barter, give
to or of in any other way to any person under the age of sixteen (16) years any
cartridges manufactured and designed for use in a pistol. (1960 Compilation §
8-505)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 6-240.
5-4-5: LEGAL HUNTING ON ANNEXED LANDS:
In the event the city elects to annex land, which immediately prior to said
annexation was property on which legal hunting occurred, the city by resolution
may designate the property specified area where legal hunting may continue.
(Ord. 2006-05, 3-7-2006)
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS 1
SECTION:
5-5-1: Sales, License And Use
5-5-2: Permit For Public Display
5-5-3: Certain Exceptions To Chapter
 
Notes
1 1. For state law as to authority of city generally in connection with fire
  prevention, see WS §§ 15-1-103 (xxiv)–(xxviii).
5-5-1: SALES, LICENSE AND USE:
   A.   Fireworks and pyrotechnics that are permitted by the Wyoming Statutes
to be used or sold within the state, can be offered for sale, exposed for sale
and sold from the Saturday commencing the Memorial Day weekend through Labor
Day in the city in open business/light industrial D-3 districts. The building
or structure used for such purposes shall be permanent in nature and fixed to a
foundation that is part of the real property and the same shall not contain any
goods or merchandise other than fireworks and pyrotechnics.
   B.   Each firework and pyrotechnic business shall obtain a business license
as provided for in title 3, chapter 1 of this code, and the annual license fee
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge, shoot, fire,
light or detonate any firecrackers or other fireworks, or pyrotechnics of any
kind whatsoever, excepting caps and cap guns, within the city. (Ord. 79-18;
amd. Ord. 82-10; Ord. 82-12; Ord. 96-5; Ord. 96-5; Ord. 2019-10)
5-5-2: PERMIT FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY:
The city council shall have the power to grant permits within the city limits
for supervised public displays of fireworks by individuals, the city, amusement
parks and other organizations and groups, and to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for the granting of such permits. Every such display shall be
handled by a competent operator and shall be of a character and so located,
discharged and fired as not to be hazardous to property or to endanger any
person. No permit shall be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 79-18)
5-5-3: CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
   A.   Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling or
delivering fireworks to the city, any individuals, amusement parks and other
organizations and groups holding a permit issued for a public display as herein
provided;
   B.   Any person from using or exploding fireworks in accordance with the
provisions of any permit issued as herein provided, or as part of a supervised
public display;
   C.   Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale or selling any
fireworks which are to be and are shipped directly out of the state; or
   D.   Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling, using or
exploding blank cartridges for theatrical, ceremonial or historical purposes,
or in organized athletic or sporting events. (Ord. 79-18)
CHAPTER 6
PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Permit Required
5-6-3: Application For Permit; Filing; Contents
5-6-4: Hours During Which Parades Or Open Air Meetings Not To Be Held
5-6-5: Number Of Participants
5-6-6: Obstruction Of Streets And Sidewalks Not Permitted; Exception
5-6-7: Action On Application For Permit; Grounds For Refusal; Reapplication;
Time Limits
5-6-8: Contents Of Permit
5-6-9: Copy Of Permit To Be Furnished To City Department
5-6-10: Applications For Conflicting Activities; Priority Of Scheduling; Action
On Activities; Limitations On Issuance
5-6-11: Permit Fees; Waiver
5-6-12: Payment Of Permit Fee; Advance Payments
5-6-13: Responsibilities Of Parade Sponsor
5-6-14: Funerals And Peaceful Picketing Exempt From Chapter
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
OPEN AIR MEETING: Any congregation of citizens held outdoors and upon any
alley, highway, or any public way, or on any property belonging to or under the
supervision or control of the city government for the purpose of hearing
speakers or discussing some matter of common interest, where the number of
participants expected may reasonably be assumed to exceed ten (10) persons. The
term shall include religious and political meetings.
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of
any kind, including those of a religious or political nature, or any similar
display in or upon any street. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall participate in a parade or open air meeting unless a written
permit for the parade or open air meeting shall first be obtained from the city
clerk, nor shall any person participate in any parade or open air meeting which
violates the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FILING; CONTENTS:
Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in writing to
the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event by a
representative of the group seeking the permit, and shall set forth the
following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
seeking to conduct any parade or open air meeting.
   B.   If the parade or open air meeting is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization.
   C.   The name, address and telephone number or the person who will be the
parade chairperson or chairperson of the open air meeting, or any person
otherwise in charge.
   D.   The date when the parade or open air meeting is to be conducted.
   E.   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point and
the location of speakers' platforms, if any.
   F.   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which,
will constitute the parade or open air meeting and the type of animal, if any.
   G.   The hours when such parade or open air meeting will start and
terminate.
   H.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion
of the width of the streets or sidewalks proposed to be traversed.
   I.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade or open
air meeting.
   J.   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
assembly area or areas. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-4: HOURS DURING WHICH PARADES OR OPEN AIR MEETINGS NOT TO BE HELD:
All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than peak
traffic periods, which are seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M., and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday
through Saturday. All open air meetings shall conclude by eleven o'clock (11:
00) P.M. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-5: NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS:
Parades and open air meetings shall be limited to such numbers of persons and
vehicles as will not obstruct traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in an
unreasonable manner. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-6: OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS NOT PERMITTED; EXCEPTION:
No parade or open air meeting shall be conducted in a manner that unreasonably
interferes with the free and unobstructed use of any public street or sidewalk
by other persons unless the permit granted for the activity specifically closes
the street or sidewalk so interfered with. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-7: ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL; REAPPLICATION;
TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Following receipt of an application or reapplication for a permit
required by this chapter, the city clerk shall either, within twenty four (24)
hours, issue or reject the application.
   B.   Permits may be rejected on the basis of an improper or incomplete
application or for other valid reasons, and specific reasons for rejection
shall be made known to the applicant, in writing, at the time of rejection.
(Ord. 94-6)
5-6-8: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
The permit required by this chapter issued by the city clerk shall prescribe
the following:
   A.   The date of the parade or open air meeting and the times of
commencement and termination.
   B.   Minimum speed.
   C.   Maximum speed.
   D.   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
   E.   What portion of the streets or sidewalks or other public areas are to
be occupied by the parade or open air meeting, and the location of assembly
areas in the case of parades.
   F.   The maximum number of persons, vehicles and animals to be allowed to
participate in the activity.
   G.   The route of the parade or the place of the open air meeting. (Ord. 94-
6)
5-6-9: COPY OF PERMIT TO BE FURNISHED TO CITY DEPARTMENT:
The city clerk shall furnish a copy of all permits issued pursuant to this
chapter to all other city departments that may in any way be involved by the
parade or open air meeting for which a permit is issued. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-10: APPLICATIONS FOR CONFLICTING ACTIVITIES; PRIORITY OF SCHEDULING; ACTION
ON ACTIVITIES; LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE:
   A.   If the city clerk shall receive more than one application for a parade
or open air meeting to be held at the same time and the same place or on the
same day, the application filed first in time shall take precedence.
   B.   An application for a permit required by this chapter shall be
considered to be "at the same time" if the event is scheduled to commence
within two (2) hours before or after the holding of another event.
   C.   An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the
requested parade route comes at any point within two thousand feet (2,000'),
measured in a straight line, from the route of another parade or an open air
meeting or, if the open air meeting is to be conducted within two thousand feet
(2,000') of another open air meeting or any point of a parade route.
   D.   If the city clerk receives an application for more than one parade or
open air meeting in a single day, he may set a time for the duration of each
parade or open air meeting, which time shall not, without the consent of the
group seeking the permit, be less than three (3) hours.
   E.   The city clerk may issue permits for more than a single parade or open
air meeting during one day in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
however, he shall not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the
issuance of an additional permit would require the continuing diversion of so
great a number of police officers or other municipal personnel as to prevent
normal police protection or other services to the city. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-11: PERMIT FEES; WAIVER:
   A.   For street parades, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   For open air meetings, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   C.   Upon application in writing properly made to the city council, the city
council may waive the required fees. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-12: PAYMENT OF PERMIT FEE; ADVANCE PAYMENTS:
Fees for permits, if required by this chapter, shall be paid at the time the
permit is issued. No permit shall be issued unless the entire fee, if required,
is paid in advance. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-13: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARADE SPONSOR:
It is unlawful for any person to cause the assembling of any persons, animals
or vehicles for the purpose of having a parade or to cause persons to
participate in such parade for which no permit has been issued, or to cause or
allow any person, animal or vehicle to participate in a lawfully permitted
parade in a manner which violates the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-6)
5-6-14: FUNERALS AND PEACEFUL PICKETING EXEMPT FROM CHAPTER:
Funerals are exempted from the terms and provisions of this chapter; peaceful
picketing is exempted from the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-
6)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Adoption Of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic On Highways
6-1-3: Authority To Regulate Or Control Traffic
6-1-4: Obedience To Title
6-1-5: Authority Of Police And Fire Department Officials Generally
6-1-6: Duties Of Drivers In Event Of Accidents
6-1-7: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates And Similar Devices Restricted
6-1-8: Driver's License, Vehicle License Plates And Liability Insurance
Required
6-1-9: Damaging Motor Vehicles; Throwing Rocks, Etc., At Vehicles Or
Passengers; Tampering, Etc., With Traffic Control Devices
6-1-10: Bus Regulations
6-1-11: Racing Of Engine, Etc.
6-1-12: Procedure When Getting Out Of Car On Left Hand Side
6-1-13: Permits Required For Certain Parades And Processions
6-1-14: Taxicab Stands
6-1-15: Vehicles To Be Constructed Or Covered To Prevent Escaping Of Contents
6-1-16: Left Turns Or U-Turns On Certain Intersections Prohibited; Method Of
Making U-Turns
 
Notes
1 1. WS §§ 31-5-109 - 31-5-111, 31-5-303, 31-5-304, 31-5-401, 31-5-503, 31-5-
  511.
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUS: A motorized vehicle designed to transport more than sixteen (16) persons.
COMMERCIAL TRAILER: A trailer designed and used by a commercial business.
LIVESTOCK TRAILER: A trailer designed for hauling/transporting livestock.
MOTORIZED: Self-propelled by a motor under the control of a driver.
PUBLIC STREET: The entire width of every public right of way.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motorized vehicle, or a nonmotorized vehicle which can
be driven or towed by a motorized vehicle, which is primarily designed for
temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and/or travel use
including, but not limited to, motorized motor homes, motorized camping vans,
camp/travel trailers, pop up camp trailers, and slide-in pickup box campers
(but not pickup box toppers).
SCHOOL ZONE RESTRICTIONS: Restrictions in school zones when "children are
present" is defined as being any time when school is in session or at such
times as there shall be school activities or civic gatherings after regular
school hours which involve school age children being present in the school
zone.
TRAILER: A nonmotorized vehicle which can be towed by a motorized vehicle and
can be used to transport animals, snowmobiles, motorcycles, boats, all-terrain
vehicles (ATVs), other vehicles, equipment, machinery, construction materials,
firewood and other items and things, but does not include nonmotorized
recreational vehicles designed to be towed which are defined as a "recreational
vehicle".
VEHICLE: Any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle including, but not limited to:
cars, pickups, vans, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), buses, trailers,
and motorized or nonmotorized recreational vehicles. (Ord. 2016-03, 4-5-2016)
6-1-2: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS:
Wyoming Statutes chapter 5, sections 31-5-101 through and including 31-5-1507,
as amended, being the uniform act regulating traffic on highways, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated in this section as part of this code as
fully as if completely set out in full herein. One copy of these provisions
shall be kept at city hall for examination and inspection by the public. (Ord.
2014-01, 3-4-2014)
6-1-3: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE OR CONTROL TRAFFIC:
The mayor and/or the chief of police shall have the authority to control and
regulate all traffic and motor vehicles by placement of signs and traffic
control devices and the designation of through streets and other designations
in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 80-4)
6-1-4: OBEDIENCE TO TITLE 1 :
It shall be a violation of this title for any person to do any act forbidden,
or fail to perform any act required in this title. (1960 Compilation § 17-202;
amd. Ord. 80-4)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-104.
6-1-5: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS GENERALLY:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic
laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic
in the city.
   B.   Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a
fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   C.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (1960 Compilation § 17-201; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-6: DUTIES OF DRIVERS IN EVENT OF ACCIDENTS 1 :
   A.   Duties In Event Of Accident Involving Person Or Vehicle: The driver of
any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person or damage to any property in any amount shall immediately stop such
vehicle at the scene of the accident, and shall give his name, address, license
number and the registration number of his vehicle to the person struck or to
the driver or occupant of any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any
person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying
or making arrangements for the carrying of such persons to a physician, surgeon
or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. Any person
failing to stop or comply with such requirements under such circumstances shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Striking Fixtures Or Property Upon Or Adjacent To A Highway Or Street:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to
fixtures or other public or private property upon, contiguous or adjacent to a
highway, alley, street or other right of way within the corporate limits of the
city, shall stop and take immediate and reasonable steps to locate and notify
the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact, and of his name
and address and of the license number and registration numbers of the vehicle
he is driving, and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's
or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident immediately by
the quickest means of communication to the police department. (1960 Compilation
§ 17-214; amd. Ord. 424; Ord. 80-4)
 
Notes
1 2. WS § 31-5-1101 et seq.
6-1-7: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(1960 Compilation § 17-204; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-8: DRIVER'S LICENSE, VEHICLE LICENSE PLATES AND LIABILITY INSURANCE
REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets
and highways of the city unless such person has a valid driver's license issued
by the state for the type or class of vehicle being driven, unless otherwise
exempt by Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-107. It shall be a violation of this
provision if a person drives a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so under
his license has been cancelled, suspended or revoked.
   B.   Every device in, upon or by which any personal property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human
power, shall have license plates as required by Wyoming Statutes title 31,
chapter 4, and for motor vehicles shall be conspicuously displayed and securely
fastened in such a manner as to be plainly visible, one on the front, except
for motorcycles, trailers and house trailers, and one on the rear of every such
motor vehicle. Such plates shall be secured so as to prevent swinging and
shall, except for motorcycles, be attached in a horizontal position at a
minimum height of twelve inches (12") from the ground and shall be maintained
free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. (1960
Compilation § 17-218; amd. Ord. 69-7; Ord. 80-12; Ord. 97-3)
   C.   No owner of a motor vehicle required to be registered or/and licensed
as required by Wyoming Statutes title 31, chapter 4, shall operate or permit
the operation of his motor vehicle without having in full force and effect a
motor vehicle liability policy in amounts provided by Wyoming Statutes section
31-9-405(b), or a bond in the amounts provided by Wyoming Statutes section 31-
9-102(a)(xi). Excusable neglect or mistake by another is a defense for any
violation of this subsection. If evidence of excusable neglect or mistake by
another is presented and the defendant is convicted, the court may consider
this evidence in imposing a penalty under this subsection. The judge may
suspend part or all of the sentence under this subsection and place the
defendant on probation, subject to the conditions imposed by the judge which
may include a condition that the defendant shall deliver the registration and
license plates of the vehicle involved to the county treasurer for the county
where the citation was issued. This subsection does not apply to a vehicle
owned by a nonresident and registered in a state requiring insurance if a
vehicle insurance policy meeting requirements of the laws and regulation of
that state is in effect or unless it otherwise complies with the law of that
state convening compulsory financial responsibility. A vehicle owned by a
nonresident and registered in a state not requiring insurance is exempt from
this subsection. Any operator or owner of a motor vehicle required to be
registered who is not able to demonstrate that they have in full force and
effect motor vehicle liability insurance policy in the amounts required above,
may be charged with violating this subsection. (Ord. 2007-08, 6-5-2007)
   D.   No person shall knowingly operate, nor shall any owner knowingly permit
to be operated, upon any street or highway, any vehicle:
      1.   Unless a valid certificate of title, certificate of registration and
license or temporary permits have been issued for the vehicle except for as is
otherwise provided by law;
      2.   With license plates, validation stickers or license permits altered,
mutilated or obscured so as to prevent the license plate number from being
easily recognized. No person shall alter or mutilate any valid license plate,
sticker or permit. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-2010)
6-1-9: DAMAGING MOTOR VEHICLES; THROWING ROCKS, ETC., AT VEHICLES OR
PASSENGERS; TAMPERING, ETC., WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person not the owner or operator thereof, to
tamper, meddle or interfere with any vehicle, or to start or attempt to start
the machinery thereof while the same is standing still, or to puncture or
otherwise mutilate the tires, or to scratch, mark or otherwise deface the body
or the apparatus thereof, or to take or remove from such vehicle any part or
portion of the machinery, equipment or other portion thereof, or to throw, cast
or hurl any stone, rock, snowball, glass or other missile at any vehicle or the
occupants thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to tamper,
meddle or interfere with any traffic sign or painted, drawn or established
line, constructed or maintained under the provisions of this title. (1960
Compilation § 17-221; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-10: BUS REGULATIONS:
All motor buses shall start from and return to stations designated by the chief
of police, by and with the consent of the street commissioner, and no other
vehicle may occupy such stations. All stops for taking on and letting off
passengers will be made on the near side of the street and all such stops shall
be made as close to the right hand curb as conditions permit. (1960 Compilation
§ 17-222; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-11: RACING OF ENGINE, ETC.:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle in the city to
unnecessarily race his engine or backfire same or cause any unnecessary engine
noise. (1960 Compilation § 17-803; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-12: PROCEDURE WHEN GETTING OUT OF CAR ON LEFT HAND SIDE:
Any person emerging from the left hand or driver's side of any motor vehicle
into the line of traffic must not do so without exercise of caution and persons
so emerging must give the right of way to approaching vehicles in the line of
traffic. (1960 Compilation § 17-812; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-13: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 1 :
No funeral, procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons,
fifty (50) or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States army or
navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire
department, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which apply. (1960 Compilation § 17-808;
amd. Ord. 80-4)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-110.
6-1-14: TAXICAB STANDS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized and required to establish taxicab
stands on such public streets in such places and in such manner as he shall
determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and
every such taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs erected by
the chief of police. (Ord. 80-4)
6-1-15: VEHICLES TO BE CONSTRUCTED OR COVERED TO PREVENT ESCAPING OF CONTENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any loose cargo by
truck or other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city, unless
such cargo is covered and secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of
litter on public and private property.
   B.   The duty and responsibility imposed by subsection A of this section
shall be applicable alike to the owner of the truck or other vehicle, the
operator thereof, and the person from whose residence or establishment the
cargo originated.
   C.   In the prosecution charging a violation of this section, lack of
adequate covering and securing shall in itself constitute proof a violation has
been committed. (1960 Compilation § 17-919; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-1-16: LEFT TURNS OR U-TURNS ON CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED; METHOD OF
MAKING U-TURNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a left
hand turn where such intersection is posted forbidding same. It shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn at those
intersections where traffic is controlled by electrical signals and flashers.
   B.   A driver wishing to make a U-turn where lawful shall give the necessary
signal by extending his left hand horizontally outside the vehicle. To make the
turn he shall pass to the right of and beyond the center of the street
intersection before turning. U-turns can be made at street intersections only.
   C.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle across the centerline of any
street or roadway so as to cross the opposite lane of traffic and stop, stand
or park the vehicle at the curb. (1960 Compilation § 17-508; amd. Ord. 80-4)
CHAPTER 2
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Restrictions As To Speed
6-2-2: Speed Or Acceleration Contests
6-2-3: Careless Or Heedless Driving
6-2-4: Obstructing Intersections And Crosswalks
6-2-5: Driving Or Having Control Of Vehicle While Under Influence Of
Intoxicating Liquor Or Controlled Substances
6-2-6: Limitations On Backing
6-2-7: Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession
6-2-8: Vehicles Not To Be Driven On Sidewalk
6-2-9: Driving Over Closed Streets
6-2-1: RESTRICTIONS AS TO SPEED 1 :
   A.   Every person operating a motor vehicle or other vehicle on the streets
or highways of the city shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner at
a rate of speed not greater than is reasonable, proper and safe, having due
regard for the width, grade, curve, corners and traffic, and intended use and
condition of the street, and all other attendant circumstances, so as not to
endanger the life or limb or property of any person or animal. Such vehicles
shall not be driven at a greater speed than is posted or designated; provided,
however, the privately owned vehicles used by the members of the city volunteer
fire department, Park County search and rescue, and employees of West Park
Hospital who are ambulance drivers, EMTs or emergency room personnel, are
designated as emergency vehicles, and if equipped with at least one flashing
red, white or amber light visible from the front of the vehicle and equipped
with a marker on the front of the vehicle indicating the department or
organization with which affiliated, shall be allowed while performing or
traveling to perform assigned firefighting or emergency service duties to be
driven at a speed up to ten (10) miles per hour over the posted or designated
speed limit, provided the situation is safe and it is prudent to do so.
   B.   In driving upon, in or through any alley or other accessway dividing
any block within the city, no motor or other vehicle shall exceed the rate of
speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 80-4; amd. Ord. 90-12; Ord. 92-3)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-301 et seq.
6-2-2: SPEED OR ACCELERATION CONTESTS:
   A.   No person shall engage in any motor vehicle speed or acceleration
contest, or exhibition of speed or acceleration on any street or alley of the
city without approval of such use by the mayor and city council. No person
shall aid or abet in any such motor vehicle speed or acceleration contest or
exhibition on any street or alley of the city without approval of such use by
the mayor and city council.
   B.   No person shall, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed or acceleration contest upon a street or
alley of the city in any manner obstruct, or place, or assist in placing any
barricades or obstruction upon any street or alley without approval of such use
by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 453; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-2-3: CARELESS OR HEEDLESS DRIVING 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon the streets, alleys
or highways of this city in a careless or heedless manner in disregard of the
rights or safety of others, or without due caution or circumspection, or at a
speed or in such manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property. Conviction of such driver under this section shall not require
mandatory suspension of driver's or operator's license under state law. (1960
Compilation § 17-211; amd. Ord. 423; Ord. 80-4)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-229.
6-2-4: OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS AND CROSSWALKS:
No driver or operator of a motor vehicle shall enter an intersection or a
marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space at the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the entire vehicle he is driving or
operating, without it obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indicating to proceed. (1960
Compilation § 17-606; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-2-5: DRIVING OR HAVING CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF
INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
   A.   As used in this section:
    ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION: 1. The number of grams of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters (100 ml) of blood;
      2.   The number of grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters (210 l) of
breath; or
      3.   The number of grams of alcohol per seventy five milliliters (75 ml)
of urine.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Includes:
      1.   Any drug or substance defined by Wyoming Statutes section 35-7-1002
(a)(iv);
      2.   Any glue, aerosol or other toxic vapor which when intentionally
inhaled or sniffed results in impairment of an individual's ability to drive
safely.
   CONVICTION: As defined in Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-102(a)(xi).
   DRIVER'S LICENSE: As defined in Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-102(a)(xxv),
and includes nonresident operating privileges as defined in Wyoming Statutes
section 31-7-102.
   OTHER LAW PROHIBITING DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE: A statute of
another state, the United States or a territory or district of the United
States, or an ordinance of a governmental entity of this or another state, or
of an Indian tribe which prohibits driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, alcohol, controlled substances or drugs.
   B.   No person shall drive or have actual physical control of any vehicle
within this state if the person:
      1.   Has an alcohol concentration of eight one-hundredths of one percent
(0.08%) or more; or
      2.   To a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving:
         a.   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         b.   Is under the influence of a controlled substance; or
         c.   Is under the influence of a combination of any of these elements
named in subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
   C.   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts
alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or being in actual
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, the amount
of alcohol in the person's blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical
analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance shall
give rise to the following presumptions:
      1.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of five one-
hundredths of one percent (0.05%) or less, it shall be presumed that the person
was not under the influence of alcohol;
      2.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of more than five
one-hundredths of one percent (0.05%) and less than eight one-hundredths of one
percent (0.08%), that fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the
person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, but it may be considered
with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the
influence of alcohol to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving
a motor vehicle, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this
section as part of this code as fully as if completely set out in full herein.
One copy of this provision shall be kept on file in the office of the city
clerk for examination and inspection by the public.
   D.   Subsection C of this section shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of
whether the person was under the influence of alcohol, including tests obtained
more than three (3) hours after the alleged violation. The fact that any person
charged with a violation of subsection B of this section is or has been
entitled to use the controlled substance under the laws of this state shall not
constitute a defense against any charge under subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 2002-12, 9-3-2002)
6-2-6: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING 1 :
No vehicle shall be driven in a backward direction to make a turn on any street
nor shall a vehicle be backed into or in a street intersection. No vehicle
shall be driven in a backward direction farther than is absolutely necessary to
avoid accident, or to put itself into such position as to enable it properly to
proceed on its ways, or to park properly. (1960 Compilation § 17-813; amd. Ord.
80-4)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-226.
6-2-7: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously marked. This provision shall not apply at intersections where
traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1960
Compilation § 17-807; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-2-8: VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALK:
The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, or
onto a sidewalk, except as a permanent or temporary driveway. (1960 Compilation
§ 17-804; amd. Ord. 80-4)
6-2-9: DRIVING OVER CLOSED STREETS:
No vehicle shall be driven over or across any pavement newly laid or repaired,
where there is a barrier or sign warning persons not to drive over such
pavement or a sign stating that the street is closed. (1960 Compilation § 17-
210; amd. Ord. 80-4)
CHAPTER 3
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
SECTION:
6-3-1: Parking Prohibited In Certain Places
6-3-2: Parking Long Vehicles On Certain Streets
6-3-3: Removal Of Parked Vehicles Upon Order Of Police, Etc.
6-3-4: Parking And Storage In Alleys
6-3-5: Parking For Purpose Of Repairing
6-3-6: Parking At Curb
6-3-7: Parking On Private Property (Rep. by Ord. 2014-20, 1-20-2015)
6-3-8: Registered Owner Responsible For Illegal Parking
6-3-1: PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES 1 :
   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      5.   In a crosswalk.
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of an intersection or crosswalk, measured
along the curbside from their projected point of intersection, except in areas
controlled by parking meters.
      7.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      8.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
the curb of a street.
      9.   Alongside any portion of an officially painted red or yellow curb.
      10.   In front of any officially marked entrance or exit of any theater,
place of amusement, school, hospital, church, hotel or any other buildings
where there are public gatherings.
      11.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      12.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
      13.   On any public street or alley within the city, or within any
municipal parking area, if the vehicle is not currently licensed to be operated
or towed on public streets or is inoperable, or cannot be safely operated or
towed.
      14.   Within fifty five feet (55') of an intersection or crosswalk
(measured along the curbside from the projected point of intersection of the
streets) if such vehicle is a recreational vehicle, a vehicle over eighty
inches (80") in height, trailer, livestock trailer or bus.
      15.   On any public street or alley within the city, or within any
municipal parking area, if the vehicle is a vehicle, recreational vehicle,
trailer, livestock trailer or bus, and a person is living in such vehicle.
Provided, a licensed or registered vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer,
livestock trailer or bus being used for vacation or temporary living purposes,
may be parked on a city street for no more than two (2) weeks per year while
the occupants are visiting the family living on the abutting private property.
Such vehicle must comply with subsections A1 through A14 of this section as
well.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for any purpose whatsoever
so that any part of any such vehicle or its load extends into the street to a
point nearer than eight feet (8') from the centerline thereof.
The object of this provision is to keep an open space or clearance of sixteen
feet (16') in the middle of the street at all times, and if a vehicle or its
load is of such length that it cannot be parked on a certain street so as to
conform with this section and other provisions of this chapter, it shall not be
left standing upon such street.
   C.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
   D.   If, pursuant to section
6-1-3 of this title, or by the action of the owner of real property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of the owner, and not as
a matter of right, a parking space has been reserved for the handicapped and a
sign as specified under Wyoming Statutes sections 31-5-111 and 31-5-501 is in
place, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully park a vehicle in
violation of the restrictions; however, this shall not prohibit use of a
handicapped parking space by a person issued a distinctive handicapped license
plate or a transferable identification card by the state, or any other state,
and displaying the plate or card on a vehicle used by this person. (1960
Compilation § 17-1006; amd. Ord. 69-6; Ord. 74-1; Ord. 80-4; Ord. 89-9; Ord.
94-18; Ord. 2016-04, 4-5-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-504.
6-3-2: PARKING LONG VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS:
No truck, trailer, motor vehicle or other vehicle measuring more than eighteen
feet (18') overall, with or without load, shall be left standing or permitted
to park at any time on Sheridan Avenue between 11th and 15th Streets, or on
12th or 13th Streets between Beck and Sheridan Avenues. (1960 Compilation § 17-
1006; amd. Ord. 74-1; Ord. 80-4)
6-3-3: REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES UPON ORDER OF POLICE, ETC.:
The owner, operator or custodian of any motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle
parked on the streets, alleys or roadways of the city shall immediately remove
such vehicle from such place where so parked upon order or demand of any police
officer or other official of the city.
The police department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle not
removed as ordered pursuant to the provisions above or which is illegally
parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the
movement of any emergency vehicle.
Vehicles so towed away shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to
the owner or operator upon payment of any towing fee incurred and all storage
charges. (1960 Compilation § 17-1006; amd. Ord. 74-1; Ord. 78-22; Ord. 80-4)
6-3-4: PARKING AND STORAGE IN ALLEYS:
No person shall stop, place or park a vehicle, trailer or other movable object
within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property, nor shall any person leave a vehicle parked unattended in an
alley, except commercial vehicles engaged in the loading or unloading of such
vehicle.
No person shall place, store or abandon any item, structure or property of any
kind in any alley, except garbage and trash as authorized and allowed by the
city for regular pick up and removal. (1960 Compilation § 17-1007; amd. Ord.
74-1; Ord. 80-4; Ord. 81-11)
6-3-5: PARKING FOR PURPOSE OF REPAIRING:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street, alley or roadway for the
purpose of repairing or overhauling such vehicle, except for minimum repairs
necessitated by an emergency; nor shall any person park any vehicle upon a
street, alley or roadway for the purpose of displaying it for sale; nor shall
any person park on any street within the business district any vehicle from
which merchandise is peddled. (1960 Compilation § 17-1006; amd. Ord. 74-1; Ord.
80-4)
6-3-6: PARKING AT CURB:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to
the curb except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stop or park a
motor vehicle or other vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb
and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18")
of the regularly established curb line; except, that upon those streets
authorized and designated for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the
angle indicated by the street markings.
   B.   In stopping or parking a motor vehicle or other vehicle on the streets
and avenues set forth and specified in this section, angle parking is
authorized and required:
      1.   Bleistein Avenue;
      2.   Beck Avenue between 8th Street and 17th Street;
      3.   Rumsey Avenue between 9th Street and 16th Street;
      4.   Cody Avenue between 8th Street and 10th Street;
      5.   9th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      6.   9th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      7.   10th Street between Cody Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      8.   10th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      9.   11th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      10.   11th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      11.   12th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      12.   12th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      13.   13th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      14.   13th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      15.   14th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      16.   14th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      17.   15th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue;
      18.   15th Street between Sheridan Avenue and Rumsey Avenue;
      19.   16th Street between Beck Avenue and Sheridan Avenue.
   C.   Parking other than parallel parking shall be authorized and allowed in
all parking areas set in from the curb so that no part of the parked vehicle
extends more than eight feet (8') into the street from the established curb
line. (1960 Compilation § 17-1001; amd. Ord. 399; Ord. 74-1; Ord. 74-4; Ord.
78-8; Ord. 78-16; Ord. 80-4; Ord. 93-10; Ord. 2001-08, 6-18-2001)
6-3-7: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-20, 1-20-2015)
6-3-8: REGISTERED OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ILLEGAL PARKING:
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed shall be
responsible for any parking of such vehicle in violation of this chapter. It
shall be no defense that such vehicle was illegally parked by another unless it
is shown that at such time such vehicle was being used without the consent of
the registered or licensed owner thereof. (1960 Compilation § 17-1010; amd.
Ord. 74-1; Ord. 80-4)
CHAPTER 4
TIME LIMITATION ON PARKING
SECTION:
6-4-1: Parking Time Limits
6-4-2: Parking Signs Required (Rep. by Ord. 2014-21, 1-20-2015)
6-4-3: Overtime Parking
6-4-4: Duties Of Police In Connection With Illegal Or Overtime Parking
6-4-5: Penalties
6-4-1: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Unless posted signs provide otherwise, it is unlawful for any person to
park, store or leave standing, or permit to be parked, stored or left standing,
upon the public streets or alleys of the city, any trailer or vehicle for a
continuous period of longer than twenty four (24) consecutive hours, except
for:
      1.   Fully operative and licensed, registered trailers or motor vehicles
belonging to the owners of the immediately abutting property; and
      2.   Vehicles parked, stored or left standing, or permitted to be parked,
stored or left standing, upon the public streets or alleys of the city with the
express consent of the immediately abutting property owner or occupant.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" shall have the same
meaning as provided in Wyoming Statutes 31-5-102(a)(lviii). The term "trailer"
shall have the same meaning as described in Wyoming Statutes 31-5-102(a)(liv).
   C.   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of
eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. of any
day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any street where such signs have
been erected.
   D.   The penalty for violating this section shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). The penalty for each subsequent violation of this section shall be
double the fine of the previous violation.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit, prevent
or bar the authority of the police department or the sheriff's office to treat
a vehicle as abandoned pursuant to Wyoming law.
   F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to in any way limit the
authority of the city to post signs limiting or regulating additional limits on
parking within the city. (Ord. 2014-22, 1-20-2015)
6-4-2: PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-21, 1-20-2015)
6-4-3: OVERTIME PARKING:
It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person
to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal
parking time established for any street as herein described. (Ord. 84-11)
6-4-4: DUTIES OF POLICE IN CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL OR OVERTIME PARKING:
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, acting in accordance
with the instructions issued by the chief of police or any other official or
person approved by the mayor and the city council, relative to vehicles parked
illegally or overtime, to report:
   A.   The state license number of such vehicle.
   B.   The time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The location and street where the vehicle was occupying a parking space
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances pertaining to such violations.
   E.   Each officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owners
or operators thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of any
provisions of this chapter and instructing the owner or operator to report to
the police department or the city treasurer in regard to such violation. (Ord.
84-11)
6-4-5: PENALTIES:
Each owner or operator shall, within twenty four (24) hours of the time when
the notice as provided in section
6-4-4 of this chapter was attached to such vehicle, pay to the city the sum of
two dollars ($2.00) for the first offense if appearance and payment is made by
the violator within twenty four (24) hours, otherwise the violator shall pay
five dollars ($5.00); and the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the second
offense and each subsequent offense committed within the same calendar day as
the first offense, provided such violator makes payment to the city within
twenty four (24) hours of the time when the notice as provided in section
6-4-4 of this chapter was attached to such vehicle, otherwise twenty dollars
($20.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 84-11)
CHAPTER 5
REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Unattended Vehicles Obstructing Traffic
6-5-1: UNATTENDED VEHICLES OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC 1 :
Whenever a police officer or other law enforcement officer finds a vehicle
unattended where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such
officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the
nearest garage or other place of safety. (1960 Compilation § 17-1008; amd. Ord.
448; Ord. 80-4)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 31-5-508.
CHAPTER 6
UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VEHICLE BY YOUTHFUL DRIVER WITH
DETECTABLE ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION
SECTION:
6-6-1: General Provisions; Penalty
6-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   As used in this section:
    ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION: 1. The number of grams of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters (100 ml) of blood;
      2.   The number of grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters (210 l) of
breath; or
      3.   The number of grams of alcohol per seventy five milliliters (75 ml)
of urine.
   CONVICTION: As defined by Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-102(a)(xi).
   DRIVER'S LICENSE: As defined in Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-102(a)(xxv),
and includes nonresident operating privileges as defined in Wyoming Statutes
section 31-7-102(a)(xxx).
   PEACE OFFICER: As defined by Wyoming Statutes section 7-2-101(a)(iv)(A), (B)
and (G).
   B.   A person younger than twenty one (21) years of age shall not operate or
be in actual physical control of a vehicle in this state with an alcohol
concentration of two one- hundredths of one percent (0.02%) or more.
   C.   Repealed by laws 2002, sp. sess., ch. 93, § 2.
   D.   When a peace officer has probable cause to believe that a person may be
violating or has violated subsection B of this section, the peace officer may
request that the person submit to a chemical test or tests to be administered
in compliance with Wyoming Statutes section 31-6-108. Prosecution for a
violation of this section is a bar to prosecution under Wyoming Statutes
section 12-6-101(b) or any similar municipal ordinance.
   E.   A person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). A person convicted of violating this section a second time within
one year of the first conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than one month, a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), or both. A person convicted of a third or subsequent
conviction under this section within two (2) years shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for more than six (6) months, a fine of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both. The court may
order the person to undergo a substance abuse assessment and complete any
recommended treatment for any conviction under this section as a condition of
probation. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the term of probation
imposed by a judge under this section may exceed the maximum term of
imprisonment established for the offense under this subsection, provided the
term of probation, together with any extension thereof, shall in no case exceed
three (3) years.
   F.   A person convicted under this section or a municipal ordinance which
substantially conforms to the provisions of this section shall, in addition to
the penalty imposed in subsection E of this section, have his driver's license
denied or suspended pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 3-7-128(h). The court
shall forward a copy of the conviction to the department.
   G.   The court may, upon pronouncement of any jail sentence under subsection
E of this section, provide in the sentence that the defendant may be permitted,
if he is employed or enrolled in school and can continue his employment or
education, to continue such employment or education for not more than the time
necessary as certified by his employer or school administrator, and the
remaining day, days or parts of days shall be spent in jail until the sentence
is served. He shall be allowed out of jail only long enough to complete his
actual hours of employment or education and a reasonable time to travel to and
from his place of employment or school. Unless the defendant is indigent, the
court shall require him as a condition of special treatment under this
subsection to pay a reasonable amount for room and board as determined by the
sheriff.
   H.   Chemical analysis of a person's blood, breath or urine to determine
alcohol concentration or controlled substance content shall be performed in
accordance with Wyoming Statutes section 31-6-105(a). (Ord. 2002-12, 9-3-2002)
CHAPTER 7
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Adoption Of Wyoming Laws Governing Bicycles
6-7-2: Riding On Sidewalks
6-7-3: Regulations Shall Control; Exceptions
6-7-4: Skateboards, Rollerblades And Scooters
6-7-1: ADOPTION OF WYOMING LAWS GOVERNING BICYCLES:
Wyoming Statutes sections 31-5-701 through 31-5-706, inclusive, as amended, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this section as part of this
code as fully as if completely set out in full herein. One copy of this
provision shall be kept on file in the office of the administrative services
director for examination and inspection by the public. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-19-
2008)
6-7-2: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   No person shall ride or operate any bicycle on any sidewalk in the city
when such sidewalk is posted with signs prohibiting the riding or operating of
bicycles on sidewalks.
   B.   Bicycles operated and ridden upon the sidewalks where not prohibited
shall be single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the
right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk and shall exercise due and
proper care. (Ord. 2008-03, 2-19-2008)
6-7-3: REGULATIONS SHALL CONTROL; EXCEPTIONS:
The ordinances, rules and regulations of the city pertaining to the riding and
operation of bicycles within the city shall apply to all riders and operators
of bicycles, unless an individual or group has received permission and
authority from the governing body as part of a special event, and unless such
person has obtained the proper permits in accordance with city rules and
regulations. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-19-2008)
6-7-4: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES AND SCOOTERS:
   A.   No person shall use, ride or operate any skateboard, rollerblades,
roller skates or scooters on any sidewalk or on any street within the city
limits where signs are posted prohibiting such use or operation of skateboards,
roller skates, rollerblades or scooters.
   B.   Skateboards, rollers skates, rollerblades and scooters operated and
ridden upon the sidewalks where not prohibited shall be single file only. Under
all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right of way to pedestrians using
the sidewalk and shall exercise due and proper care.
   C.   Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-19-2008)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
Article I.  In General
7-1-1: Duties Generally Of Street Commissioner
7-1-2: Designation Of Avenues And Streets
7-1-3: City Base
7-1-4: Littering And Penalties
Article II.  Construction Of Sidewalks At Order Of City Council
7-1-5: Authority To Order Construction
7-1-6: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Duties Generally Of
City Clerk
7-1-7: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Notice To Residents
7-1-8: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Notice To Corporations
And Nonresident Property Owners; Effect Of Irregularities, Etc., In Service Of
Notice
7-1-9: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Time To Commence
Construction
7-1-10: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Failure To Comply With
Notice
7-1-11: Notice To Abutting Property Owners To Construct; Failure To Comply With
Notice; Collection Of Costs From Abutting Owners
7-1-12: Liability Of Owners Of Corner Property
Article III.  Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters And Driveways
7-1-13: Construction Generally; Concrete Worker's Bond Required; Amount
7-1-14: Construction Generally; Concrete Worker's Bond Required; Forfeiture
7-1-15: Construction Generally; Permit; Required
7-1-16: Construction Generally; Permit; Fee
7-1-17: Construction Generally; City Engineer To Stake Out Grade And Line;
Additional Fee If Stake Is Removed, Etc.
7-1-18: Construction Generally; Specifications For Sidewalks
7-1-19: Construction Generally; Compliance With Plans Of City Engineer
7-1-20: Construction Generally; Construction Of Driveway; Breaking Curbing
Therefor
7-1-21: Driving Repeatedly Over Curbing
7-1-22: Damage To Sidewalk, Curb Or Gutter
7-1-23: Excavations Under And Openings In Sidewalks
7-1-24: Barricade On Sidewalk
7-1-25: Sidewalks To Be Maintained In Safe Condition
7-1-26: Snow And Ice On Sidewalks
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
7-1-1: DUTIES GENERALLY OF STREET COMMISSIONER:
The street commissioner shall, subject to the orders of the mayor and council,
have general charge, direction and control of all work in the streets,
sidewalks, culverts and bridges of the city, and shall perform such other
duties as may be required of him by this code and other ordinances of the city.
(1960 Compilation § 15-102)
7-1-2: DESIGNATION OF AVENUES AND STREETS:
With the exception of Canyon View subdivision, all streets parallel to Sheridan
Avenue or lying in a general easterly and westerly direction shall be
designated as avenues, and all streets parallel to 12th Street or lying in a
general northerly and southerly direction shall be designated as streets. (1960
Compilation § 15-103)
7-1-3: CITY BASE:
The official city base or plane of reference for elevations in the city is
hereby fixed at a point at mean low tide referred to as the official bench mark
of the United States geological survey, bearing the Red Lodge datum.
The rectangle set out in the stone footing wall of the Pioneer Building, which
seat is at a point north 15.8 feet from the southwest corner of block nine and
at 1.7 feet above the sidewalk level, is hereby declared to be the primal bench
mark of the city, and the elevation thereof is four thousand nine hundred
ninety and eighty three one-hundredths feet (4,990.83') above the mean low
tide.
All official elevations hereafter established in the city shall be described
with reference to their elevation as compared with the official base in feet
and decimal parts of a foot. No grade or official elevation shall be
established other than by ordinance, and in the manner described in this
section. (1960 Compilation § 15-104)
7-1-4: LITTERING AND PENALTIES:
   A.   No person shall place, throw, scatter or deposit garbage, debris,
refuse or waste material, objects or substances, including abandoned or junked
vehicles, upon the property of another, or any street, alley or right of way in
the city. Operators or persons in control of motor vehicles are responsible
under this section for the disposition or ejection of garbage, debris or other
materials from the vehicle while the vehicle is being operated or occupied
within the city.
   B.   Littering is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The court may suspend all or part of a
sentence imposed under this section and require the person convicted of
littering to perform up to forty (40) hours of labor in the form of cleaning
litter debris from the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks and other public areas
or facilities. (Ord. 00-10)
ARTICLE II.  CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AT ORDER OF CITY COUNCIL
7-1-5: AUTHORITY TO ORDER CONSTRUCTION:
The city council is hereby authorized to order by motion or resolution the
construction of any cement or concrete sidewalk that may be deemed necessary
for the use of pedestrians, or for the proper development of the immediate
vicinity where such sidewalk is required. (1960 Compilation § 14-201)
7-1-6: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; DUTIES GENERALLY OF
CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall immediately ascertain the names of the owners of the
property referred to in section
7-1-5 of this chapter and shall, within five (5) days after ascertaining the
same, serve written notices upon each owner of the property adjacent or
abutting upon the sidewalk to be constructed or reconstructed as directed by
the council.
The city clerk shall, on or before the first regular meeting held by the
council after the service of the notices so made by him, make a return showing
upon whom service was had and how. (1960 Compilation §§ 14-201, 14-204)
7-1-7: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; NOTICE TO RESIDENTS:
Service of the notice required by section 7-1-6 of this chapter upon resident
property owners abutting on any such improvement to be directed to be made,
shall be made by delivering a copy of such notice to the owner of the property
or by leaving a copy thereof at the usual place of residence of such owner,
with some member of his family or other person in his employ over the age of
fourteen (14) years. (1960 Compilation § 14-202)
7-1-8: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; NOTICE TO CORPORATIONS
AND NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNERS; EFFECT OF IRREGULARITIES, ETC., IN SERVICE OF
NOTICE:
In case the owner of abutting property is a corporation and has no agent or
officer residing with the city, then service shall be made upon such
corporation in the same manner as provided by the laws of the state for the
service of summons upon a corporation in a civil action, commenced in the
district courts of the state. If the owner is a nonresident of the city, then
the city clerk may serve the notice by registered mail, if he can ascertain the
place of residence of such nonresident owner, and in the event he cannot be so
served, then service can be made by advertising twice in a weekly newspaper
published in the city.
No irregularity in the method of service shall in any manner affect any
assessment made under the provisions of this article, if the provisions of this
section have been substantially complied with, and shall not affect such
assessment whatsoever, if the owner of such property has actual notice of the
resolution or action of the council for the same length of time fixed in the
notice herein required to be served upon him.
Service in a newspaper shall be deemed completed at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
following the day of the last publication. (1960 Compilation § 14-203)
7-1-9: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; TIME TO COMMENCE
CONSTRUCTION:
The notice referred to in this article shall require the owner of the abutting
property to construct or reconstruct, as the case may be, such sidewalk within
fifteen (15) days from the service of such notice. (1960 Compilation § 14-202)
7-1-10: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
NOTICE:
If, at the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of
notice, the sidewalk shall not have been constructed or reconstructed, as the
case may be, as provided by this article, along the property where the same is
ordered by the city council to be constructed or reconstructed, the city
council may order the work done either by day labor or by contract, and may
provide that the payment for the expenses and cost of same shall be paid in the
first instance by the city or that certificates of indebtedness shall be issued
therefor as provided by law. (1960 Compilation § 14-205)
7-1-11: NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT; FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
NOTICE; COLLECTION OF COSTS FROM ABUTTING OWNERS:
In all cases where the sidewalks have not been constructed, repaired or
reconstructed by the owners of abutting lots and it has been done by the city
as provided in section 7-1-10 of this chapter, the street commissioner shall
make out and return to the council, upon the completion of such sidewalk, an
accurate and detailed report of the cost of construction, including the
engineer's fee; provided, however, that the work done by contract need not be
so returned. The city council shall thereupon cause notice to be given in a
manner as nearly similar as may be in case of equalization of taxes, by the
board of equalization, but may set any date it deems proper for the hearing
upon such notice. The notice shall specify the amount it is proposed to be
assessed against the person so notified. At the time of the hearing upon such
notice or thereafter, the city council shall apportion the expenses and costs
heretofore mentioned, charging each lot with its just proportion of the costs
and expenses of construction, repair or reconstruction, such charge to be
apportioned according to the frontage of each lot or part of lot abutting such
improvement. The city council may thereupon assess and place upon the tax list
for the current year the proportion of the cost and expense of constructing or
reconstructing such sidewalks, as a special assessment against each lot or part
of lot abutting thereon; such assessment to be collected and the collection
thereof to be enforced in the same manner as near as may be provided by law or
ordinance for the collection and compelling the collection of taxes for general
revenue purposes, and the proceedings in reference thereto shall be as nearly
as may be, the same as in the collection of taxes for general revenue purposes.
Instead of assessing the charges and expenses against the property as is
contemplated in this section, the council may direct the issuance of
certificates of indebtedness to the person so constructing or reconstructing or
repairing such sidewalk or sidewalks, which such certificate of indebtedness
shall state the amount due to such person by reason thereof stating the
property in front of which such work was done, and shall be signed by the
mayor, countersigned by the city clerk and the seal of the city attached. Such
certificates shall draw interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month,
after its date until paid and shall, when recorded in the office of the county
clerk, be a lien on and against the property stated in such certificate.
Payment of such certificate may be enforced as provided by law. (1960
Compilation §§ 14-206, 14-208)
7-1-12: LIABILITY OF OWNERS OF CORNER PROPERTY:
The owner of any property adjacent to the street corners shall install, or such
property shall be assessed for that portion of the sidewalk extending from the
property line to the nearest curb in both directions. (1960 Compilation § 14-
207)
ARTICLE III.  SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS 1
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15.1-3(10).
7-1-13: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; CONCRETE WORKER'S BOND REQUIRED; AMOUNT:
No person shall construct or reconstruct any cement sidewalk, curb, gutter or
driveway, or do any other concrete work on any street or alley, without first
having filed a bond with the city clerk.
Such bond shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as a
guarantee that he will faithfully comply with the provisions of the
specifications covering such work as prepared by the city engineer and with the
provisions of this chapter insofar as they may apply to the work he proposes to
do. (1960 Compilation §§ 14-101, 14-102)
7-1-14: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; CONCRETE WORKER'S BOND REQUIRED; FORFEITURE:
Every person referred to in section 7-1-13 of this chapter shall be directly
responsible for all work as herein referred to, which may be done under his
direction. In the event that any such work is done unskillfully or carelessly,
or should such person neglect or refuse to comply with the specifications
herein referred to, or with this code or other city ordinances, the city
engineer may recommend to the mayor and city council the forfeiture of the
bond.
The mayor or city council may order that the bond of such person shall be
forfeited. (1960 Compilation § 14-108)
7-1-15: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; PERMIT; REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, reconstruct, or remove any sidewalk, curb, gutter or
pavement, without first having obtained a permit from the city engineer
specifying the work to be done. (1960 Compilation § 14-103)
7-1-16: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; PERMIT; FEE:
Before issuing the permit required by section 7-1-15 of this chapter, the city
engineer shall collect for the benefit of the city a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) for each fifty foot (50') lot, or fractional part thereof, for the
benefit and improvement of which such permit is to be made. (1960 Compilation §
14-104)
7-1-17: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; CITY ENGINEER TO STAKE OUT GRADE AND LINE;
ADDITIONAL FEE IF STAKE IS REMOVED, ETC.:
   A.   After a permit is issued, the city engineer shall stake out, or have
staked out, the established grade and line to which the sidewalk or curb and
gutter must be built; and no additional charge shall be made therefor.
   B.   If the grade stakes are removed or lost before the proposed improvement
is constructed or reconstructed, the city engineer shall cause the same to be
reset, charging a fee, and issuing his official receipt therefor, in an amount
equal to the fee for issuing such permit. (1960 Compilation § 14-105)
7-1-18: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be constructed of the best quality of Portland cement concrete
and shall be of such composition as may be specified by the city engineer. No
sidewalks shall be constructed of boards, planks or wooden materials. No work
shall be done on any sidewalk or curb, except with strict compliance with the
specifications compiled by the city engineer, and all materials and work shall
comply with the specifications furnished by the city engineer. (1960
Compilation § 14-106)
7-1-19: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; COMPLIANCE WITH PLANS OF CITY ENGINEER:
All sidewalks or curbs and gutters shall be laid to the grade lines established
by the city engineer. At the intersection of curbs and gutters or sidewalk with
any alley or driveway, and at all street corners, such curbs and gutters,
sidewalks and driveways shall be installed only in accordance with the plans
furnished by the city engineer. If any such sidewalks, curbs and gutters are
not laid or constructed in accordance with the provisions hereof, the city
council may direct the same to be relaid or reconstructed at the expense of the
owner of the abutting property. (1960 Compilation § 14-107)
7-1-20: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY; CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAY; BREAKING CURBING
THEREFOR:
   A.   In all cases where access is required for driveway purposes, it shall
be necessary to make application to the office of the city engineer for
permission to break the curb. Upon the city engineer's approval of the plans
and specifications for such curb cut and the determination that same can safely
be allowed so as not to interfere with traffic and cause a hazardous condition,
the application shall be approved and the necessary permission granted.
   B.   No curbing shall be allowed to remain broken, and the new driveway must
be constructed as one unit with the existing curb and gutter, with connections
at either side properly made at the existing joints.
   C.   If at any time a driveway or curb cut shall no longer be necessary or
is abandoned by disuse, then the property owner shall replace or restore the
necessary curb, gutter and sidewalk. If the property owner fails or refuses to
take such corrective measures, then the city may do so and the cost and
expenses of same shall be paid by the property owner. (1960 Compilation § 14-
112; amd. Ord. 78-10)
7-1-21: DRIVING REPEATEDLY OVER CURBING:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to repeatedly drive over any
curbing. (1960 Compilation § 14-112)
7-1-22: DAMAGE TO SIDEWALK, CURB OR GUTTER:
No person shall damage or tear up any sidewalk, curb or gutter without
authority from the proper official so to do. (1960 Compilation § 14-111)
7-1-23: EXCAVATIONS UNDER AND OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Each coal room or other opening under a sidewalk shall be constructed
as follows: The outer wall next to the street shall be formed of concrete,
stone or brick not less than twelve inches (12") in thickness, or such
additional thickness as the city engineer may require, and no part thereof
shall project beyond the curbstone. The sides or return walls shall be of the
same materials and at least eight inches (8") thick. The top shall conform with
the sidewalk grade and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete of a
thickness and design approved by the city engineer, and supported on iron beams
or reinforced concrete beams of sufficient strength to carry a load of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds to the square foot, exclusive of the weight of
materials used in construction.
   B.   Where an excavation has been made under a sidewalk, any opening in the
sidewalk shall be of a size and design approved by the city engineer, and shall
be covered with an iron manhole and cover not exceeding twenty four inches
(24") in diameter, or by sidewalk doors of steel or iron, set flush with the
surface of the walk. No cover for any such opening shall have a surface that
may, under any conditions, become slippery or hazardous to pedestrians.
   C.   Every opening in a sidewalk, leading to an underground room or space,
shall at all times be maintained in good condition. No such opening shall be
allowed to remain open, except with the proper barricade, and at no time longer
than absolutely necessary. Any person in charge of such underground space and
opening, shall be liable for any and all damages resulting from accident or
injury caused in any way by such opening. (1960 Compilation § 14-109)
7-1-24: BARRICADE ON SIDEWALK:
   A.   Where any sidewalk or portion thereof is in the course of repair or
construction, or is so defective as to constitute a hazard, the contractor
making such repairs, or the owner or agent of the property abutting upon such
sidewalk, shall cause a barricade to be erected to safeguard against accidents.
Where there is not sufficient light to reveal such barricade, there shall be
suitable warning lights placed thereon, which shall be in operation from dusk
to daylight.
   B.   Such barricade shall be maintained so long as required, but no longer,
and shall not be interfered with, changed or removed by any person other than
the contractor, owner or agent. (1960 Compilation § 14-110)
7-1-25: SIDEWALKS TO BE MAINTAINED IN SAFE CONDITION:
   A.   Every sidewalk shall be maintained in a safe condition at all times by
the owner of the property abutting thereon.
   B.   There shall be a uniform level and slope to each sidewalk and no uneven
surfaces, variations in grade or other condition that might be instrumental in
causing injury to any person, shall be permitted to exist.
   C.   Where any existing sidewalk does not conform with the grade prescribed
by the city engineer, the owner of the abutting property shall cause the same
to be relaid to the grade, at his own expense. (1960 Compilation § 14-113)
7-1-26: SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS 1 :
   A.   Every sidewalk or space where sidewalk should or may be constructed
within the city shall be maintained clean and free from snow, ice or slush, by
the owner, agent or occupant of the premises abutting thereon, whether the same
be a vacant lot or contain an occupied or unoccupied building of any kind.
   B.   All sidewalks through the business district of the city shall be kept
clear, for the safety and comfort of pedestrians, at all times during any
continued or heavy snowfall. (1960 Compilation § 14-114)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15.1-3(10).
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS, BARRIERS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required For Excavations
7-2-2: Duty Of Excavator To Replace Excavation
7-2-3: Deposit Of Excavated Material
7-2-4: Excavation To Be Protected Generally
7-2-5: Street Barriers And Warning Lights
7-2-6: Interference With Barriers, Etc.
7-2-7: Obstructions; Buildings, Fences, Signs, Etc.
7-2-8: Obstructions; Height Of Awnings Above Sidewalks
7-2-9: Obstructions; Wires
7-2-10: Obstructions; Merchandise, Etc.
7-2-11: Obstructions; Permit To Erect, Etc.
7-2-12: Sidewalk Cafes
7-2-12-1:    Purpose
7-2-12-2:    Permit Required
7-2-12-3:    Definitions
7-2-12-4:    Sidewalk Cafe Standards; Minor And Major Permits
7-2-12-5:    Sidewalk Cafe Standards; Major Permits
7-2-12-6:    Operating Restrictions; Minor And Major Permits
7-2-12-7:    Operating Restrictions; Major Permits
7-2-12-8:    Minor And Major Sidewalk Cafe Permitting Procedures
7-2-12-9:    Term Of Permits And Renewal Procedures; Minor And Major Sidewalk
Cafe Permits
7-2-12-10:    Permit Assignment Or Transfer Prohibited
7-2-12-11:    Appeal Upon Denial Or Revocation Of A Permit
7-2-12-12:    Violations
7-2-12-13:    Severability
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATIONS:
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any excavation, or dig or cause to
be dug, any hole, drain or ditch in any street, sidewalk or alley or other
public grounds in the city without first having obtained the written consent of
the street commissioner, and then only for temporary and necessary purposes.
(1960 Compilation § 15-701)
7-2-2: DUTY OF EXCAVATOR TO REPLACE EXCAVATION:
It shall be the duty and liability of the person responsible for any excavation
referred to in section
7-2-1 of this chapter to replace the same in its original condition in
accordance with the specifications of the street commissioner and within the
time limit fixed by the permit. (1960 Compilation § 15-702)
7-2-3: DEPOSIT OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL:
In making excavations in streets and highways for the laying of service pipes
or making repairs, the earth or other material removed must be deposited in a
manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public. (1960
Compilation § 12-124)
7-2-4: EXCAVATION TO BE PROTECTED GENERALLY:
No city officer or employee, or any contractor or other persons, shall make any
excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any thoroughfare, without
providing a suitable barricade around or in front of same, with appropriate
warning lights in operation from dusk to daylight. (1960 Compilation § 15-703)
7-2-5: STREET BARRIERS AND WARNING LIGHTS:
Whenever it becomes necessary for the street commissioner to close to traffic
any street or alley, or any portion thereof, for the purpose of making repairs
or improvements, it shall be the duty of such commissioner to erect, or cause
to be erected, suitable barriers across such street or alley, with appropriate
warning lights in operation from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., of each day at both ends of every obstruction upon any street and at
intervals of seventy five feet (75') along the same. (1960 Compilation §§ 15-
704, 23-111)
7-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH BARRIERS, ETC.:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon or into any barricade,
repairs or improvements as referred to in this chapter, or to remove, or cause
to be removed, any part of such barricade or warning device. (1960 Compilation
§ 15-705)
7-2-7: OBSTRUCTIONS; BUILDINGS, FENCES, SIGNS, ETC.:
No person shall erect, build or set up in the city, in whole or in part, any
fence, signpost, shop or any other building or obstruction whatever, in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, provided, however,
merchandise, A-frame signs, merchandising props and flowerpots may be placed on
the sidewalk by a merchant in front of its business as long as the same does
not impede pedestrian traffic or interfere with parked cars or passengers
exiting same. No A-frame sign shall be larger than two feet by four feet (2' x
4'). No sign, awning or other obstruction shall be suspended from any building
into or over any sidewalk, street or alley, so as to obstruct or interfere with
the pedestrian traffic or vehicle traffic, nor shall any sign, awning or other
obstruction be suspended in or over any portion of the street other than the
sidewalk line. (1960 Compilation § 15-707; amd. Ord. 89-4)
7-2-8: OBSTRUCTIONS; HEIGHT OF AWNINGS ABOVE SIDEWALKS:
All awnings, including the aprons thereof, and all suspensions from any
buildings and all suspensions whatever over any sidewalk, shall not come nearer
the sidewalk than seven and one-half feet (71/2'). (1960 Compilation § 15-707)
7-2-9: OBSTRUCTIONS; WIRES:
With the exception of wires required for the operation and service of a public
utility, no person shall install, erect or extend wires of any kind across any
street, alley or public way. (1960 Compilation § 15-707)
7-2-10: OBSTRUCTIONS; MERCHANDISE, ETC.:
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, upon or over any sidewalk in the
city, or suspend over or place or deposit in any street or sidewalk, goods,
wares and merchandise for sale, show or otherwise, beyond or from line of lot
where such goods may be placed or suspended. (1960 Compilation § 15-707)
7-2-11: OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMIT TO ERECT, ETC.:
Nothing in sections
7-2-7 through
7-2-10 of this chapter shall prohibit the mayor or city council, in their
discretion, from giving permission for the erection of temporary signs, banners
or necessary obstructions. (1960 Compilation § 15-707)
7-2-12: SIDEWALK CAFES:
7-2-12-1: PURPOSE:
It shall be the purpose of this section
7-2-12 to permit and encourage sidewalk dining in the downtown architectural
district, as referenced in section
9-2-2 of this code, that is compatible with other uses of the public sidewalk
when it does not negatively impact health, safety and welfare of city residents
and visitors. The city finds that sidewalk cafes encourage a pedestrian
oriented environment, help to create a visually attractive atmosphere and
streetscape, and promote overall commerce. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Private commercial use of public sidewalks for the purpose of operating a
sidewalk cafe in the city is prohibited unless a permit is obtained as provided
in this section
7-2-12. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFE PERMIT: A seasonal permit issued by the governing body, and
renewable by application to the administrative services officer for a sidewalk
cafe that conforms to the procedures and regulations of this section
7-2-12, for sidewalk cafe operations serving alcoholic and nonalcoholic
beverages.
MINOR SIDEWALK CAFE PERMIT: A seasonal permit issued by the administrative
services officer based upon approval by the public works director or designee
for a sidewalk cafe that conforms to the procedures and regulations of this
section
7-2-12, for sidewalk cafe operations serving nonalcoholic beverages only.
SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor dining area located on a public sidewalk in the
downtown architectural district, that is provided with waiter/waitress service
or counter service. A sidewalk cafe contains readily removable tables and
chairs and may contain railing and planters. It is otherwise unenclosed by
fixed walls and is open to the air, except that it may have an awning or
umbrellas, or other nonpermanent covers. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-4: SIDEWALK CAFE STANDARDS; MINOR AND MAJOR PERMITS:
   A.   Clear Lane: A minimum sixty inch (60") clear pedestrian path must be
maintained at all times to allow adequate pedestrian movement; provided, the
governing body may authorize a narrower pedestrian path, not less than thirty
six inches (36"), for short distances when the sidewalk cafe is not located in
Wyoming department of transportation right of way and pedestrian traffic is
minimal. Any area potentially subject to overhang from parked vehicles shall
not be included as part of the required pedestrian path. Potential vehicle
overhang shall be determined pursuant to section
10-16-10, table 2 of this code.
   B.   Nonhazardous Location: Cafes shall only be permitted where it is
determined that the use will not create a hazard and where it will not create a
sight distance obstruction for motor vehicle operators.
   C.   Location To Associated Establishment: Sidewalk cafes may only be
located adjacent to the establishment with which they are associated.
   D.   Furnishings: Furnishings of a sidewalk cafe shall consist solely of
readily removable awnings, covers, railings, tables, chairs, planters
containing plants and accessories. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a
temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property, except that covers
and railings may be secured by means of flush mounted anchors in a manner to be
approved by the public works director. No objects which are part of a sidewalk
cafe, except lighting fixtures, railing, awning or other nonpermanent covers,
may be attached, even in a temporary manner, to any building or structure on
which the sidewalk cafe abuts. All furnishings and fixtures shall be removed
from public property at any time that the sidewalk cafe permit is inactive,
such as during the dates of November 2 through March 31, or in the case of
permit revocation.
   E.   Refuse Storage: No structure or enclosure to accommodate the storage of
accumulated garbage may be erected or placed adjacent to or separate from the
sidewalk cafe on public property.
   F.   Interference With Public Service Facilities: A sidewalk cafe shall not
interfere with any public service facility, such as telephone, mailbox or
bench, located on a sidewalk.
   G.   Impact On Adjacent Properties: Operation of a sidewalk cafe shall not
adversely impact adjacent or nearby residential, religious, educational or
commercial properties, and shall be in accordance with all applicable codes and
regulations.
   H.   Electrical Requirements: All electrical wiring and fixtures associated
with or part of the sidewalk cafe shall be permitted by the building department
then installed and remain in conformance with the appropriate codes of the
city.
   I.   Quality Of Furnishings: Tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects
provided with the sidewalk cafe shall be of quality design, materials and
workmanship both to ensure the safety and convenience of users and to enhance
the visual and aesthetic quality of the urban environment.
   J.   Noise: Noise from the sidewalk cafe shall not interfere with
residential, lodging, or other property uses in the area.
   K.   Closing Upon Violation: The establishment of a sidewalk cafe pursuant
to the permit (minor or major), and the operation and maintenance of a sidewalk
cafe, shall be considered to be a privilege and not a right, and the governing
body reserves the authority to order the closing of any sidewalk cafe forthwith
upon the conviction of a permittee in municipal court of a violation of this
section.
   L.   Fees For Permit: The fees for the permit under this section
7-2-12 shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a minor sidewalk cafe, one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a major sidewalk cafe, or those fees on
file with the administrative services officer which have been approved by the
governing body by resolution. No permit shall be issued by the administrative
services officer unless the fees required by this section
7-2-12 are paid.
   M.   Insurance Requirement: Each permittee of a minor sidewalk cafe shall
file with the administrative services officer evidence of liability insurance
equal to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Also, the
applicant shall provide proof of insurance at the time of application. The
applicant shall require the insurance carrier to provide the city with thirty
(30) days' prior written notice of cancellation of any policy.
   N.   Nonliability: A signed agreement to defend, indemnify, save, and hold
harmless the city and all of its officers, agents or employees from any
liability for damages resulting from any and all occupancy and operations under
a permit granted pursuant to this section
7-2-12 shall be submitted along with the application to the administrative
services officer. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-5: SIDEWALK CAFE STANDARDS; MAJOR PERMITS:
   A.   Liquor License Required: Major sidewalk cafes must hold a current city
liquor license.
   B.   Standards: Major sidewalk cafes shall meet all the requirements set
forth in section
7-2-12-4 of this chapter, in addition to the following standards:
      1.   Outdoor dining areas serving alcoholic beverages shall be
continuously supervised by employees of the establishment.
      2.   Alcoholic beverages may be served in a fenced or enclosed area
immediately adjacent to the building in which the licensed room is located. A
sign, one square foot, reading "No Food Or Beverages Allowed Beyond Fence/
Enclosure" shall be posted at a conspicuous location within the perimeter of
the outdoor cafe serving alcoholic beverages.
      3.   The location of sidewalk cafes where alcohol is served shall be
subject to the requirements of title 3, chapter 2 of this code.
   C.   Responsible Party For Violation: The party responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this section
7-2-12 and compliance therewith in each instance is the permittee, and any
prosecution for a violation of this section
7-2-12 shall be against the permittee. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-6: OPERATING RESTRICTIONS; MINOR AND MAJOR PERMITS:
   A.   Hours Of Operation: All sidewalk cafes shall cease sales or services by
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each night and all areas shall be vacated by twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   B.   Display Of Permit: The permit evidencing permitting of the sidewalk
cafe in accord with this section
7-2-12 shall be prominently displayed.
   C.   Serving Patrons: The restaurant shall not serve food or beverages to a
patron at a sidewalk cafe area unless that patron is seated at a table or
counter.
   D.   Appearance Of Cafe: Sidewalk cafes and the public property on which
they are located shall be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any
substance that may cause damage to the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.
Sidewalk cafe areas must remain clear of litter, food scraps and soiled dishes
at all times. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-7: OPERATING RESTRICTIONS; MAJOR PERMITS:
All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafes shall be dispensed from
the licensed dispensing room as set forth by the liquor license. Alcoholic
drinks shall only be served to patrons seated at tables or counters. The
drinking of alcoholic beverages by a member of the public while a patron at a
sidewalk cafe, within the confines of the sidewalk cafe area, shall not be
construed as a violation of any ordinance controlling open containers in a
public area. The operator of the sidewalk cafe must be a city liquor license
holder, if he intends to service alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe area,
and shall comply with all other laws and regulations concerning the serving of
alcoholic beverages in the state. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-8: MINOR AND MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFE PERMITTING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority: The administrative services officer, with approval of the
public works director or designee, is authorized to issue a seasonal permit to
operate a minor sidewalk cafe on public property; provided, that the standards
set forth in section
7-2-12-4 of this chapter have been found to be in compliance. The
administrative services officer may also grant renewals of major sidewalk cafe
permits pursuant to compliance with applicable standards of this chapter.
   B.   Operating Season: The seasonal permit shall allow the operation of a
sidewalk cafe from April 1 up to and including November 1 of any calendar year.
A permit may also be issued for less than a full season or for a stipulated
number of operating days. The permit fee will not be prorated.
   C.   Review Of Application And Site Plans: Application and site plans for
sidewalk cafe permits (minor and major) shall be reviewed by the public works
director and administrative services officer.
   D.   Site Plan Approval:
      1.   A permit application available from the administrative services
officer for site plan approval shall be submitted to the administrative
services officer, public works director or designee. The application shall
state the following:
         a.   Name of the individual/business;
         b.   Individual/business address;
         c.   Address of sidewalk occupancy;
         d.   Property owner if other than applicant;
         e.   Written authorization from the owner of the adjacent associated
property to submit the application, where the applicant is not the owner of the
associated property;
         f.   Name of planner, engineer, architect or agent;
         g.   Dates of occupancy;
         h.   Hours of occupancy;
         i.   Capacity of existing associated establishment;
         j.   Proposed capacity of sidewalk cafe;
         k.   Area of occupancy (square feet and dimensions);
         l.   Use of musical instruments or sound reproduction system;
         m.   If application is a new application or renewal;
         n.   A site plan drawn to the specifications of this section;
         o.   Proof of liability insurance for one million dollars
($1,000,000.00); and
         p.   Executed indemnity agreement.
      2.   The site plan and the accompanying application shall show the
following:
         a.   The applicant's entire property and adjacent properties on a site
plan with streets for a distance of at least twenty five feet (25') on either
side of the property boundaries fronting the right of way, at a scale of one-
eighth inch equals one foot (1/8" = 1'), or other scale showing adequate
detail.
         b.   A detailed plan showing the design, relevant details and location
of all temporary structures, such as awnings, planters, landscaping, railings,
tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet
locations.
         c.   All exterior lighting shall be shown on the site development plan
and shall be of such type and location and shall have such shading as will
prevent the source of light from being seen from any adjacent roadway or
residential property.
         d.   If the use of a musical instrument and/or sound amplifying system
is planned, the applicant must be aware that complaints of excessive loud noise
could result in a disturbing the peace violation, as provided in section
5-2-5 of this code.
      3.   The administrative services officer or designee shall distribute
copies of the site development plan to the chief of police, fire marshal, city
planner, and public works director for review and comments in relation to
compliance with this and all other city ordinances.
      4.   If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, a written
letter shall be provided from the property owner stating his approval of the
sidewalk cafe. Said letter shall be submitted with any application.
      5.   Property owners adjacent to the subject property and those located
on the same block and side of the street shall be notified in writing by the
applicant of the intent to establish a sidewalk cafe prior to submittal of any
application. Adjacent owners shall also be requested to complete the form,
included with the application, indicating support or objection to the
application. These letters of support or objection shall be submitted with the
application.
   E.   Decision: Based upon the review comments as listed above, the public
works director or designee may approve, approve with conditions, refer the
application back to the applicant for modification, or deny the application. If
approved, the administrative services officer shall issue the minor sidewalk
cafe permit.
   F.   Letter Of Denial; Appeal: If the application for a minor sidewalk cafe
permit is denied, the applicant shall receive a letter with the reason for
denial. It shall be the applicant's option to appeal the decision to the city
council by requesting an agenda request form from the administrative services
officer.
   G.   Governing Body Approval: Major sidewalk cafe permits are subject to
approval of the governing body. After review by city staff, the application
shall be placed on an agenda for review by the governing body. The governing
body shall then approve, approve with conditions, refer the application back to
the applicant for modification, or deny the application. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-
2015)
7-2-12-9: TERM OF PERMITS AND RENEWAL PROCEDURES; MINOR AND MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFE
PERMITS:
   A.   Term: A sidewalk cafe permit (minor or major) shall be valid for one
season (April 1 through November 1) only.
   B.   Renewal: A renewal based upon the previous permit may be approved by
the administrative services officer without full staff review, if the
application meets the following conditions:
      1.   Ownership of the business has not changed.
      2.   Ownership of the property has not changed.
      3.   There has been no change to the site development plan.
      4.   There are no outstanding code violations.
      5.   The application is reviewed by the planning department to verify
compliance.
      6.   Each permittee of a sidewalk cafe (minor or major) shall file with
the administrative services officer evidence of liability insurance equal to
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
      7.   The renewal application is submitted on or before March 1 of each
year to allow adequate time for staff review and renewal permit issuance prior
to the beginning of the season.
      8.   The renewal is subject to all conditions placed on the original
permit.
      9.   Failure by the permittee to submit all required documentation as set
forth in this section
7-2-12 shall be the basis for denying a renewal permit. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-
2015)
7-2-12-10: PERMIT ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
No permittee shall assign or transfer a sidewalk cafe permit. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-
5-2015)
7-2-12-11: APPEAL UPON DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation Or Suspension: Any permit granted under the provisions of
this section
7-2-12 may be revoked or suspended at the action of the governing body for
failure to comply with any sections of this section
7-2-12, any conditions of approval, or if there are any statutory liquor
license infractions, upon the recommendation of any of the city departments
that participated in the permit review process.
   B.   Removal Of Furnishings; Cease Of Operations: Upon revocation of a
permit, all furnishings and fixtures shall be removed from public property
within twenty four (24) hours. Upon suspension, all sidewalk cafe operations
shall cease until such time as the permit is brought into compliance or it has
been revoked. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-12: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who operates a sidewalk cafe without a permit or who shall violate
any of the provisions of this section
7-2-12 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to which shall be
added court costs up to the maximum allowed by law. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
7-2-12-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this section
7-2-12 shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof; but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy and in which such judgment
shall have been rendered. (Ord. 2015-05, 5-5-2015)
CHAPTER 3
YELLOWSTONE REGIONAL AIRPORT
SECTION:
Article I.  In General
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Description And Title
7-3-3: Revenues
7-3-4: Rules And Regulations Generally As To Use
7-3-5: Lease Of Sites For Structures, Etc.; Building Of Structures
7-3-6: Lease Agreements Or Contracts
7-3-7: Assumption Of Responsibility And Risk
7-3-8: Permit For Use Of Facilities
7-3-9: Use Of Field By Commercial Aviation Subject To Regulations And Fees
7-3-10: Supplies, Services And Repairs
7-3-11: Operation Of Aircraft On Ground
7-3-12: Areas For Aircraft Repair
7-3-13: Removal Of Disabled Aircraft
7-3-14: Aircraft Fueling And Defueling
7-3-15: Vehicular Traffic
7-3-16: Fire Hazards Generally
7-3-17: Carrying Explosives, Flammable Material And Fireworks
7-3-18: Garbage, Refuse, Etc.
7-3-19: Aerial Spraying
7-3-20: Advertisements
7-3-21: Miscellaneous Offenses
Article II.  Airport Obstruction Zoning
7-3-22: Short Title
7-3-23: Definitions
7-3-24: Airport Zones
7-3-25: Airport Zone Height Limitations
7-3-26: Use Restrictions
7-3-27: Nonconforming Uses
7-3-28: Permits
7-3-29: Enforcement
7-3-30: Appeals
7-3-31: Penalties
7-3-32: Conflicting Regulations
7-3-33: Severability
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance
designed for such navigation but used primarily as safety equipment.
AIRPORT: The Yellowstone regional airport.
BOARD: The Yellowstone regional airport joint powers board appointed by the
city of Cody and the Park County commissioners.
MANAGER: The airport manager is appointed by the Yellowstone regional airport
joint powers board to manage, superintend, have charge of, control and protect
the airport. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-2: DESCRIPTION AND TITLE:
That certain property situated in sections 4 and 5 of T. 52 N., R. 101 W. and
sections 33 and 34 of T. 53 N., R. 101 W., as shown on the official city of
Cody map for public airport use shall be known as the Yellowstone regional
airport. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-3: REVENUES:
All revenues of every source derived from the airport and its operations shall
be deposited in a special fund designated Yellowstone regional airport fund and
used only for airport purposes. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS GENERALLY AS TO USE:
All pilots, crewmen, service and maintenance personnel, ground personnel,
passengers, onlookers and all other persons employed at, visiting or utilizing
the airport shall be governed by the present and future rules and regulations
promulgated by the Yellowstone regional airport joint powers board, as well as
by the provisions of the city ordinances and all applicable rules and
regulations of the United States and the state, which rules and regulations are
made a part hereof by reference as if set out in full herein. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-
7-2001)
7-3-5: LEASE OF SITES FOR STRUCTURES, ETC.; BUILDING OF STRUCTURES:
The board and/or airport manager, upon written application, may lease
buildings, building sites or any portion of the airport to persons desiring to
construct hangars or other appropriate structures at the airport. Such
structures shall be built according to the rules and regulations which now
exist, or which may hereafter be adopted, regarding specifications and plans,
and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and building
official, and such structure shall be erected only on such area of the airport
as the board and/or manager shall designate and under conditions and provisions
as to the reversion of such property which may be imposed. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-
2001)
7-3-6: LEASE AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS:
The rental agreement for land, buildings or other structures at the airport
shall be determined by a written lease agreement or contract between the board
and any lessee. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-7: ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY AND RISK:
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on
the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof and he shall
release, hold harmless and indemnify the board, its agents and employees,
manager, the city, its mayor and council, and its officers and employees, and
Park County, the commissioners, its agents and employees from any liability or
loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims of third persons
against the person using the airport. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-8: PERMIT FOR USE OF FACILITIES:
No person shall use the airport as a base or terminal for commercial aviation
activities or conduct any business or concession upon the airport or upon any
land acquired for use in connection with the airport, or upon or in any of the
buildings, structures, land, parking places, walkways, roadways or other
facilities used or operated in connection with the airport, without first
obtaining the written permission of the board or the airport manager. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-9: USE OF FIELD BY COMMERCIAL AVIATION SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS AND FEES:
The use of the airport by commercial aviation companies shall be subject to
existing agreements, rules and regulations and minimum standards, and to the
imposition of such charges or fees as the board or the airport manager may set
and determine. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-10: SUPPLIES, SERVICES AND REPAIRS:
Supplies, provisions, gasoline, oils, fuel, service and repairs shall be
offered and sold or delivered for use at the airport, subject to such rules and
regulations and minimum standards as from time to time may be adopted and
ordered by the board or airport manager. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-11: OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT ON GROUND:
   A.   No aircraft engine shall be started on an aircraft not equipped with
adequate brakes which are fully set, unless the wheels have been set with
blocks.
   B.   No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a competent operator
shall be at the controls of the aircraft.
   C.   No aircraft engine shall be run or warmed up unless the aircraft is in
such position that the propeller blast shall clear all buildings, groups of
people in the observation areas, aircraft parking areas, service runways and
flight landing paths.
   D.   No aircraft shall taxi in or out of hangars at any time.
   E.   Engines mounted in aircraft shall not be operated in any hangar. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-12: AREAS FOR AIRCRAFT REPAIR:
No aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller or appliance shall be repaired on any
area of the airport other than that specifically designated by the board or the
airport manager. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-13: REMOVAL OF DISABLED AIRCRAFT:
Every aircraft owner, his pilot and agents, severally, shall be responsible for
the prompt removal of any disabled aircraft, unless directed to delay such
action pending investigation of an accident. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-14: AIRCRAFT FUELING AND DEFUELING:
All fueling activities on airport shall comply with federal aviation regulation
part 139, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   No aircraft shall be fueled or drained of fuel while the engine is
running or while such aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed space.
   B.   No smoking shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of the aircraft
fuel tanks while the aircraft is being fueled or drained of fuel, nor within
fifty feet (50') of any fuel carrier when not in motion or when it is being
utilized for refueling or draining of fuel from an aircraft.
   C.   No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch
electrical appliances on or off in any aircraft during fueling or draining of
fuel.
   D.   All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling and draining
operations shall be equipped with a bonding device to equalize static charges.
During refueling, the aircraft and the fuel dispensing apparatus shall both be
grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential.
   E.   Persons engaged in the fueling and draining of aircraft shall exercise
care to prevent overflow of fuel.
   F.   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on board
unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin door of such aircraft
or a cabin attendant is present at or near the cabin door.
   G.   Only personnel engaged in the fueling and maintenance and operation of
an aircraft shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of fuel tanks of such
aircraft during any such operation, except as provided in subsection F of this
section.
   H.   Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of persons
engaged in refueling and draining operations.
   I.   No person shall start or operate the power plant of any aircraft when
there is gasoline on the ground and under the aircraft.
   J.   Fueling hoses and draining equipment shall be maintained in a safe and
sound and nonleaking condition. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-15: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
   A.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport other than in
accordance with the general rules as hereinafter prescribed for the control of
such vehicles, except when given special instructions by the board or the
airport manager, or in cases of emergency involving danger to life or property.
   B.   Parking of vehicles will be in those areas designated as parking areas
by the board or airport manager.
   C.   Vehicles shall not be driven on the airport, including aprons, unless
necessary in the refueling, servicing or movement of an aircraft or in
connection with the maintenance of the field and facilities.
   D.   Private vehicles are not permitted on the air carrier ramp at any time.
   E.   No private vehicle of any description shall be allowed upon the runways
or taxiways at any time without permission of the board or the airport manager.
   F.   No motorcycles, go-carts, motorized scooters or bicycles of any kind
shall be permitted on the airport without permission of the board or the
airport manager.
   G.   Pedestrians and vehicular traffic while on the landing area proper at
all times shall exercise extreme caution and give sufficient right of way for
the safe operation of aircraft. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-16: FIRE HAZARDS GENERALLY:
   A.   No person shall use inflammable volatile liquids in the cleaning of
aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers and appliances, unless such cleaning
operations are conducted in open air areas as designated or in a room
specifically set aside for that purpose, which room must be properly
fireproofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire
extinguishing apparatus.
   B.   No person shall conduct any open flame operations in any hangar or
building, or part thereof, unless specifically authorized by the board or the
airport manager.
   C.   No person shall store or stock material or equipment in such a manner
as to constitute a fire hazard.
   D.   No person shall keep or store any flammable liquids, gases, signal
flares or other similar material in hangars or any building on the airport;
provided, that such materials may be kept in aircraft in the proper receptacles
installed in the aircraft for such purpose or in rooms or areas specially
approved for such storage by the board or the airport manager.
   E.   No person shall keep or store lubricating oil in or about the hangars;
provided, that such materials may be kept in aircraft in the proper receptacles
installed in the aircraft for such purpose or in containers provided with
suitable draw off devices approved by the board or the airport manager.
   F.   Lessees in hangars or hangar space shall provide suitable metal
receptacles with covers for the storage of oil waste, rags and other rubbish.
   G.   No person shall use volatile flammable substances for cleaning the
floors in the hangars or in other buildings on the airport.
   H.   All lessees of the airport facilities shall keep the floors of hangars,
apron pits, and areas adjacent thereto, leased by them respectively, free and
clear of oil, grease and other flammable material.
   I.   Doping processes shall be conducted only in properly designated,
fireproofed, and ventilated rooms or buildings in which all windows and doors
shall open easily.
   J.   All persons using the airport area or facilities of the airport shall
exercise the utmost care to guard against fire and injury to persons and
property.
   K.   In the event of fire or other emergency the person discovering such
peril shall immediately report such information to the fire department. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-17: CARRYING EXPLOSIVES, FLAMMABLE MATERIAL AND FIREWORKS:
No person, except police officers, duly authorized post office employees,
airport employees or members of the armed forces of the United States on
official duty, shall carry any explosives or flammable material on the airport
without the written permission of the board or the airport manager. Fireworks
shall not be permitted on the airport at any time. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-18: GARBAGE, REFUSE, ETC.:
No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse, scrap metals, metal
containers, glass, or other material on the airport, except in receptacles
provided for that purpose and each lessee of airport property shall be
responsible for removal of such refuse from the airport. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-
2001)
7-3-19: AERIAL SPRAYING:
No aircraft equipped with apparatus for distribution of sprays, dust, weather
modification or other chemicals, seeds or bait shall be loaded or unloaded on
the asphalt ramps, nor shall any aircraft so equipped be parked on such asphalt
ramps, unless such aircraft is provided with proper fittings and nozzles which
are in a sound and leakproof condition. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-20: ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall post, distribute or display signs, advertisements, circulars,
printed or written matter at the airport, except with the approval of the board
or the airport manager and in such manner as they may prescribe. No permanent
signboards shall be erected on the airport property. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-21: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
No person shall:
   A.   Destroy, injure, deface or disturb in any way any building, sign,
equipment, marker or other structure, flower, lawn or other public property on
the airport.
   B.   Trespass on lawns and seeded areas on the airport.
   C.   Abandon any personal property on the airport.
   D.   Interfere with, tamper or injure any part of the airport or any of the
equipment thereon.
   E.   No unauthorized person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft or
shall start the engine of such aircraft.
   F.   No person shall take or use any aircraft, or parts or accessories
thereof, or tools or other equipment owned or controlled by any other person
and stored or otherwise left at the airport without the consent of the owner or
operator thereof, or other satisfactory evidence of his right to do so. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
ARTICLE II.  AIRPORT OBSTRUCTION ZONING
7-3-22: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the YELLOWSTONE REGIONAL
AIRPORT OBSTRUCTION ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-23: DEFINITIONS:
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet from mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the
vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of
aircraft.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES: These zones apply to the
area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined
in federal aviation regulation (FAR) part 77, and shown on the approved
approach and clear zone plan for the airport.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth
in this article, the datum shall mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise
specified.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use
of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this airport hazard zoning
article.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or
area type navigation equipment, for which a straight in, nonprecision
instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no
precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on the airport layout
plan.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity. It includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, or similar representative of any of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure, which includes vertical and horizontal approach guidance. It also
means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so
indicated on the approved airport layout plan.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The primary
surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. The
width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part
77 of the federal aviation regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach
existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point onto
the runway centerline.
PUBLIC USE AIRPORT: Any airport, publicly or privately owned, which is open to
public use and meets all appropriate state and federal operational criteria.
RUNWAY: A defined area on a public use airport, prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length, including both existing and proposed, as
shown on the approved airport layout plan for Yellowstone regional airport.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but not
limited to, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead
transmission lines.
TRANSPORT RUNWAY: A runway that is used for five hundred (500) or more (actual
or forecasted) annual aircraft operations that are larger than utility
aircraft.
TREE: Any deciduous or coniferous natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve
thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum gross weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight in instrument designation indicated
on the FAA approved airport layout plan. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-24: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the
approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones as they
apply to a public use airport. Such zones are shown on the approved airport
airspace drawing, which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a
part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is
considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive limitations. The
various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
   A.   Approach and clear zones. Those areas depicted on the approved airport
airspace drawing include the horizontal, conical, approach and primary surfaces
which pertain to federal aviation regulation (FAR) part 77. Within this zone
are the following defined subzones:
      1.   Utility runway visual approach subzone: The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two
hundred fifty feet (250') wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to
a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal
distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface, its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      2.   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-fourths (3/4) mile nonprecision instrument approach subzone: The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly
to a width of three thousand five hundred feet (3,500') at a horizontal
distance of ten thousand feet (10,000') from the primary surface, its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      3.   Transitional subzone: These zones are hereby established as the area
beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at
ninety degree (90°) angles to the runway centerline and the runway.
      4.   Horizontal subzone: The horizontal zone is hereby established by
swinging arcs of ten thousand feet (10,000') radii from the center of each end
of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by
drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.
      5.   Conical subzone: The conical zone is hereby established as the area
that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward
therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical
zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the
transitional zones. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-25: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Specified: Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure
or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any
zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones and subzones in question as follows:
      1.   Utility runway visual approach subzone: Slopes upward twenty feet
(20') horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
      2.   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-fourths (3/4) mile nonprecision instrument approach subzone: Slopes
upward thirty four feet (34') horizontally for each foot vertically beginning
at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to
a horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway
centerline.
      3.   Transitional subzones: Slopes upward and outward seven feet (7')
horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending to a
height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation (5,100
feet) which is highest elevation of each public use airport. In addition to the
foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven
feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the approach zones and extending to where they
intersect the conical surface.
      4.   Horizontal subzone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport
elevation.
      5.   Conical subzone: Slopes upward and outward twenty feet (20')
horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above
the airport elevation.
   B.   Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure
to a height up to thirty five feet (35') above the surface of the land.
   C.   Multiple Limitations: Where an area is covered by more than one height
limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. These surfaces are
shown on the approved approach and clear zone plan for Yellowstone regional
airport and are incorporated herein. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-26: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of
land or water within airport zones established by this article in such a manner
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots
to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing,
takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the public use airport.
Included in this restriction is any land or water use which would tend to
promote or increase bird population and thereby increase the likelihood of a
bird strike problem.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of
land or water within the approved approach and clear zones established by this
article in such a manner which would promote or increase large congregations of
people and/or aboveground storage of flammable substances. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-
2001)
7-3-27: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this article
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or
alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and is
diligently prosecuted.
   B.   Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the
owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and
lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards.
Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the
expense of the owner of the public use airport. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-28: PERMITS:
   A.   Future Uses: No material change shall be made in the use of land; and
no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise
established in any zone or subzone hereby created, unless a permit therefor
shall have been applied for and granted by the city approved by the board or
airport manager.
      1.   Under these provisions, a permit for a tree or structure of less
than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the ground shall not be
required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and
transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred
feet (4,200') from each end of the runway, except when such tree or structure,
because of terrain land contour, or topographic features, would extend above
the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. All other applicable
regulations, codes and permits shall apply to the erection, alteration,
planting or establishment of a tree, structure or use of land.
      2.   Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which
the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the
resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulation herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be
granted. If such determination is negative, the permit may be denied or the
applicant may be allowed to modify the application to comply with the
provisions of this article.
   B.   Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date hereof, or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the
application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
such a permit shall be granted.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the city determines
that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty
percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height
limit or otherwise deviate from these provisions.
   D.   Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the
city for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed
where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not
be contrary to the public interest, but will do substantial justice and be in
accordance with the spirit of this article.
   E.   Hazard Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and
be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner
of the structure or tree in question to permit the city or airport owner, at
its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and
lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport
hazard. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-29: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the city to administer and enforce the regulations
prescribed herein. It may delegate to the board and/or airport manager as it
deems appropriate. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the
city upon a form furnished by it. Application required by this article to be
submitted to the city shall be promptly considered and granted or denied.
Application for action by the city shall be forthwith transmitted by it. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-30: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
city administering officer made in the administration of this article may
appeal to the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   All appeals hereunder must be taken as provided by the rules of the
city by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building
official shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission, all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
   C.   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the building official certifies after the notice of appeal
has been filed that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed, except by order of the city council.
   D.   The city shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public
notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or
by attorney.
   E.   The city may, in conformity with the provisions of this article,
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-31: PENALTIES:
Each violation of this article or any regulation, order or ruling promulgated
hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
to exist after official notification of such offense shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-32: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
7-3-33: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without
the valid provision or application, and to this end the provision of this
article is declared to be severable. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-7-2001)
CHAPTER 4
TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Tree Size And Species
7-4-3: Distance From Street Corners And Fire Hydrants
7-4-4: Distance From Curbs And Public Sidewalks
7-4-5: Utilities
7-4-6: Public Tree Care
7-4-7: Pruning; Corner Clearance
7-4-8: Application, Permit For Trees Located In The Right Of Way
7-4-9: Tree Topping
7-4-10: Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property
7-4-11: Trees Already In Place
7-4-12: Improper Planting
7-4-13: Arborist License And Bond
7-4-14: Interference With City Tree Board
7-4-15: Review By The City Council
7-4-16: Penalty
7-4-17: Conflict With Other Ordinances
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY TREE BOARD: A group consisting of the parks director and/or one of his
representatives, and up to nine (9) members at large who are residents or
conduct business in Cody and are appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the city council.
   A.   The term of the members, other than that of the parks director or his
representatives, shall be two (2) years, except that the term of half of the
initial at large appointees will be for one year. In the event of a vacancy
during the term of any appointed member, his successor shall be appointed by
the mayor for the unexpired portion of the term.
   B.   At large members of the board shall serve without compensation.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the city tree board to study,
investigate, counsel, and develop written standards, rules and regulations for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. Such standards will be
presented to the city council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall
constitute the official city "tree rules and regulations" and shall constitute
the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city of Cody, Wyoming.
   D.   The city tree board, when requested by the city council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its responsibilities.
   E.   The city tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter and keep a
journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be quorum for the
transaction of business.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in parks
having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS: Sidewalks located within the city right of way.
PUBLIC TREES: All street trees, park trees and any other trees located on
public property.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
sidewalk, crosswalk, alley, shade tree or for another special use.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation lying in the
city right of way. (Ord. 96-15; amd. Ord. 2010-04, 3-2-2010)
7-4-2: TREE SIZE AND SPECIES:
The following tree size classification shall apply in subsequent sections:
Small tree: Up to twenty five feet (25') projected height at maturity.
Medium tree: Twenty five feet (25') to forty feet (40') projected height at
maturity.
Large trees: Over forty feet (40') projected height at maturity.
New plantings of the following nuisance species, as determined by tree board
regulation, shall be prohibited on the right of way of any street, alley or
public sidewalk. Those species of trees include: elms susceptible to Dutch elm
disease, lombardy poplar, white poplar, weeping willow, cottonwoods, box elder,
upright evergreens, Russian olive, flowering crab, mountain ash, cutleaf
weeping birch, any tree, shrub or hedge which by its habit of growth cannot be
maintained to a single leader or trunk, any tree, shrub or hedge which by its
habit of growth would obstruct, restrict or conflict with necessary and safe
use of the public right of way, such as upright evergreens, including spruce,
pine, juniper, etc. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-3: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
No "street trees" shall be planted closer than thirty feet (30') from any
street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or
curb lines. No "street tree" shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') from
any fire hydrant. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-4: DISTANCE FROM CURBS AND PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and public sidewalks
will be in accordance with the tree species size classes listed in section
7-4-2 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or public
sidewalk than the following: small trees - two feet (2'), medium trees - three
feet (3'), and large trees - four feet (4'). (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-5: UTILITIES:
No "street trees", other than the small trees described in section
7-4-2 of this chapter, may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any
underground water line (with the exception of underground irrigation systems),
sewer line, transmission line or other utility. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-6: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, preserve and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the rights of way of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure safety when
servicing city utilities, or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds. The city may, at its option, remove or cause to be removed any public
tree or part thereof which presents an unsafe condition or which by reason of
its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public improvements. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-7: PRUNING; CORNER CLEARANCE:
The pruning and maintenance of trees that interfere with the proper spread of
light of any streetlamp or obstructs the view from any intersection, is the
responsibility of the adjacent landowner, whether the tree lies on private
property or within the city right of way. There shall be a clear space of ten
feet (10') above the surface of the street, eight feet (8') above sidewalks and
twelve foot (12') clearance in alleys. Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public.
If owners do not correct such problems, the city shall notify property owners
in writing. If owners are advised of the above mentioned problems and they are
not corrected within ten (10) days, the city shall remove the problem trees or
limbs and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner. Such trimming will
be confined to the area immediately above the right of way. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-8: APPLICATION, PERMIT FOR TREES LOCATED IN THE RIGHT OF WAY:
No person or company shall plant, remove, cut above the ground, or disturb any
tree on any street, park, or other public place without first filing an
application and procuring a permit from the city. The person receiving the
permit shall abide by the standards set forth in this chapter. Permits are
issued free by contacting city hall. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-9: TREE TOPPING:
It is unlawful as a normal practice for anyone to top any street tree, park
tree, or other tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within
the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the city tree board. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-10: DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The city shall advise private landowners as to the proper way to remove any
dead or diseased trees on private land within the city, when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. If owners are
advised of the above mentioned problems of hazard trees and action is not taken
to correct the problem within thirty (30) days, the same may be removed or
cause to be removed by the city and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the
owner. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-11: TREES ALREADY IN PLACE:
Trees already in place and growing at the date hereof shall be exempt from
sections
7-4-3,
7-4-4 and
7-4-5 of this chapter. However, any new or replacement trees shall be governed
by those sections. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-12: IMPROPER PLANTING:
Whenever a tree or shrub is planted in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, the city shall notify the landowner in writing. If the landowner has
not corrected the problem within ten (10) days, the same may be removed or
caused to be removed by the city and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the
owner. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-13: ARBORIST LICENSE AND BOND:
It is unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation
of pruning, treating or removing public trees, or trees on private property
within the city without first applying for and procuring a license from city
hall. Applicants shall pass a written examination to ensure they are qualified
and knowledgeable in tree pruning standards. Arborists certified by the
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) will be exempt from the
examination. There shall be no license fee and licenses will not be required
for any public service employee or city employee doing such work in the pursuit
of their public service endeavors. Before any such license shall be issued,
each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance
in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily
injury and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage
indemnifying the city or any person injured or damage resulting from the
pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. Additionally, applicants must
provide a list of references. The city will give preference to arborists
certified by the ISA or companies with a certified arborist on staff when
performing maintenance on public trees. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-14: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD:
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree
board, or any city employee, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees or shrubs
authorized in this chapter. The city may, at its option, when advised by the
city tree board, cause the removal of dead or diseased trees from private
property.
Prior to removal of dead or diseased trees by the city, the city shall provide
written notice to the property owner. Should the property owner contest the
fact that the tree is diseased, they may request a hearing in front of the city
council. Said hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the Wyoming administrative
procedures act. If a hearing shall be requested, the city shall not cause the
removal of the dead or diseased tree until the completion of the hearing. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply in case of an emergency. "Cases
of emergency" are defined as conditions which pose an immediate safety or
health hazard to the public. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-15: REVIEW BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from the ruling of order of the
city tree board to the city council, who may hear the matter and make final
decision. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or a
plea of guilty, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 96-15)
7-4-17: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
In the event anything contained in this chapter is at variance or conflicts
with any other city ordinance in effect at the time of the passage of this
chapter, and particularly the city zoning ordinances, then this chapter shall
be deemed subservient thereto and the other ordinance or ordinances shall
control. (Ord. 96-15)
CHAPTER 5
REGULATION OF BASIC CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION:
Article I.  General Provisions
7-5-1: Definitions
Article II.  Filing And Review Of Rates
7-5-2: Initial Filings By Franchisees
7-5-3: Initial Municipality Review
7-5-4: Supplementary Filings
Article III.  Provisions Generally Applicable To Rate Orders
7-5-5: Effective Date Of Rate Orders, Etc.
Article IV.  Duties Of The Franchisee
7-5-6: Duties Of The Franchisee; Generally
Article V.  Duties Of The Municipality
7-5-7: Duties Of The Municipality; Generally
Article VI.  Proprietary Information
7-5-8: Request And Production
Article VII.  Petition For Changes In Status
7-5-9: Petition And Consideration
Article VIII.  Penalties And Forfeitures
7-5-10: Penalty For Violation, Fraud And Evasion
Article IX.  Customer Service Standards
7-5-11: Minimum Service Standards Required From Cable Franchise
ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, and shall apply
in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations:
BASIC SERVICES OR BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Has the same meaning as the term "basic
service", as defined at 47 USC section 522, or as amended.
CFR: The code of federal regulations currently in effect, or as amended.
EQUIPMENT: Refers to all equipment and services subject to regulation under 47
CFR section 76.923, or as amended.
FCC: The federal communications commission, or successor governmental entity
thereto.
FRANCHISEE: A current holder or grantee of a cable television license or
franchise.
MUNICIPAL REPRESENTATIVE: The administrative department, division or individual
as designated by the mayor then in elected office.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Cody, which has adopted these regulations, whether
acting through the governing body or its administration.
OR AS AMENDED: Refers to federal or state regulations, or to those regulations
as they may be amended; if a reference section is renumbered, the ordinance
shall be read to refer to the section as renumbered.
REVENUES: All revenues, in whatever form received.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who legally receives any one or more of the services
provided by a franchisee.
USC: The United States Code currently in effect, or as amended. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE II.  FILING AND REVIEW OF RATES
7-5-2: INITIAL FILINGS BY FRANCHISEES:
   A.   Filing; When Made: A franchisee subject to regulation must file a
submission (the rate filing) within thirty (30) days of the notification of
said regulation (but is not required to make a filing earlier than November 15,
1993), justifying its then existing basic service and equipment rates. All
rates for customer classifications must be justified. Once a franchisee has
been notified by the municipality that its rates are subject to regulation, it
may not thereafter increase its rates for basic service or equipment without
the prior approval of the municipality. This requirement applies in all cases,
including increases in rates announced prior to the date the operator was
notified its rates were subject to regulation. A franchisee must submit a rate
filing to justify any increase in basic service or equipment rates, or any new
basic service or equipment rate (collectively referred to herein as rate
increases). An increase occurs when there is an increase in rates or a decrease
in program or customer services. Rate filings proposing and supporting
increases must be filed for review at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
proposed effective date of the increase. This requirement does not alter or
eliminate any other notice requirement. Where there is no applicable FCC form
that is to be used to support an equipment charge, the franchisee shall submit
sufficient information to demonstrate that the price it proposes to charge
recovers only its costs, plus a reasonable profit.
   B.   Filing; Where Made: Every rate filing must be submitted to the
municipality. A rate filing shall be considered filed for review on the date
received. Three (3) copies of each rate filing (including all supporting
materials) must be submitted. If any part of the rate filing contains
information that is claimed to be proprietary under applicable FCC rules, the
franchisee must file three (3) copies of the filing with the proprietary
information removed.
   C.   Filing; Contents: Subject to FCC regulations governing the burden of
proof, a rate filing submitted by a franchisee must show that the rates
proposed for basic service and equipment are reasonable. Except as inconsistent
with FCC rules:
      1.   Every rate filing must clearly state in a cover letter whether it
justifies existing rates, or proposes an increase in rates. The cover letter
must also identify any rate that is derived in whole or in part based upon cost
of service, and identify any pages of the rate filing that contain information
that the franchisee claims is proprietary. It must state whether any part of
the proposed increase is based on an inflation adjustment or an alleged
increase in external costs. The cover letter should also contain a brief
narrative description of any proposed changes in rates or in service;
      2.   The pages of each rate filing must be numbered sequentially;
      3.   The rate must contain all applicable FCC forms correctly completed;
and
      4.   If different rates are being charged or are to be charged for
different customers or classes of customers, the filing must show that the
classifications and the differences in the rates charged are reasonable and
consistent with federal law.
   D.   Cost Of Service Rate: If the franchisee seeks to support a rate based
upon a cost of service, the municipality will establish a rate that provides
the franchisee an opportunity to recover its reasonable costs, including a
reasonable profit. An expense or investment is not presumed reasonable merely
because the franchisee has incurred or made it. A franchisee is not entitled to
recover monopoly rents in any form.
   E.   Cost Of Service Analysis: In addition to information the municipality
requires the franchisee to provide, unless the municipality grants a waiver of
this provision, a franchisee who seeks to justify all or part of its rates
based upon its cost of service must submit a complete cost of service analysis
that shows all expenses it incurs and all revenues derived from the system,
directly or indirectly, by the franchisee or any person that constitutes a
"cable operator" of the system within the meaning of 47 USC section 522, or as
amended. The cost of service must identify the accounting level (as that term
is used in the FCC regulations) at which each expense or revenue identified was
aggregated and clearly show how the expense or revenue was allocated. The
franchisee may not include costs at an accounting level unless it also includes
all revenues from that same level attributable to the system or to a group of
systems of which the system is a part. The replacement cost of a comparable
system must be identified and supported. The franchisee must identify the name
and address of any entity with which it has a contract, other than a
programmer, which derives revenues from the system, and must state whether and
how the revenues of that entity were included in the cost of service. In
addition, the cost of service shall clearly show the derivation of a proposed
charge per channel and the application of that charge to yield a basic service
rate. It must also show and support the derivation and allocation of any
amounts included in the derivation of the rate for:
      1.   Operation and maintenance expenses;
      2.   Administrative and general expenses;
      3.   Programming expenses (identifying retransmission consent costs and
copyright fees separately);
      4.   Costs for required facilities, equipment or services for public,
educational and government use and any institutional network;
      5.   Franchise fee expenses;
      6.   Investment in the system and associated depreciation;
      7.   Other itemized expenses, including federal, state and local taxes;
and
      8.   The proposed return on equity and actual interest expense paid by
the franchisee.
   F.   Equipment Costs Not Included: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
franchisee is not required to submit the cost of service specified in
subsection E of this section for equipment rates, and instead initially shall
complete, submit and support the costs of equipment using applicable FCC forms.
Any cost of service submitted to justify basic service rates must show that the
cost of service does not include equipment costs. (Ord. 93-19)
7-5-3: INITIAL MUNICIPALITY REVIEW:
   A.   Notice: After receiving a rate filing, the municipality promptly shall
publish a notice that a filing has been received and that, except for those
parts which may be withheld as proprietary, it is available for public review.
The notice shall state that interested parties may comment on the filing, and
shall provide all interested parties seven (7) days to submit written comments
on the filing. The municipality shall submit comments received and
recommendations for action to the governing body no later than twenty (20) days
after the filing and shall make those comments and recommendations available
for public inspection. The franchisee may submit a response to public comments
or the municipality's recommendations, but must do so no later than five (5)
days after the municipality's recommendations are submitted to the governing
body and the franchisee. The response shall be filed with the municipality, and
if submitted in a timely fashion, shall be forwarded to the governing body. The
governing body may provide for a public hearing to receive additional input
from all parties if it so desires.
   B.   Written Order: Within thirty (30) days of the date of the filing, the
governing body shall issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form,
approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in
whole or in part; or tolling the proposed rate in whole or in part. If the
governing body denies a proposed rate, it should provide a written explanation.
If the governing body tolls the rate in whole or in part, its written order at
least shall explain that it requires additional time to review the rate filing
and state that the franchisee may cure any deficiency in its filing by
submitting a supplementary filing. With respect to existing rates, "tolling"
means the rates may remain in effect, subject to refund; with respect to rate
changes, "tolling" means the portion of the rate change that is tolled may not
go into effect. (Ord. 93-19)
7-5-4: SUPPLEMENTARY FILINGS:
   A.   If a proposed rate is tolled in whole or in part, the franchisee shall
submit a supplementary filing twenty (20) days from the date the tolling order
was issued, containing corrections, if any, to its filing (including any
required supplement to its cost of service filing) and any response to
information filed by interested parties or to the recommendations of the
municipality and any additional information supporting the proposed rate.
Supplementary filings must be filed in accordance with subsection B of this
section.
   B.   A supplementary filing also must contain such reasonable information as
the municipality directs the franchisee to provide.
   C.   In addition to information the municipality requires the franchisee to
provide, and unless the municipality grants a waiver of this provision, a
franchisee who claimed that it is entitled under applicable federal law to a
rate in whole or in part based upon the adjustments for inflation and external
costs contemplated by 47 CFR section 76.922(d)(1), (2), or as amended, must
submit the following:
      1.   A calculation showing how each part of the adjustment was derived;
      2.   A statement itemizing each external cost (as defined by FCC
regulations), the amount of that external cost for the two (2) calendar years
prior to the date of the filing and the year to date in which the filing is
made; and the projected amount of the external cost for the remainder of the
year in which the filing is made and for the following calendar year. The
statement must specifically show any increases in revenues from programming
services;
      3.   If the increase is attributable to any increase in programming
service costs, the contract for each programming service whose cost has
increased; a sworn statement identifying each programming service whose costs
increased where the programmer is an affiliate of the franchisee (as defined by
FCC regulations); and, for any contract that has been in effect less than
twelve (12) months, the prior contract for the service; and
      4.   A sworn statement by the franchisee's chief financial officer or an
independent, certified accountant stating that he or she has examined all
external costs (including all programming costs) and has offset against any
increase claimed, the amount of any decrease in external costs, and the amount
by which any increase in external costs was below the GNP-PI, as required by 47
CFR section 76.922(d)(2), or as amended; affirming that the franchisee has only
sought to recover any external cost to the extent that cost exceeded the GNP-
PI; and affirming that the franchisee has not attempted to recover any increase
in the cost of programming purchase by an affiliate, except as provided in 47
CFR section 76.922(d)(2)(vi), or as amended.
   D.   Upon receiving the supplementary filing, the municipality promptly
shall publish a notice that a filing has been received and that it is available
for public review (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary).
The notice shall state that interested parties may comment on the filing, and
shall provide interested parties twenty (20) days to submit written comments on
the filing. The municipality shall submit comments received and recommendations
for action to the governing body. The recommendations shall be made available
for public inspection. The franchisee may submit a response to public comments
or the municipality's recommendations, but must do so no later than ten (10)
days after the municipality's recommendations are submitted to the governing
body.
   E.   The governing body shall issue a written order, which may be in any
lawful form, approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the
proposed rate in whole or in part; or allowing the rate to go into effect in
whole or in part, subject to refund. If the governing body denies a proposed
rate, it shall provide a written explanation. If the governing body issues an
order allowing the rates to go into effect subject to refund, it shall also
direct the franchisee to maintain an accounting in accordance with 47 CFR
section 76.933, or as amended.
   F.   The order specified in subsection E of this section shall be issued
ninety (90) days after the tolling order for any rate the franchisee justifies
based on the FCC benchmark. The order shall be issued within one hundred fifty
(150) days of the tolling order for any rate the franchisee justifies with a
cost of service showing. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE III.  PROVISIONS GENERALLY APPLICABLE TO RATE ORDERS
7-5-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATE ORDERS, ETC.:
   A.   Any rate order of the governing body shall be effective upon approval
by the governing body and any publication required given the manner in which
the order was adopted. Each rate order shall be released to the public and the
franchisee. In any case where the governing body approves, denies or tolls a
rate, orders that a rate may go into effect subject to refund, or orders
refunds or establishes rates, a public notice shall be published by the
municipality stating that the order has been issued and is available for
review. Any such order shall be in writing.
   B.   The governing body may take any steps it is not prohibited from taking
by federal law to protect the public interest as part of any rate order or by
any other means. By way of illustration and not limitation, it may require
refunds, set rates and impose forfeitures and penalties directly or through its
delegated representatives, and enforce refund orders. No penalties shall be
imposed, however, based only on a finding that the franchisee filed for
approval of rates later found to be unreasonable. Any order prescribing a rate
must explain why the franchisee's proposed rate was unreasonable and why the
prescribed rate is reasonable. However, before prescribing a rate or ordering a
refund to subscribers, the governing body shall ensure the franchisee has had
notice and opportunity to comment on the proposed rate or refunds. If the
recommendations of the municipality propose a specific rate, mailing a copy of
the recommendation to the franchisee at the time it is submitted to the
governing body shall be deemed to provide notice, and the franchisee must
comment on the refund or rate in its response to the recommendations.
   C.   No order approving or setting a rate using the FCC benchmark shall be
interpreted to establish the just and reasonable rate to subscribers. Every
such rate approved or established shall be subject to further reduction and the
refund to the extent permitted under applicable laws and regulations, as the
same may be amended from time to time. By way of illustration and not
limitation, should the FCC reduce the benchmark, the municipality shall have
the right to reduce a franchisee's rates and to require the franchisee to
refund any amounts collected above the benchmark, except to the extent
prohibited by federal law. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE IV.  DUTIES OF THE FRANCHISEE
7-5-6: DUTIES OF THE FRANCHISEE; GENERALLY:
   A.   Remedial Requirements: A franchisee must implement remedial
requirements, including prospective rate reductions and refunds, within sixty
(60) days of the date the governing body issues an order mandating a remedy.
   B.   Certification Required: Within ninety (90) days of the date an order
mandating a remedy is issued, a franchisee must file a certification, signed by
an authorized representative of the cable company stating:
      1.   Whether the franchisee has complied fully with all provisions of the
governing body's order;
      2.   Describing in detail the precise measures taken to implement the
governing body's order; and
      3.   Showing how refunds (including interest) were calculated and
distributed.
   C.   Books And Records: It is each franchisee's responsibility to keep books
and records of account so that it can refund any amounts owed to subscribers.
   D.   Complete Filing Required: It is each franchisee's duty to submit as
complete a filing as possible, and knowingly withholding information or making
a filing that is incomplete under applicable law shall be treated as an evasion
of these regulations.
   E.   Information Requests:
      1.   A franchisee and any other entity that has records of revenues or
expenses that are allocated to the franchisee's system must respond to requests
for information from the municipality by deadlines established by the
municipality. A franchisee is responsible for ensuring that such other entity
responds to the municipality's requests.
         a.   All notices or other information requested by these regulations
or by the municipal representative shall be mailed to the person so appointed
by the mayor, or to the mayor in the absence of a specific appointment;
provided, that any notices triggering a response due in ten (10) days or less
shall be sent via overnight mail, hand delivered or sent via fax with telephone
confirmation to the local office.
      2.   Because federal law limits the time available for an initial
response to a filing by a franchisee before the order contemplated by article
II of this chapter issues, the franchisee must be prepared to respond to
written requests for information regarding its filing within five (5) days of
the date an information request is provided to the franchisee. The information
may include the information the franchisee would be required to provide as part
of any supplementary filing. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE V.  DUTIES OF THE MUNICIPALITY
7-5-7: DUTIES OF THE MUNICIPALITY; GENERALLY:
The municipality shall be responsible for administering the provisions herein.
Without limitation and by way of illustration:
   A.   The municipality shall ensure notices are given to the public and each
franchisee as required herein and by FCC regulations;
   B.   The municipality may submit requests for information to the franchisee
and establish deadlines for responses;
   C.   For good cause, the municipality may waive any provision herein or
extend any deadline for filing or response except as to such matters that are
mandatory under FCC regulations;
   D.   The municipality shall rule on any request for confidentiality; and
   E.   The municipality shall prepare the recommendations to the governing
body contemplated by sections 7-5-3 and 7-5-4 of this chapter. If the
municipality recommends that any increase be denied in whole or in part, the
representative shall:
      1.   Propose a rate and explain the basis for its recommendation or the
municipality may propose that rates remain at existing levels or a lower level;
      2.   Recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue; and
      3.   Notify the franchisee of the recommendations at the time they are
submitted to the governing body. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE VI.  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
7-5-8: REQUEST AND PRODUCTION:
   A.   If these provisions or any request for information requires the
production of proprietary information, the franchisee must produce the
information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is
submitted, a franchisee may request that specific, identified portions of its
response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The
request must state the reason why the information should be treated as
proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for
confidentiality will be granted if the municipality determines that the
preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the
provisions of the freedom of information act, 5 USC section 552, or as amended.
The municipality shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that
results in information being withheld. If the franchisee requests
confidentiality and the request is denied:
      1.   Where the franchisee is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw
the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be
returned to it; or
      2.   The franchisee may seek review within five (5) working days of the
denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed
pending review.
   B.   Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as
proprietary. The municipality shall weigh the policy considerations favoring
nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of
the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify by certified or
registered mail the requesting entity and the cable franchisee that submitted
the information as to the disposition of the request. The municipality may
grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the franchisee may
seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum.
Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE VII.  PETITION FOR CHANGES IN STATUS
7-5-9: PETITION AND CONSIDERATION:
Any franchisee may petition for a change in status in accordance with 47 CFR
section 76.915, or as amended, and the municipality shall consider that
petition in accordance with 47 CFR section 76.915, or as amended. The petition
and three (3) copies must be filed with the municipal representative. (Ord. 93-
19)
ARTICLE VIII.  PENALTIES AND FORFEITURES
7-5-10: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION, FRAUD AND EVASION:
   A.   Except as prohibited by federal law, a franchisee shall be subject to
penalties and forfeitures under section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Any request for approval of a rate may be denied if the franchisee:
      1.   Knowingly submits false or fraudulent information to the
municipality in connection with any rate proceeding;
      2.   Fails to comply with any lawful order or request of the
municipality, including, but not limited to, a request for information
concerning an order setting rates; or
      3.   Evades or attempts to evade federal or local rate regulation;
provided, that filing for approval of a rate that is later determined to be
unreasonable is not in and of itself an evasion of federal or local rate
regulation. (Ord. 93-19)
ARTICLE IX.  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
7-5-11: MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS REQUIRED FROM CABLE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Cable System Office Hours And Telephone Availability:
      1.   Telephone Services:
         a.   The franchisee will maintain a local, toll free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four
(24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
         b.   Trained company representatives will be available to respond to
customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
         c.   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained company representative on the next business day.
         d.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred,
transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be
met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
         e.   The franchisee will not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards
above, unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to
comply.
         f.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
      2.   Customer Service Centers And Bill Payment Locations: Customer
service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal
business hours and will be conveniently located.
   B.   Installations, Outages And Service Calls:
      1.   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards
will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time measured on a
quarterly basis:
         a.   Standard installations will be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those
that are located up to one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the existing
distribution system.
         b.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the franchisee, the
franchisee will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event
later than twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The
franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next
business day after notification of the service problem.
         c.   The appointment window alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. (The
franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside
of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
         d.   A franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
         e.   If a franchisee representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary,
at a time which is convenient for the customer.
   C.   Communications Between The Franchisee And Cable Subscribers:
      1.   Notification To Subscribers:
         a.   The franchisee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
            (1)   Products and services offered;
            (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
            (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
            (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
            (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
            (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office.
         b.   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the
cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of
thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control
of the franchisee. In addition, the franchisee shall notify subscribers thirty
(30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information
required by the preceding subsection.
      2.   Billing:
         a.   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.
         b.   In case of a billing dispute, the franchisee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
      3.   Refunds:
         a.   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
            (1)   The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
            (2)   The return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee if
service is terminated.
      4.   Credits:
         a.   Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
   D.   Definitions:
    NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business
hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of the franchisee. These conditions which are not within the control of
the franchisee include power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. These conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay per view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods,
and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
   E.   Customer Service Obligations: Nothing in these customer service
standards should be construed to prevent or prohibit:
      1.   The governing body and a franchisee from agreeing to customer
service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in subsections A
through D of this section;
      2.   The governing body from enforcing, through the end of the franchise
term, preexisting customer service requirements that exceed the standards set
forth in subsections A through D of this section and are contained in current
franchise agreements;
      3.   Any state or the governing body from enacting or enforcing any
consumer protection law, to the extent not specifically preempted herein; or
      4.   The establishment or enforcement of any state or municipal law or
regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service
requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed by, the standards
set forth in subsections A through D of this section. (Ord. 93-19)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICITY
SECTION:
Article I.  In General
8-1-1: Trimming Of Trees, Shrubs And Bushes; Improvements
8-1-2: Interference With Wiring, Etc., By Unlicensed Persons
8-1-3: Permit Required For Electrical Work; Application; Issuance
8-1-4: Permit Required For Electrical Work; Plans And Specifications
8-1-5: Permit Required For Electrical Work; Defective Work
8-1-6: Wiring Interfering With Building Specifications
8-1-7: Inspection Fees
Article II.  Municipal Electrical Supply
8-1-8: General Conditions Governing City Supplied Utilities
8-1-9: Meter And Service Deposits
8-1-10: Temporary Service
8-1-11: Bridging Or Interfering With Meters
Article III.  Rates And Charges For Electrical Current Furnished By City
8-1-12: Collector
8-1-13: Schedule Of Rates
8-1-14: Payment Of Bills
8-1-15: Standards And Policy
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
8-1-1: TRIMMING OF TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES; IMPROVEMENTS:
All property owners within the city limits shall keep their trees, shrubs and
bushes situated on their property trimmed from time to time in such a manner
that there shall be proper clearance between all electrical lines and any
portion of the trees, shrubs and bushes. Said trees, shrubs and bushes shall be
so trimmed that none of the branches, twigs or leaves of same shall come in
contact with or in any way interfere with the wires or other equipment upon
said electrical lines. Said trees, shrubs and bushes in the streets and alleys
shall be trimmed by the city at its expense. Should a property owner fail to
properly trim the trees, shrubs and bushes located on the owner's property, the
city may go upon the said property owner's property to do the necessary
trimming and the city will bear all costs and expenses involved in doing so.
In no event shall any homeowner, contractor, developer or resident place
structures, trees, shrubs, bushes, fences, or any other permanent structure in
a utility right of way or easement without the written permission of the
utility company holding said right of way or easement. If existing structures,
trees, bushes, shrubs, fences or any other structure are located in a utility
right of way or easement and are deemed to obstruct utility maintenance or
operation, they shall be removed upon reasonable request from the utility or
the city at the property owner's expense. If the property owner does not remove
the structure, trees, shrubs, bushes, fences, or any other permanent structure
within the time frame of the reasonable request, the obstruction will be
removed at the property owner's expense. Any obstruction placed on a utility
easement or right of way without express written permission of the utility that
becomes damaged through necessary utility activity on said right of way will
not be repaired or replaced by the utility or the city.
Any property owner who fails to trim trees, shrubs or bushes located on their
property, and refuses to allow the city to do so, within ten (10) days after
having been given written notice by the city that same interfere with the city
electrical lines, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-22, 12-2-2008)
8-1-2: INTERFERENCE WITH WIRING, ETC., BY UNLICENSED PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, contractor, workman or any other person not
licensed to do electrical wiring as provided herein, to interfere with any
electrical wiring or metering apparatus in or on any building in any manner
whatsoever. (Ord. 2004-08, 8-2-2004)
8-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL WORK; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring in any building,
nor shall any building be wired for the placing of any electric lights, motors,
heating devices or any apparatus requiring the use of electrical current, nor
shall any alterations be made in the wiring of any building after inspection
without first notifying the building official or designee and securing a permit
therefor. Minor repair work, alterations costing twenty five dollars ($25.00)
or less, or additions of three (3) outlets or less, and not requiring
additional circuits need not be inspected, but must be reported to the building
official or designee. Within the fire limits, however, such additions and
alterations shall be inspected, but no inspection fees will be required.
Applications for such permits describing such work shall be made by the person
installing the same on application blanks furnished by the city. The permit,
when issued, shall be to such applicant. (Ord. 2004-08, 8-2-2004)
8-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL WORK; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The architect and builder are required to furnish such plans and specifications
for proposed electrical work as may be deemed necessary by the building
official or designee before any permit for the same shall be issued. (Ord.
2004-08, 8-2-2004)
8-1-5: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL WORK; DEFECTIVE WORK:
Any person engaged in the business of electrical construction and of the
installation of wiring and apparatus for electric lights, heat or power in the
city who shall fail to promptly correct any defects in his work, after having
been so notified by the building official or designee, shall not receive any
further permits until such defects have been corrected; and in any case in
which any person shall continue to or persistently violate the provisions of
this article, he shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code until he has complied with all the rules and provisions of
this article to the satisfaction of the building official or designee. (Ord.
2004-08, 8-2-2004)
8-1-6: WIRING INTERFERING WITH BUILDING SPECIFICATIONS:
If, in any case, the wiring is in such a position as to interfere with the
completion of the buildings as called for by specifications, the wiring
contractor must be notified to have it changed. (Ord. 2004-08, 8-2-2004)
8-1-7: INSPECTION FEES:
All work done pursuant to or under any permits described in section 8-1-3 of
this chapter shall be inspected by the building official or designee, who shall
charge and collect therefor a minimum fee. (Ord. 2004-08, 8-2-2004)
ARTICLE II.  MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SUPPLY
8-1-8: GENERAL CONDITIONS GOVERNING CITY SUPPLIED UTILITIES:
   A.   Execution Of Contract For Purchase Of Electricity For Use By The City:
The mayor and city council shall sign and execute any contract that may be made
with any utility, federal or state agency, department or any municipality or
joint powers board concerning the purchase of electrical energy for use by the
city that may be approved by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Service Nontransferable Without Advance Approval: The electrical
service furnished by the city is intended to be used by the actual customer
that has entered into the contract with the city for the uses contemplated by
the rate category of the service. This service is not to be resold, assigned,
used or extended off of the tract of land served for the use or benefit of any
other individual, corporation or other entity in advance of receiving the
specific written approval of the city administrator or his/her designee.
   C.   Changes In Property Ownership: In the case of a change in ownership of
any property to which the city of Cody provides utility services, it is the
responsibility of the new owner/transferee to establish a utility account by
completing an application for utility service and complying with the deposit
requirements as outlined in section 8-1-9 of this chapter as of the date of
sale, transfer or conveyance. If the new owner/transferee establishes the
utility account after the date of sale, transfer or conveyance the new owner/
transferee shall be responsible for payment of all charges incurred back to the
date of sale, transfer or conveyance of the property. In the event the new
owner/transferee fails to comply with the application and deposit requirements
the city of Cody reserves the right to establish a utility account in the name
of the new owner/transferee. In the case of foreclosures, the date of sale,
transfer or conveyance shall be the date of the foreclosure sale as confirmed
by the Park County sheriff's office.
   D.   Changes In Property Tenancy: In cases where a tenant is provided
utility services by the city of Cody and the services are billed in the
tenant's name it is the responsibility of the tenant to notify the city of Cody
in advance of when the tenant occupies or vacates the property and requests to
start or terminate utility service. A tenant's services may be terminated by
the city of Cody without a request from the tenant if notification is received
from a landlord or property owner or upon receipt of an application for utility
service from a new tenant. If a tenant fails to notify the city of Cody to
terminate services as of the actual date the tenant vacated the property, the
city of Cody shall terminate services as of the date the notice to terminate is
received. The tenant shall be responsible for all charges incurred through the
date of termination and no adjustment of charges shall be made to a tenant's
bill for a tenant's failure to provide a timely termination notice to the city
of Cody as required.
   E.   Service Application: A service application for each service address is
required to be completed by all individuals, governmental entities and
commercial businesses requesting utility services from the city of Cody. If a
risk assessment is performed to determine the required deposit amount, the
applicant shall pay a ten dollar ($10.00) application fee. An applicant and/or
coapplicant receiving service at a new service address must pay any and all
outstanding utility debts he/she may have accrued in the city before a new
service may be started. (Ord. 2016-02, 2-16-2016)
8-1-9: METER AND SERVICE DEPOSITS:
   A.   Residential Service Accounts: Applicants have the following service
deposit options:
      1.   A credit risk assessment/identity verification check may be
performed on all individual applicants and coapplicants per service address
prior to a utility account being established. The deposit amount shall be based
on a risk assessment credit scoring model provided by a credit rating company
contracted by the city. The deposit schedule shall be as follows:
 
Risk Assessment Score Deposit Amount
10% or less           No deposit required
11% to 50%            $200.00
51% and above         400.00
 
      2.   In lieu of a service deposit, residential service applicants and
coapplicants who have an active residential city of Cody utility account which
reflects good payment history may forgo the risk assessment and have the
deposit waived.
      3.   Residential service applicants and coapplicants who do not meet the
credit history criteria and who do not wish to undergo a credit risk assessment
scoring or who do not wish to provide their social security number to establish
a utility account may instead pay in advance a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
deposit which will be held on the account until the customer terminates
service. The deposit shall be used at the termination of service to cover any
amounts owed to the city by the customer. Any remaining deposit balance shall
be refunded to the customer.
In the case of rental property, the service application, credit risk
assessment/identity verification and application fee is not required for the
transfer of services from a tenant's account to the property owner's account.
   B.   Commercial Service And Construction Service Accounts: Applicants have
the following service deposit options:
      1.   A deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per service address.
      2.   In lieu of a service deposit, commercial service and construction
service applicants and coapplicants who have an active commercial city of Cody
utility account which reflects good payment history may have the deposit
waived.
      3.   Commercial service and construction service applicants and
coapplicants who do not meet the credit history criteria and do not wish to pay
the five hundred dollar ($500.00) service deposit may instead provide a
personal guarantee from the business owner or officer of the business and
undergo a risk assessment scoring to determine the amount of the deposit. The
guarantor shall remain on the account as a responsible party for securing
payment until a new application for service is received by the city identifying
and signed by a new guarantor or the account shows good payment history. It is
the responsibility of the customer to provide new guarantor information to the
city or request that a guarantor be released from responsibility due to good
payment history. If a risk assessment is performed the deposit schedule shall
be as follows:
 
Risk Assessment Score Deposit Amount
10% or less           No deposit required
11% to 50%            $200.00
51% and above         400.00
 
      4.   In addition to the deposit requirements, commercial service and
construction service applicants and coapplicants whose business is structured
as a sole proprietorship or partnership are required to provide a personal
guarantee from the business owner regardless of the deposit option selected.
For construction service accounts only, multi-unit structures such as duplexes,
triplexes and apartment complexes shall be considered one service address for
the purpose of this section.
   C.   Governmental Entities: Governmental entities are exempt from the
deposit requirements for both residential and commercial services. For the
purpose of this section a "governmental entity" is defined as an agency,
instrumentality, or other political subdivision of federal, state, or local
government (including multijurisdictional agencies, instrumentalities, and
entities).
   D.   Service Deposits: Service deposits shall be applied to the customer's
utility account(s) after eighteen (18) consecutive months if the account
reflects good payment history. If not already applied, service deposits shall
be used at the termination of service to cover any amounts owed to the city by
the customer. Any remaining deposit balance shall be refunded to the customer.
As per Wyoming Statutes section 15-7-409, interest will not be paid to
customers who post a service deposit.
   E.   Rental Property: In the case of rental property, the deposit shall be
made either by the owner of the property, by his/her agent on his/her behalf or
by the party renting the property as they may agree. In the event that service
is to be discontinued as a result of the failure of the utility customer to pay
the utility bills, notice of the impending disconnect shall be given to the
owner if the owner has requested in writing that he/she be notified in the
event his/her renter fails to pay utility bills. Service will be rendered for
periods in which the property is vacant for any reason and the owner of the
property will be assessed all utility charges incurred at the particular
property. The property owner shall be responsible for paying all utility
charges incurred during the time a property is vacant or in between tenants. If
these charges become delinquent utility service may be disconnected and the
utility account will remain in the property owner's name and service will not
be provided to a tenant until any and all delinquent charges for that property
are paid in full.
   F.   Utility Accounts In Bankruptcy Protection: Customers with city of Cody
utility accounts in bankruptcy protection may be required to provide a deposit
or other "assurance of payment" as outlined in U.S. Code title 11, chapter 3,
subchapter IV, section 366 to continue receiving utility service. The assurance
of payment shall be the maximum deposit amount for residential and commercial
service as outlined in subsections A and B of this section.
   G.   Good Payment History: For the purpose of establishing a utility
account, "good credit history" is defined as: Beginning from the date of the
new application there must be eighteen (18) consecutive months of utility
payments on the applicant's and/or coapplicant's active utility account during
which there have been no more than one late payment, no payments returned for
any reason, and no nonpay disconnect letters or nonpay disconnections. (Ord.
2016-02, 2-16-2016)
8-1-10: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
Any person desiring temporary lighting and power service from the city during
the construction activities before permanent power is installed shall pay a
nonrefundable temporary meter fee of one hundred five dollars ($105.00)
(single-phase or 3-phase) for the installation of the meter. The usage and base
charges for the temporary meter will depend on the classification of the type
of service requested. If the service will be used for primarily commercial use,
the applicants will pay for the temporary electrical service at the commercial
electric rate. If the service will primarily be used for residential use, the
applicant will pay for the temporary electrical service at the residential
rate. In addition to the temporary meter fee, accounts established with
temporary meters are also subject to the deposit requirements as outlined in
section 8-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-02, 3-17-2015)
8-1-11: BRIDGING OR INTERFERING WITH METERS:
   A.   Any person who shall remove, alter, scrape, bare, change or connect any
device, wire or fixture to any electric power wire of the city before such wire
reaches the meter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who shall break
any meter seal or the wire holding any meter seal or open any electric meter or
change the dials or hands thereof, or break the glass in an electric meter,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who attaches any device to any
electric meter designed or used to prevent electric current from flowing
through such meter or shall shunt across the wires of any electric meter, or
close the loops thereof, or who shall by any system of wires or devices attempt
to use any electric current without having the same pass through the meter in
such a way as to permit the full registration and metering of such electric
current, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies available against any individual
convicted of a violation of subsection A of this section, and in every case in
which an electric meter is found to be in any of the conditions described in
subsection A of this section which could affect the meter's operational
accuracy, precision and ability to measure current, the City shall discontinue
the service at the affected meter and the individual shall forfeit any deposit
posted for the said meter; provided, however, that the City shall first give
the affected customer five (5) days' written notice that his service shall be
discontinued and the customer shall have three (3) days from the date of
receipt of the said notice to file a written request for a hearing with the
City Administrator or his/her designee to show cause why his electrical utility
service should not be disconnected and discontinued. Notification shall be
accomplished by, and be complete upon, posting the written notice of
termination upon the affected meter or by depositing a copy thereof, postage
prepaid in the U.S. mail, duly addressed to the customer at the address used by
the City for utility bills in the case of an individual who has a utility
account with the City. If the affected customer can show that his meter is not
in the condition described in subsection A of this section then his service
shall be reconnected and his meter deposit reinstated. The entire balance, if
any, of an affected customer's utility account with the City shall become
immediately due and payable upon discontinuation of the said service pursuant
to this section. A new meter deposit must be posted and the actual cost of
repairing the affected meter must be paid to the City once the meter is
repaired before electrical service may be resumed at the same location. In
addition, the customer shall pay for the estimated usage he should have
received during the period of time when his meter was not functioning
correctly, based upon the average billing for the period of time in question
based on the said customer's previous billing experience with the City. If the
customer has insufficient billing experience with the City from which to derive
an estimated amount of usage based on previous experience, then and in that
event, he shall pay an amount determined by the average electricity usage for
that type of service of similarly situated City electrical utility customers
over the period of time in question.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of each customer supplied with
electricity to keep the electric meter accessible for reading, inspection,
replacement, repairing or testing. If the customer fails to keep the meter
accessible within ten (10) business days from the date of the written notice,
the City may terminate the electric service. Notice of the lack of
accessibility shall be given by either posting written notice on the door of
the residence, or mailing notice by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid to
the last known address of the customer. In the event the accessibility
situation creates an emergency or safety issue, the City reserves the right to
terminate the electricity immediately. (Ord. 2015-02, 3-17-2015)
ARTICLE III.  RATES AND CHARGES FOR ELECTRICAL CURRENT FURNISHED BY CITY
8-1-12: COLLECTOR:
   A.   The administrative services officer or his/her designee shall be the
collector of all City utility bills and is authorized to enter into agreements,
on behalf of the City, for the payment of past due accounts, including all
applicable charges, on reasonable terms and conditions and to consolidate and
equalize customers' utility payments.
   B.   The administrative services officer or his/her designee, with the
approval of the City Administrator or his/her designee, shall be authorized to
enter into agreements and assign applicable rates to adjust individual customer
accounts. This may happen from time to time as necessary when a customer had
been placed on an incorrect rate. (Ord. 2016-08, 6-21-2016)
8-1-13: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
A.   Beginning with all bills generated on or after October 1, 2019, the rates
for metered electricity sold within the City limits shall be as follows:
 
Customer Classification Monthly Base Fee 1 Energy Fee 2 Demand Fee 3
Residential service rate                 $27.50 $0.8860 n/a
Commercial service rate                  $31.50 $0.0821 n/a
Demand service rate                      $45.00 $0.0428 n/a
City commercial service rate             $31.50 $0.0821 n/a
City demand service rate                 $45.00 $0.0428 n/a
Commercial demand service rate           -      -       $17.50
City commercial demand service rate      -      -       $17.50
Electric commercial special service rate -      -       $17.50
Irrigation service rate                  $4.00  $0.0860 n/a
Security lights                          $3.50  $0.0860 n/a
Notes:
1.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2019, each customer
classification shall pay a monthly customer charge as indicated.
2.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2019, each customer
class shall pay the energy fee indicated for each kilowatt hour used per month
or as estimated by City staff regarding security lights.
3.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2019, each customer
shall pay a monthly demand charge as indicated per kilowatt of demand as shown
or computed from the readings of the City's demand meter installed at the
customer's location for the 15 minute period of customer's greatest use during
the billing period.
4.   Customers requesting or transferring service of more than 200 amperes
shall be billed under this demand rate. The Public Works Director or his/her
designee shall recommend to the administrative services officer the rate
classification for new commercial customers requesting electrical service,
based on the customer's energy and demand requirements.
 
   Beginning with all bills generated on or after October 1, 2020, the rates
for metered electricity sold within the City limits shall be as follows:
 
Customer Classification Monthly Base Fee 1 Energy Fee 2 Demand Fee 3
Residential service rate                 $24.00 $0.0925 n/a
Commercial service rate                  $31.75 0.0851  n/a
Demand service rate                      $60.00 $0.0462 n/a
City commercial service rate             $31.50 $0.0821 n/a
City demand service rate                 $60.00 $0.0462 n/a
Commercial demand service rate           -      -       $17.00
City commercial demand service rate      -      -       $17.00
Electric commercial special service rate -      -       $17.00
Irrigation service rate                  $5.00  $0.0925 n/a
Security lights                          $4.00  $0.0925 n/a
Notes:
1.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2020, each customer
classification shall pay a monthly customer charge as indicated.
2.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2020, each customer
class shall pay the energy fee indicated for each kilowatt hour used per month
or as estimated by City staff regarding security lights.
3.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2020, each customer
shall pay a monthly demand charge as indicated per kilowatt of demand as shown
or computed from the readings of the City's demand meter installed at the
customer's location for the 15 minute period of customer's greatest use during
the billing period.
4.   Customers requesting or transferring service of more than 200 amperes
shall be billed under this demand rate. The Public Works Director or his/her
designee shall recommend to the administrative services officer the rate
classification for new commercial customers requesting electrical service,
based on the customer's energy and demand requirements.
 
   Beginning with all bills generated on or after October 1, 2021, the rates
for metered electricity sold within the City limits shall be as follows:
 
Customer Classification Monthly Base Fee 1 Energy Fee 2 Demand Fee 3
Residential service rate                 $20.50 $0.0989 n/a
Commercial service rate                  $32.00 $0.0882 n/a
Demand service rate                      $75.00 $0.0497 n/a
City commercial service rate             $32.00 $0.0882 n/a
City demand service rate                 $75.00 $0.0497 n/a
Commercial demand service rate           -      -       $16.50
City commercial demand service rate      -      -       $16.50
Electric commercial special service rate -      -       $16.50
Irrigation service rate                  $6.00  $0.0989 n/a
Security lights                          $4.50  $0.0989 n/a
Notes:
1.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2021, each customer
classification shall pay a monthly customer charge as indicated.
2.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2021, each customer
class shall pay the energy fee indicated for each kilowatt hour used per month
or as estimated by City staff regarding security lights.
3.   For electrical usage billed on or after October 1, 2021, each customer
shall pay a monthly demand charge as indicated per kilowatt of demand as shown
or computed from the readings of the City's demand meter installed at the
customer's location for the 15 minute period of customer's greatest use during
the billing period.
4.   Customers requesting or transferring service of more than 200 amperes
shall be billed under this demand rate. The Public Works Director or his/her
designee shall recommend to the administrative services officer the rate
classification for new commercial customers requesting electrical service,
based on the customer's energy and demand requirements.
 
   B.   Service Charges: The following charges apply to all levels of service
in addition to any other charges:
 
Connection, reconnection or disconnection of meter:                              
   Normal office hours (7:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.)                              $35.00
   Other than normal office hours                                            $110.00
Trouble calls on customer owned equipment:
   Normal office hours (7:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.)                              No
                                                                                charge
   Other than normal office hours (for first 2 hours, actual labor costs for $110.00
work in excess of 2 hours)
Temporary service connection: Single and 3-phase                                $105.00
Returned payment charge                                                         $30.00
Testing of meters more than once at customer's request in a 12 month period,    $50.00
where meter is found to be accurate within 2 percent
 
(Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-07, 9-3-2019)
8-1-14: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
   A.   All bills for the rates and charges of all utility services furnished
by the City shall be due fifteen (15) days from the billing date. All bills
shall be delinquent on the sixteenth day thereafter. Delinquent turnoff
procedures shall commence after the thirty fifth day after the bill date and
service will be turned off on the forty fifth day after the bill date or on the
next scheduled disconnect date unless payment is made before that date except
for cases of extreme hardship where adjustments/agreements can be made with the
administrative services officer or his/her designee or during any period of
extreme weather. Extreme weather occurs when the average temperature is or is
expected to be equal to or less than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) for a
period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
The administrative services officer or his/her designee shall determine if
extreme weather is occurring or is expected and adjust disconnections or order
reconnections appropriately. Where adjustments require additional reconnections
and/or disconnections due to extreme weather, they shall be performed without
additional fees or charges.
   B.   In the event that a bill becomes delinquent, the City shall initiate
the delinquent turnoff procedures and the following charges shall be assessed:
 
Charge for the delivery of the final turnoff notice        $30.00
Disconnection or reconnection of service at meter          35.00
Disconnection or reconnection of service other than meter  50.00
 
   C.   If any utility payment is dishonored for any reason, the customer will
be notified in writing stating that the account must be paid in cash or cash
equivalent within thirty (30) days of the notice. The customer will be shut off
if payment is not received. The same procedure will apply to a second
dishonored payment received within a twelve (12) month period.
Upon receipt of a third dishonored payment, the same procedure will apply and
the customer will be notified in writing that payment in cash or cash
equivalent will be required for payment of all future city bills for all
utility customer charges and other fees.
If any payment is delivered to the city to prevent a shutoff and the payment is
subsequently dishonored the customer will be subject to immediate service
disconnection.
Any customer who fails to pay the amount of the check and the collection fee
pursuant to this section is liable to the city for three (3) times the amount
of the check, but in no case less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), a
collection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) and court costs 1 .
   D.   In the event that any utility service is discontinued for nonpayment of
bills, or receipt of dishonored payment, all applicable charges shall be paid
in full prior to reconnection, as well as any applicable billing charges and
the applicable connection or reconnection fees. A reasonable attorney fee shall
be recovered by the city along with the total delinquent balance, including
penalties and charges for all delinquent city supplied utilities if legal
action is initiated to collect on a delinquent account.
   E.   If the city overcharges any customer as the result of a meter or
metering inaccuracy or other continuing problem under its control, the city
shall initiate a refund to the person(s) paying excessive rates the difference
between the rates fixed in section 8-1-13 of this chapter and the rates so
charged, collected or received. The refund should cover the entire amount of
time the excessive charges were charged, collected or received, or for the
period of time in which there are computerized records. No refund is required
from the city except to the customer last served by the meter prior to when the
error was found.
   F.   If the city undercharges any customer as the result of a meter or
metering inaccuracy or other continuing problem under its control, the city may
only bill the customer for difference between the rates fixed in section 8-1-13
of this chapter and the rates so charged in the six (6) previous billing
periods immediately prior to the date the city remedies the meter or billing
inaccuracy. No adjustments will be made to the customer's account except to the
customer last served by the meter prior to when the error was found.
   G.   In the event that the electric service meter is found to be more than
two percent (2%) in error, either fast or slow, proper correction shall be made
of previous readings and adjusted bills shall be rendered. Since it is
difficult to determine when the meter failed, the administrative services
officer or his/her designee will review the account for the period of time when
the failure appears to be noticeable and will calculate the average usage of
the prior twelve (12) months, and will adjust the account accordingly based on
the average usage. The average usage will be billed and anything billed in
excess of the average or below the average will be adjusted for the time period
determined to be inaccurate. (Ord. 2016-08, 6-21-2016)
8-1-15: STANDARDS AND POLICY:
The electric distribution standards policy dated 2001 and prepared by the
electrical services division of the city is hereby adopted, made a part hereof
by this reference and incorporated herein as if set forth in length; together
with all changes, amendments, replacements or supplements as adopted and
approved by resolution of the governing body.
A copy of said electric distribution standards policy shall be kept on file at
the city hall and marked "Official Copy". (Ord. 2016-08, 6-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 1-1-115.
CHAPTER 2
WATER
SECTION:
Article I. General
8-2-1: Ownership And Control Of Water System; Purpose, Extension Of Water Mains
And Perimeter Water Mains
8-2-2: Duties Of Administrative Services
8-2-3: Permit Required For Use
8-2-4: Tap Fees And Hookup Fees
8-2-5: Duties Of City Relating To Tapping
8-2-6: Inspection Of Work
8-2-7: Specifications For Service Pipes
8-2-8: Consumer Shall Maintain And Protect
8-2-9: Supplying Water To Others
8-2-10: Alterations Or Additions To Conduits, Etc.
8-2-11: Stopcock Specifications
8-2-12: Failure To Pay Charges Where Two Or More Consumers Are On One Service
Pipe
8-2-13: Emergency Supply Required Of Steam Boiler Owners
8-2-14: Use Of Water Forbidden During Emergency
8-2-15: Wasting Water; Leaks To Be Repaired
8-2-16: Right To Suspend Certain Water Uses
8-2-17: Notice When Water Is Shut Off
8-2-18: Right Of Access To Premises
8-2-19: Drinking Fountains
8-2-20: New Work
8-2-21: Irrigation And Sprinkling
8-2-22: Sprinkling Sidewalks
8-2-23: Water On Streets, Sidewalks And Other Public Places
8-2-24: Key To Curb Stop Or Valve
8-2-25: Turning Water On After Turned Off
8-2-26: Turning Water Off For Extension And Repairs
8-2-27: Cross Connections
8-2-28: Interference With Or Damage To Water System
8-2-29: Taking Water Or Diverting Water Without Permission
8-2-30: Tampering, Etc., With Fire Hydrants
8-2-31: Discharging Firearms And Use Of Watercraft
8-2-32: Interpretation Of Chapter
8-2-33: Penalty
Article II. Domestic Service
8-2-34: Water Meters; Required
8-2-35: Water Meters; Installation; Responsibility Of Plumber And Consumer
8-2-36: Water Meters; Plumber's License Required
8-2-37: Water Meters; Inspections; Service Charges
8-2-38: Water Meters; Tampering With Or Denying Access To; Estimated Water
Charge
8-2-39: Water Meters; Method Of Computation Of Readings
8-2-40: Schedule Of Rates And Charges
8-2-41: Schedule Of Rates And Charges; Responsibility For Payment
Article III. Raw Water System
8-2-42: Definitions
8-2-43: Application Of Article
8-2-44: Management Of System
8-2-45: Application For Permission To Take Water
8-2-46: Extension Of System; Use Of Raw Water
8-2-47: Connection Charges; Tap Sizes
8-2-48: Duty Of Water Department To Tap Mains, Etc.
8-2-49: Supplying To Others
8-2-50: Alterations Or Additions To Conduits, Pipes, Etc.
8-2-51: Draining Lines
8-2-52: Right Of Access To Premises
8-2-53: Permit To Install Pipes, Etc.
8-2-54: Times Of Use Of Water; Suspension Of Use
8-2-55: Cross Connections
8-2-56: Schedule Of Rates And Charges; Time Of Payment; Failure To Pay;
Requirement For Meter
8-2-57: Responsible For Payment
Article IV. Special Provisions
8-2-58: Special Use Water Policy
8-2-59: Modified Special Use Water Policy
8-2-60: Governing Body Right To Rescind
ARTICLE I.  GENERAL
8-2-1: OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF WATER SYSTEM; PURPOSE, EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS
AND PERIMETER WATER MAINS:
   A.   The city water system, located inside and outside the corporate limits
of the city, as owned by the city, shall be maintained, controlled and managed
exclusively by the governing body for municipal ownership, the object being to
supply the city with water for the extinguishment of fires, and for supplying
the inhabitants thereof with water for domestic, manufacturing, irrigation and
other purposes.
   B.   All new perimeter water mains, as well as the extensions of any
existing perimeter water mains, shall be done in accordance with and pursuant
to the master water plan adopted by the governing body which is in effect at
that time.
   C.   Definition of a "perimeter water main" is a water line over eight
inches (8") in diameter that is installed for the primary purpose of
transporting water to a new area that is or can be developed into lots for
residential or commercial purposes, but shall not include the water lines,
regardless of size, that are placed within these developing areas.
   D.   The initial installation of all water mains not designated as perimeter
water mains by the city, shall be paid for by the adjacent property owners. The
maintenance of all water mains and lines, other than individual service lines,
shall be borne by the city after initial installation has been made. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-2: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
The administrative services department shall account for the general accounting
of the water fund. This fund shall be charged with all money derived from the
sale of water bonds, from water rents or water revenues, from special taxation,
if any, sale of surplus water department materials and for money that may be
transferred from the general fund or any other fund of the city. This fund
shall be credited for all authorized expenditures for the city water system.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR USE:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or other ordinance, no person
shall knowingly, either directly or indirectly, take water from the city water
system without first making application therefor to the administrative services
department and paying any necessary tap fees and/or hookup fees as hereinafter
provided. Any application for water service outside the established city limits
shall be accompanied by such plans, design and engineering data prepared by an
engineer or firm acceptable to the city that the city may require. The
governing body shall be under no obligation whatsoever to approve an
application by an owner of property outside the established city limits and may
in its sole and absolute discretion deny such an application for any reason or
no reason. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-4: TAP FEES AND HOOKUP FEES:
   A.   If to provide water service it is necessary to tap the water main, the
public works director or his/her designee shall, upon proper proof of
application and proper payment to administrative services, issue a utility
permit for such tap. This tap shall be by three-fourths inch (3/4") or one inch
(1") copper pipe to the curb stop or to the property line. When a larger pipe
than three- fourths inch (3/4") or one inch (1") inside measurement is
demanded, or a further distance than sixty two feet (62') from the water main
is required, or double tapping of the main, the cost shall be increased by the
public works director to such amount as is required to defray the actual costs
of materials and installation. The cost for a three-fourths inch (3/4") tap
will be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus the current rate for patching
any existing pavement, curb, gutter or sidewalk; and for a one inch (1") tap,
one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00), plus the current rate for
patching any existing pavement, curb, gutter or sidewalk.
   B.   Before the water service shall be hooked to a meter and any water
taken, the following hookup charges shall be paid:
      1.   Single-family dwelling unit: Six hundred dollars ($600.00).
      2.   Multiple-family dwelling units, including apartment houses and
motels: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) each for the first two (2) units; two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each unit over two (2), and up to and including
ten (10); one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each unit over ten (10).
      3.   All others: Six hundred dollars ($600.00).
   C.   Provided, that the tap fees and hookup charges for users outside of the
city limits shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the rates set forth in
subsections A and B of this section and pay for any extension, if required, of
the water main.
The owner of any land outside the city limits filing application to use or
extend a water tap purchased prior to July 1977, shall consent to his/her
property being included in any future annexation involving the same. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-5: DUTIES OF CITY RELATING TO TAPPING:
The water department shall tap water mains and insert corporation cocks in
accordance with the requirements governing same, upon receipt of evidence that
applicant has complied with all the tap permit requirements provided for in
section 8-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-6: INSPECTION OF WORK:
The public works director or his/her designee shall be required to inspect all
work done in making service pipe connections with the water mains, in the
laying of same, putting in stop boxes and all other work connected therewith.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-7: SPECIFICATIONS FOR SERVICE PIPES:
All service pipes, including pipes as may be installed from main to curb, must
be copper or Driscopipe 5100, 200 psi, copper tube size. All connections to
Driscopipe are to be made with compression fittings specified by the city water
division. All Driscopipe service lines are to be one continuous piece of pipe
from the main to the curb stop. No service pipes, as herein defined, shall be
installed in the city unless an approved alternative is specifically approved
by the public works director or his/her designee. All service pipes must be
laid at least five feet (5'), properly bedded with three-eighths inch (3/8")
minus pea gravel at least six inches (6") above and below the service line and
under the ground, and in all cases be deep enough to prevent freezing. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-8: CONSUMER SHALL MAINTAIN AND PROTECT:
All consumers shall keep and maintain their service pipes (from the curb stop
or meter pit to the house), stopcocks and all appurtenances connected with the
treated water supply system in good order and protected from damage and frost
at their own expense, and shall prevent any unnecessary waste of water. No
claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of such pipes or
appurtenances.
Normal maintenance of meters shall be performed by the water department. The
consumer shall be required to protect any meter through which he/she receives
water from frost or other injury. The cost of repairs to any meter, occasioned
by lack of ordinary care, shall be borne by the account holder. (Ord. 2009-11,
6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-9: SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHERS:
No consumer shall supply water to other consumers nor suffer them to take or in
any manner use the same off his/her premises. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-
1-2009)
8-2-10: ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO CONDUITS, ETC.:
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any alterations or additions
whatsoever, in or about any conduit or water cock, whether on private property
or not, without permission from the public works director or his/her designee.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-11: STOPCOCK SPECIFICATIONS:
Stopcocks shall be inserted in the service pipe in every case and protected by
a box with a cast iron covering having the word "water" or the letter "W"
marked thereon. Such stopcocks shall be placed inside of the curb and the same
must be visible and flush with the pavement, sidewalk or ground level.
When more than one building is supplied by a single tap by means of branch
service pipes, each branch pipe must have a stopcock with a box and cover
complete, to be located as hereinbefore provided. Each building must be served
by a separate service and tap. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-12: FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES WHERE TWO OR MORE CONSUMERS ARE ON ONE SERVICE
PIPE:
In cases where two (2) or more consumers are supplied with water from the same
service pipe, if either consumer fails to pay the water charges when due, the
water shall be turned off from the service pipe until charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-13: EMERGENCY SUPPLY REQUIRED OF STEAM BOILER OWNERS:
Owners of steam boilers taking water from the city water system are required to
have tanks that will contain an ample supply of water for ten (10) hours in
case the water is shut off for any purpose. The city will not be responsible
for any accidents or damage sustained by reason of failure to comply herewith.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-14: USE OF WATER FORBIDDEN DURING EMERGENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person notified of an alarm or fire, to use water
for landscape fountain, irrigation or sprinkling purposes while the fire
pressure is on the pipes. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-15: WASTING WATER; LEAKS TO BE REPAIRED:
No person shall waste water from the city water system. No leaks in service
pipes, connecting pipes or any water fixture shall be permitted; and, if not
repaired within five (5) days or as otherwise authorized by the public works
director or administrative services director so as to stop such waste of water,
after notice from the public works director or administrative services
director, water shall be shut off and not turned on again until the leak is so
repaired.
Adjustments may be made for water leaks in excess of twenty thousand (20,000)
gallons of water or more. If such leak occurs, the administrative services
department will calculate the account holder's average usage for the prior
twelve (12) month period. The account holder will be charged the regular rate
of water for the average usage and the wholesale rate for the number of gallons
used in excess of the average. If it is determined that the water went into the
ground, and did not go into the sewer system, the same calculation will be
performed for wastewater services and an adjustment will be made on the account
holder's bill for the excess wastewater as a result of the water leak. If the
water did enter the sewer system, no adjustment to wastewater will be made.
Adjustments will only be calculated once the account holder, property owner or
manager repairs the leak. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-16: RIGHT TO SUSPEND CERTAIN WATER USES:
The right is reserved to suspend the use of landscape fountains and hoses for
sprinkling yards, streets and gardens whenever in the opinion of the governing
body the public need requires it. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-17: NOTICE WHEN WATER IS SHUT OFF:
Notice to property owners or tenants by the city, or by any officers or
employees thereof, when water is to be turned off for any official reason,
shall not be required; however, the city will, at its discretion, attempt to
notify property owners or tenants when water is to be shut off from any
premises. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-18: RIGHT OF ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The public works director or his/her designee, chief of police, police
officers, and all other employees and inspectors of the city, shall have free
access at all reasonable hours to enter any premises where water is used, for
the purpose of ascertaining any violations of any of the provisions of this
article, and to install, read or inspect meters. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff.
7-1-2009)
8-2-19: DRINKING FOUNTAINS:
No drinking fountain shall be erected for public use which has openings by
which it can be used as a source of domestic supply. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009,
eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-20: NEW WORK:
The water piping system of each new building and of new work installed in an
existing building shall be separate and independent of that of any other
building. All piping or plumbing installed by the owner shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the plumbing code as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-21: IRRIGATION AND SPRINKLING:
Water for irrigation and sprinkling shall be used only during the period of the
first Monday in May through the first Monday in October, or as determined by
the public works director. No person shall use water from the water system of
the city for lawns, irrigation, sprinkling or by means of a hose in any manner
whatsoever when notified not to do so by the public works director or his/her
designee, or other representatives of the city. When necessary, the governing
body shall have the authority to regulate water used for irrigation and
sprinkling from the city water system. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-22: SPRINKLING SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place a lawn sprinkler, hose or other
sprinkler or irrigating device on his premises at such a place or in such a
manner that the same excessively sprinkles or throws water upon, over or across
any sidewalk. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-23: WATER ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall cause a pool of water, or cause any standing water to be upon
any street, sidewalk, alley or public ground, so as to cause the same to be wet
and muddy, slippery or in any way dangerous or obnoxious. Nor shall any person
permit water to flood, run or trickle from any premises, buildings or grounds,
owned or occupied by him, so as to cause any sidewalk, alley, street or other
public ground, or any part thereof, to become wet, muddy, slippery or otherwise
inconvenient, dangerous or obnoxious. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-24: KEY TO CURB STOP OR VALVE:
No person, except a licensed plumber, employees of other water systems, a city
officer or any employee or contractor acting under the instructions of a city
officer, shall be allowed to use, own or possess a key to a curb stop or to any
other stop or valve controlling water mains or service pipes, the control of
which is assumed by the city. No key of the kind herein described shall be
loaned to any person for any purpose, nor shall such key be allowed to be or
remain in the possession of any individual other than as herein provided. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-25: TURNING WATER ON AFTER TURNED OFF:
When the water has been turned off from any consumer, he/she shall not turn it
on or permit it to be turned on without the consent of the city. (Ord. 2009-11,
6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-26: TURNING WATER OFF FOR EXTENSION AND REPAIRS:
The city reserves the right, through the public works director or his/her
designee, to cause the water to be shut off from the mains, or parts thereof,
when deemed necessary for making extensions, repairs of and connections to the
mains or service pipes. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-27: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   A.   As a sanitary measure, there shall be no water service connection
installed or maintained between a public water supply and any water user
whereby unsafe water or contamination may backflow into the public water
supply.
   B.   All nonresidential connections to any public water supply shall be
protected by the appropriate backflow prevention device in accordance with the
DEQ-WQD.
   C.   All residential connections that include the use of the domestic supply
line for irrigation purposes (tied to an underground sprinkler system) shall be
protected by the appropriate backflow prevention device in accordance with the
DEQ-WQD. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-28: INTERFERENCE WITH OR DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM:
No person shall damage or interfere with the water supply of the city, or with
the pipes, ditches or channels through which it is conveyed, or any valve or
head gate used in connection with the ditches, or any pipe, hydrant or other
appliance used in connection with the water system of the city, or any
reservoir, dam, well, pump, motor, power or transmission line, telephone line
or any other part or property of the water system, whether owned by the city or
privately owned and connected in any way with the city water system. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-29: TAKING WATER OR DIVERTING WATER WITHOUT PERMISSION:
No person shall, without approval of the public works director or his/her
designee, take water from the city water system, or open any stopcock valve or
other fixture connected with the water supply system. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009,
eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-30: TAMPERING, ETC., WITH FIRE HYDRANTS:
No person shall open, close or in any way tamper with any fire hydrant
belonging to the city, except for the purpose of extinguishing fires or under
the direction of the governing body, fire chief or the public works director.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-31: DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND USE OF WATERCRAFT:
   A.   No person shall discharge firearms on or near the City water storage
tanks.
   B.   No person shall operate or use a gas powered watercraft on Beck Lake,
Alkali Lake, Markham and New Cody reservoirs, provided, however, this
restriction shall not apply to the City, its employees and agents when use of
such watercraft is necessary for inspection and maintenance. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-
16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-32: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER:
All questions arising in the interpretation of this chapter shall be decided by
the Public Works Director, with the approval of the City Administrator and the
Governing Body. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-33: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code and, in addition, the water may be shut off on any premises
upon which a violation of this chapter is found to exist and shall not be
turned on until compliance with this chapter is made. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009,
eff. 7-1-2009)
ARTICLE II.  DOMESTIC SERVICE
8-2-34: WATER METERS; REQUIRED:
All water delivered to any water user by means of the water system of the City
shall be measured by a water meter. Not more than one residence, apartment
house, business building or other establishment shall be connected to one
meter. All water meters are, and shall continue to be, the property of the
City, under the jurisdiction of the Water Department. Existing facilities that
have more than one establishment connected to one meter shall be considered
grandfathered until plumbing work is required or backflow requirements are
directed to be installed by the City, at which time the facilities must be
separately metered. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-35: WATER METERS; INSTALLATION; RESPONSIBILITY OF PLUMBER AND CONSUMER:
   A.   Location: All meters shall be installed at an indoor, frost proof
location, except as outlined below. The meters shall be installed by a licensed
plumber in a location accessible for reading and the installation shall be
subject to the approval of the Public Works Director and/or his/her designee.
   B.   Outdoor Installations: When the Public Works Director and/or his/her
designee determines that it is not practical to make an indoor installation as
outlined above, he/she may allow an outdoor installation providing it is made
in accordance with City policy adopted at time of installation. Outdoor
installations shall be made by a licensed plumber and maintained by the
consumer.
   C.   Licensed Plumber Required: When necessary to make any changes in
existing plumbing in order that all water used shall pass through the meter, it
shall be completed by a licensed plumber and paid for by the consumer.
   D.   Installation: The installation of all meters shall be made as provided
in this chapter at the consumer's expense under the direction and approval of
the Public Works Director. Meters shall be issued only to licensed plumbers for
installation in a specified location and such installation shall be made within
thirty (30) days after the issuance of the meter. Plumbers shall be responsible
for the meter until it is installed and has been inspected and accepted by a
representative of the City. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-36: WATER METERS; PLUMBER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall perform any work neither on the installation of plumbing from
the City shutoff or curb cock to the meter, nor on the installation of the
meter unless such person is one of the following: (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009,
eff. 7-1-2009)
   A.   Licensed Plumber: A licensed plumber as provided in section
9-3-1 of this Code;
   B.   Licensed General Contractor: A licensed general contractor as provided
in section
9-3-1 of this Code, and until such person has provided proof of insurance as
provided in section
9-3-5 of this Code. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2019-03,
7-9-2019)
   C.   Insured Excavation Contractor: A contractor that is insured as an
excavation contractor, has provided proof of insurance as provided in section
9-3-5 of this Code, and has been approved by the Public Works Director and/or
his/her designee for this type of work.
   D.   City Hired Contractor: A contractor hired by the City to complete a bid
project that is inspected and supervised by a licensed professional engineer.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-37: WATER METERS; INSPECTIONS; SERVICE CHARGES:
The following charges apply to all levels of service, in addition to any other
charges:
 
Connection and reconnection charge:
 Normal office hours (7:30 A.M. to 5:00  $25.00
  P.M.)
 Other than normal office hours          60.00
Returned check charge                     30.00
Utility service deposits shall be as
outlined in the City electric ordinance,  Refer to section 8-1-9 of this title
chapter 1 of this title
Meter testing:
  Testing of meters more than once at
 customer's request in a 12 month        $50.00
  period, where meter is found to be
  accurate within 3 percent
 
(Ord. 2012-09, 5-1-2012)
8-2-38: WATER METERS; TAMPERING WITH OR DENYING ACCESS TO; ESTIMATED WATER
CHARGE:
   A.   Tampering; Access: No person shall in any way tamper with any water
meter installed in the City or refuse any officer, as above referred to, access
to any such meter. All meters must be accessible to meter readers during
reasonable hours.
   B.   Estimate Of Usage: If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director or
the City, any meter has been tampered with, or if access to any meter shall be
denied meter readers, or if meter reading could not be obtained due to absence
of occupants or for other reasons, the quantity of water delivered during the
month such meter failed to register correctly by reason of such tampering, or
for which no reading was obtained, shall be estimated by the City, and paid for
as heretofore provided. Upon repetition of either of the offenses herein
mentioned, the City may, at its option, stop the delivery of water to the
premises of the person offending. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-39: WATER METERS; METHOD OF COMPUTATION OF READINGS:
The amount obtained by deducting from the most recent official meter reading,
the official meter reading immediately preceding, shall be deemed to be the
quantity of water delivered through such meter during such period, which, under
ordinary conditions, shall be approximately one (1) month. The amount charged
against such meter shall be based upon the number of thousand gallons delivered
as shown by such reading. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-40: SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates for metered water sold within the City limits shall be as follows:
The minimum monthly charge for each meter shall be as follows:
 
SMP Charge Base Charge Meter Size
$    11.0$  13.003/4 inch
22.00      26.00    1 inch
44.00      52.00    11/2 inches
77.00      91.00    2 inches
176.00     208.00   3 inches
308.00     364.00   4 inches
1,408.00   768.00   6 inches
 
The SMP fee is the wholesale tap equivalency fee charged by the Shoshone
Municipal Pipeline. The base charge is the fee assessed by the City for the
operation and maintenance of the water lines. The minimum monthly fee is
calculated as follows:
SMP charge + base charge + $2.60 per thousand gallons per month.
In the event that the water meter is permanently removed and the service will
no longer be usable on the property, the base fee and SMP fee may be removed
from the utility account. In all other circumstances, the base fee and SMP fee
will be charged on a monthly basis, regardless of usage.
   A.   The rate of metered water sold outside the corporate limits shall be
the same as listed above, unless determined otherwise by the Governing Body,
and shall at no time exceed one and one-half (11/2) times the rates listed
above.
   B.   The rate and regulations for unmetered water taken from a fire hydrant,
the City water crane or any unmetered source shall be as follows:
      1.   For water taken from the City water crane, a minimum of seven
dollars twenty two cents ($7.22) for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons or
less, plus seven dollars twenty two cents ($7.22) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons for each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons, or any fraction
thereof, per trip or load.
      2.   For water taken from a fire hydrant on or after April 1, 2020:
         a.   Except as provided in division c. below, prior to any person or
entity (customer) using or taking domestic City water from any fire hydrant is
required to complete a hydrant water sales agreement, pay the required deposit
to the City of Cody, and obtain an hydrant meter assembly from the City’s Water
Department.
         b.   A deposit of $500 shall be paid at the time a meter assembly is
checked out. When the meter assembly is returned, pending the testing of
assembly for damage, the deposit shall be applied first to any outstanding
charges including any repair costs. Any deposit balance remaining shall be
refunded to the customer. If a customer exchanges meters, the deposit may be
transferred to the new meter. This deposit requirement does not apply to
customers electing to purchase a meter.
         c.   The meter assembly rental fee shall be $50.00 per month, per
meter assembly. In lieu of a monthly rental fee a meter assembly may be
purchased from the City at cost. Purchased meters may not be returned for
credit against the purchase of a new meter or outstanding charges. Purchasing a
meter does not relieve the customer from the other requirements of this
section.
         d.   The fee for water use shall be a minimum of seven dollars and
twenty-two cents ($7.22) per thousand gallons or any fraction thereof, of water
used. This fee may be adjusted to the wholesale cost to the City of the water
is used for City funded projects.
         e.   An electronic picture of the meter dial must be submitted between
the 1st and 5th of every month to the email address listed on the water sales
agreement. In lieu of submitting an electronic photo of the meter dial, the
meter may be brought to the Water Department during regular business hours to
be read and verified by City personnel. Failure to submit a meter reading by
the due date shall result in a late fee of $40.00 and may be cause for
confiscation of the rented meter and forfeiture of the deposit.
         f.   An invoice shall be sent each month to the billing address listed
on the water sales agreement showing charges for actual consumption registered
by the hydrant meter, the monthly rental fee, any late charges, and any repair
charges. Payment for all charges billed is due within 30 days of the invoice
date. Any charges billed for hydrant meter service which are not paid by the
invoice due date shall be subject to a charge of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) per month until said obligation has been paid.
         g.   Customer shall return the meter (rented or purchased) and
additional equipment checked out to the City within 15 day s of the one-year
anniversary of the check-out date for testing and inspection. If the meter is
rented, the customer shall be given a replacement meter and will be billed for
the repair or replacement of any components of the assembly found to be
damaged. If a purchased meter fails the testing and inspection the customer
shall either (1) purchase a new meter or (2) rent a meter from the City.
Failure to return the meter and equipment for inspection by the due date shall
result in a fee of $100.00 and may be cause for confiscation of the rented
meter, equipment, and forfeiture of the deposit.
         h.   The City may terminate the hydrant water sales agreement if the
customer violates or breaches any part of the Agreement, or violates any part
of the applicable ordinance. A breach or violation which may result in
termination includes, but is not limited to: failure to report meter readings
by the due date, non-compliance with the annual meter exchange and inspection
requirements, non-payment or partial payment of any fees or charges due, late
payments, or damaging hydrants and/or hydrant meter assemblies. If the City
terminates the Agreement due to a breach by the Customer, the City may demand
return of the rented hydrant meter assembly and immediate payment of any and
all charges, fees, and cost owed to the City Upon such demand, the Customer
shall return the rented hydrant meter assembly and any additional items checked
out, in as good condition as when it was received by the Customer (normal wear
and tear excepted), no later than five business days after the date of the
termination of the Agreement.
         i.   The customer shall be responsible for protecting the rented meter
from freezing, or damage of any kind. In the event the rented meter is frozen
or damaged the customer shall reimburse the City for the cost of repairs or
replacement.
         j.   If the customer checks out additional items with the rented or
purchased meter assembly, the customer shall be responsible for returning the
additional items when the meter assembly is returned for the annual inspection.
The customer shall reimburse the City for the cost of any unreturned or damaged
items.
         k.   Taking water from a fire hydrant without a City issued meter
assembly when required shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may
be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Any person desiring to take domestic City water from any other
unmetered source, excepting City personnel for authorized City purposes and
Fire Department personnel for authorized Fire Department purposes, shall first
obtain a written permit from the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
Such permit shall fully state the name and billing address of the person or
party responsible for payment of water taken, meter number for meter used, and
the location of the source (hydrant) from where the water is to be taken. The
fee for the use of water shall be a minimum of seven dollars twenty two cents
($7.22) for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons or less, plus seven dollars
twenty two cents ($7.22) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for each additional
one thousand (1,000) gallons, or fraction thereof, per trip or load. This fee
may be adjusted to the cost of the water from SMP to the City, if the water is
used for City projects or as determined by the Governing Body.
   Payment of bills shall be as outlined in the City electric ordinance,
chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2017-08, 5-15-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 3-17-
2020)
8-2-41: WATER METERS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The utility account holder is hereby declared to be responsible for the payment
of all water metered on his/her owned or leased property. All bills for use of
water furnished shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the bill
date. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
ARTICLE III.  RAW WATER SYSTEM
8-2-42: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
RAW WATER: Water for irrigation purposes only. Such water shall not be
processed through the central water distribution and sanitation facilities of
the City and is not suitable for human consumption.
RAW WATER SYSTEM: A system of pipelines with taps of a size selected by
property owners, subject to the size regulation as hereinafter set out,
conveying untreated water to property owners contiguous to such pipelines,
desiring to attach thereto. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-43: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The following rules, regulations and rates shall be a part of the contract of
every owner of property furnished raw water directly by the City. All persons
receiving, accepting and paying for such raw water from the City, or who
hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be
bound by the rules, regulations and rates as contained in this article. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-44: MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM:
The Public Works Director and/or Water/Wastewater Supervisor shall have the
general management, control and supervision of the raw water system, subject to
the direction and supervision of the City Administrator. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-
2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-45: APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO TAKE WATER:
   A.   Application: Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, no person shall
knowingly, either directly or indirectly, take water from the raw water system
without having first made application therefor to the administrative services
director. Applications for service from the raw water system may be made only
by those whose property is immediately adjacent to an installed main and if
they are current in all billings due the city.
   B.   Pumps Prohibited: No pumps shall be allowed on any raw water tap. (Ord.
2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-46: EXTENSION OF SYSTEM; USE OF RAW WATER:
At such times as the needs of the city require, extensions of the raw system
may be made. Owners adjacent to such extensions may then make application for
such services. Prior to hooking up said extensions, applicants will be required
to pay for line assessment costs suitable to cover the applicants'
proportionate share of extension. Raw water users are authorized to use raw
water on alternating days. The use of raw water shall be based upon the days of
the week and the street address of the user. Even numbered (addressed) property
shall be authorized to use water on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday of each week.
Odd numbered (addressed) property shall be authorized to use water on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday of each week. There shall be no use of water on Monday.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the city and Park County
school district 6 with regard to recreation fields, parks and school grounds.
Users may make application to the city for a special waiver for areas that have
been newly seeded, sodded or have special watering needs. Those individuals
watering on unauthorized days will be subject to the following penalties:
   A.   First offense: Verbal warning accompanied by watering/use pamphlet and
explanation by enforcement personnel.
   B.   Second offense: Twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine.
   C.   Third offense: Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine and raw water turned off and
sealed for the balance of the irrigation season with no refund of the yearly
fee. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-47: CONNECTION CHARGES; TAP SIZES:
The public works director or water/wastewater supervisor shall, upon
application and payment of all applicable connection charges, issue an order to
tap the raw water system and lay the lateral system to conduct the raw water to
the property line of the consumer. Connection charges shall be dependent upon
the size of tap and shall be set at the following amounts:
   CONNECTION CHARGES
 
Line Size Tap Fee System Investment Fee
3/4 inch    $300.00 $  200.00
1 inch      300.00  400.00
11/2 inches 300.00  800.00
2 inches    300.00  1,400.00
21/2 inches 300.00  2,200.00
3 inches    300.00  3,200.00
4 inches    300.00  5,600.00
 
   (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-48: DUTY OF WATER DEPARTMENT TO TAP MAINS, ETC.:
The water department shall tap water mains, insert necessary valves and lay the
lateral system of the raw water line to the property line in accordance with
the requirements governing the same, upon receipt of evidence that applicant
has complied with all the requirements of this chapter relating to permits.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-49: SUPPLYING TO OTHERS:
No consumer shall supply raw water to other individuals or property, nor suffer
them to take raw water or in any manner permit the use of the same off the
premises for which the application for a tap was made. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-
2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-50: ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO CONDUITS, PIPES, ETC.:
No person shall make or cause to be made any alterations or additions
whatsoever, in or about any pipe, conduit or valve of the city lateral system,
whether on private property or not, without permission from the public works
director or water/wastewater supervisor. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-
2009)
8-2-51: DRAINING LINES:
It shall be the city's responsibility to properly drain the raw water mains at
a suitable time during the fall of the year, or at the time the Cody Canal is
turned off. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-52: RIGHT OF ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The public works director, water/wastewater supervisor, chief of police, police
officers, and all other employees and inspectors of the city, shall have free
access at all reasonable hours to enter any premises where raw water is being
used, for the purpose of ascertaining any violations of any of the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-53: PERMIT TO INSTALL PIPES, ETC.:
No person shall construct, install or alter, or permit to be constructed,
installed or altered, any raw water piping or plumbing in any building in the
city without securing a permit therefor from the public works director or
water/wastewater supervisor. No permit shall be required for the repair of
leaks, valves, cocks or pipes. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-54: TIMES OF USE OF WATER; SUSPENSION OF USE:
While water from the raw water system shall be used only during times of the
year as water is being run in the Cody Canal and supplying the city reservoir,
when necessary to the public interest, the governing body shall have the
authority to regulate or suspend the use of water from the raw water system.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-55: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No person shall connect the raw water system lines to any water lines that are
connected to the domestic water supply system. Application must be made to the
public works director or water/wastewater supervisor in order to change a
sprinkling system from the raw water system to the domestic water supply system
and, if such change be allowed, the public works director or water/wastewater
supervisor may require removal of a section of pipe no less than twelve inches
(12") in length from the supply line not being used. The use of valves between
two (2) water systems shall be prohibited. If such a cross connection is found
to exist, the public works director or water/wastewater supervisor shall order
the water to be shut off and the offending property owner shall be disconnected
from the water system until compliance is had with the terms of this article.
(Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
8-2-56: SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES; TIME OF PAYMENT; FAILURE TO PAY;
REQUIREMENT FOR METER:
   A.   All users tapped to the raw water system, except as provided in
subsections B, C, D, E and F of this section, shall pay a raw water fee based
on tap size. All utility bills generated on or after May 1, 2010, shall be
billed in monthly installments as follows:
 
Tap Size Fee Payable In Monthly Installments
3/4 inch    $  126.00$ 10.50
1 inch      189.00    15.75
11/4 inches 315.00    26.25
11/2 inches 504.00    42.00
2 inches    756.00    63.00
21/2 inches 945.00    78.75
3 inches    1,134.00  94.50
4 inches    1,575.00  131.25
 
Even though raw water is only available from the first week in May through the
first week in October of each year, the fee shall be paid at the monthly
installment regardless if water is available or not if a user is tapped onto
the city raw water system.
   B.   Those taps located above elevation five thousand forty feet (5,040')
installed prior to January 1997 shall be charged at the rate for one tap size
smaller than the installed tap size, provided however, no user shall be charged
less than the rate for a three-fourths inch (3/4") tap.
   C.   Any subdivision located above the elevation five thousand forty feet
(5,040') where the developer has installed prior to January 1997 taps greater
than one inch (1") will be charged at the rate of a one inch (1") tap.
   D.   Taps in the Canyon Meadow Subdivision shall be charged at the rate of a
three-fourths inch (3/4") tap.
   E.   Individual taps for townhouse residences shall pay an annual irrigation
season fee of sixty three dollars ($63.00), which may be paid in monthly
installments of five dollars twenty five cents ($5.25).
   F.   Any user desiring to relocate or downsize their raw water tap will do
so at their own expense, subject to inspection by the City prior to
installation. An encroachment permit must be obtained from the City. In the
event that the service needs to be retapped, the old tap must be abandoned at
the corporation stop, and if the City's only involvement is the retap, the
charge will be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-
1-2009)
8-2-57: RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT:
The utility account holder shall be responsible for the payment of all raw
water used upon each property according to the rate table set out in section 8-
2-56 of this chapter. Payment of bills shall be outlined in the City electric
ordinance, chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2009-11, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)
ARTICLE IV.  SPECIAL PROVISIONS
8-2-58: SPECIAL USE WATER POLICY:
   A.   Eligibility: Those residential customers who live in areas where City
raw water is not available for lawn and garden use and who do not have rights
to the Cody Canal, may be eligible for the City special use water policy.
Commercial customers may be eligible for the special use water policy with the
authorization from the Public Works Director or his/her designee. Account
holders who are interested in this provision must apply at City Hall and once
approved, the policy will be effective for each subsequent year thereafter
without the account holder reapplying for the policy. Those customers approved
for the special use water policy and have even numbered (addressed) property
shall be authorized to use water on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday of each week.
Odd numbered (addressed) property shall be authorized to use water on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday of each week. There shall be no use of water on Monday.
   B.   Use; Calculation: The special use water policy allows residential and
authorized commercial customers a reduced rate of the treated water for lawn
and garden use. The special use water policy is calculated as follows:
      1.   An average will be calculated from October through April based on
the account holder's treated water usage.
      2.   From May through September, customers will be billed their average
usage at the regular rate of two dollars sixty cents ($2.60) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of treated water used. The amount used over the average usage
will be billed at one dollar thirty four cents ($1.34) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of treated water used. Wastewater will be billed based on the average
treated water use from October through April. There is no additional sewer
charge on the additional water used for irrigation purposes.
      3.   From October through April, the account holder will be charged two
dollars sixty cents ($2.60) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water actually
used and wastewater will be charged at one dollar eighty four cents ($1.84) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons based on the actual amount of treated water used.
(Ord. 2017-07, 5-16-2017)
8-2-59: MODIFIED SPECIAL USE WATER POLICY:
   A.   Eligibility: Those residential customers who live in areas where City
raw water is not available for lawn and garden use and have rights to the Cody
Canal, but are not able to access it on a routine basis, may be eligible for
the City modified special use water policy. Commercial customers may be
eligible for the modified special use water policy with the authorization from
the Public Works Director or his/her designee. Account holders who are
interested in this provision must apply at City Hall and, once approved, the
policy will be effective for each subsequent year thereafter without the
account holder reapplying for the policy. Those customers approved for the
modified special use water policy and have even numbered (addressed) property
shall be authorized to use water on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday of each week.
Odd numbered (addressed) property shall be authorized to use water on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday of each week. There shall be no use of water on Monday.
   B.   Rate Calculation: The modified special use water policy allows
residential and authorized commercial customers a reduced rate of the
wastewater charges when water is used for lawn and garden use. The modified
special use water policy is calculated as follows:
      1.   For calculation of wastewater purposes, an average will be
calculated from October through April based on the account holder's treated
water usage.
      2.   From May through September, customers will be billed for the actual
amount of water used at the regular rate of two dollars sixty cents ($2.60) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons of treated water used. Wastewater will be billed
at one dollar eighty four cents ($1.84) per one thousand (1,000) gallons based
on the average and no wastewater will be charged on the additional water used
over the average. (Ord. 2017-07, 5-16-2017)
8-2-60: GOVERNING BODY RIGHT TO RESCIND:
The Governing Body reserves the right to rescind either or both special
provisions as described in this article if they so deem the provisions are no
longer in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 2017-07, 5-16-2017)
CHAPTER 3
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
Article I. Sewer Connections
8-3-1: Permit Required
8-3-2: Plant Investment Fees
8-3-3: Record Of Permits
8-3-4: License Required
8-3-5: License Revocation
8-3-6: Inspections
8-3-7: Noncomplying Connections Declared A Nuisance; Disconnection
8-3-8: Order To Connect Improved Property To City Sewer
8-3-9: Application For Connection To Sewerage System
8-3-10: Connection Costs
8-3-10-1: Discharges Into System
8-3-10-2: Sewer Use Fees; Schedule
8-3-10-3: Payment Of Bills
8-3-10-4: Review Of Sewer Use Fees
Article II. Privy Vaults, Cesspools And Grease Traps
8-3-11: Privies, Cesspools, Etc., Declared Nuisances; Removal Where City Sewer
Available; Portable Toilets
8-3-12: Cleaning Generally
8-3-13: Abandonment Of Privy Vaults And Cesspools
8-3-14: Removal And Transportation Of Contents; Designation Of Dumping Ground
8-3-15: Deposit Of Contents Not Permitted In City, Etc.
ARTICLE I.  SEWER CONNECTIONS
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to tap or make connection with any main or sewer
district installed in the City without first obtaining a permit for same from
the City Clerk as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-2: PLANT INVESTMENT FEES:
Permits to connect to the City sanitary sewerage system shall be issued by the
building inspector on application as provided in section
8-3-9 of this article and the payment of a plant investment fee as follows:
   A.   Plant Investment Fees: Plant investment fees shall be based on water
tap size to the family dwelling or commercial facility as outlined in the
following table:
   PLANT INVESTMENT FEES
 
Water    Water        Fee
Tap Size EDU/Tap Size
   3/4 in1h $    500.00
   1 inch2  1,000.00
   1.5 in4h 2,000.00
   2 inch7  3,500.00
   3 inch16 8,000.00
   4 inch28 14,000.00
   6 inch60 30,000.00
 
   B.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Units, Including Apartment Houses:
      1.   Within the City limits: As outlined in the table above or five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per unit. The higher cost prevails.
      2.   Outside the City limits: As outlined in the table above or seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per unit. The higher cost prevails.
      3.   An additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) will be
required if the property served requires the use of an existing sewer lift
station and the property served is outside the established lift station
boundaries.
   C.   All Others:
      1.   Inside the City limits: As outlined in the table above or five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each five thousand (5,000) gallons of estimated
water usage. The higher cost prevails.
      2.   Outside the City limits: As outlined in the table above or seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each five thousand (5,000) gallons of
estimated water usage per month. The higher cost prevails.
      3.   An additional fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) will be
required for each five thousand (5,000) gallons of estimated water usage per
month if the property served requires the use of an existing sewer lift station
and the property served is outside the established lift station boundaries.
   D.   Consent To Annexation Required: Before any permit to connect property
outside of the City limits to the City sanitary sewerage system shall be
issued, the owner of the property to be served shall execute and record a
consent that the property served may at any time in the future be annexed to
the City without objection by the current or subsequent owner. (Ord. 2013-13,
6-18-2013)
8-3-3: RECORD OF PERMITS:
The Public Works Director shall keep record of all sewer permits herein
provided for which shall contain the name of the applicant, the date of
application and permit, the name of the owner of the lot, and the number of the
lot to be drained by the proposed sewer. Such record shall be preserved by the
Public Works Director and shall be open to the public at all times. (Ord. 2013-
13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to do or perform the work of making any sewer
connections or construct any private sewer for the purpose of connecting with
the main or any sewer district in the City, unless such person is one of the
following: (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
   A.   A licensed plumber as provided in section
9-3-1 of this Code.
   B.   A licensed general contractor as provided in section
9-3-1 of this Code and until such person has provided proof of insurance as
provided in section
9-3-5 of this Code. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013; amd. Ord. 2019-03, 7-9-2019)
   C.   A contractor that is insured as an excavation contractor, has provided
proof of insurance as provided in section
9-3-5 of this Code, and has been approved by the Public Works Director and/or
his/her designee for this type of work.
   D.   A contractor hired by the City to complete a bid project that is
inspected and supervised by a licensed professional engineer. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-
18-2013)
8-3-5: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The license required by section 8-3-4 of this chapter may be revoked by the
Governing Body at any time upon the satisfactory evidence that the licensee has
not complied with the regulations of this chapter and title 9 of this Code, or
is otherwise incompetent. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-6: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever a connecting sewer shall be constructed as herein provided, the person
constructing the same and making the connection shall leave the same uncovered
and open until the work shall be inspected and approved by the building
official. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-7: NONCOMPLYING CONNECTIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE; DISCONNECTION:
All connections made under the provisions of this article shall be made in such
a manner as the building official shall direct.
If any such connecting sewer shall be built or constructed otherwise than in
strict compliance with the terms and requirements of this chapter and title 9
of this Code, the same shall be declared a nuisance, and shall be abolished or
abated according to law and shall be immediately disconnected from the main or
sewer district until the same is made to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and title 9 of this Code. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-8: ORDER TO CONNECT IMPROVED PROPERTY TO CITY SEWER:
Whenever the Governing Body shall deem it necessary for sanitary purposes and
the general health and welfare of the City that all of the improved property
within any sewer district of the City be connected with the main or sewer
district located in such district and provided for that purpose, the Governing
Body shall have the authority to so order and direct. Thereupon, it shall
become the duty of any property owner so designated or included within such
order, within five (5) days, or such other time as therein set forth, after the
service upon such owner or the occupant of the premises, of a copy of such
order, to commence and prosecute with due diligence the work of making and
constructing such sewer and its connection with the main or sewer district as
directed in the order. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-9: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
   A.   Any owner of property desiring to make sewer connections to the city
sanitary sewerage system shall make application with the city on a form
prescribed by the city for utility services. By making application, the
applicant shall be deemed to have agreed that a sewer connection shall be done
with materials and according to plans and specifications as may be prescribed
and required by the city engineer and subject to all orders, rules and
regulations of the city.
   B.   Applications by owners of property outside the established city limits
shall require the approval of the governing body before a permit to connect may
be issued. The governing body shall be under no obligation whatsoever to
approve an application by an owner of property outside the established city
limits and may in its sole and absolute discretion deny such an application for
any reason or no reason. Any application by an owner of property outside the
established city limits shall include an engineering analysis by an engineer or
firm acceptable to the city, of the capacity of the receiving line or lines and
an analysis of the expected effluent if the connection is for a use other than
a single-family dwelling unit, a multiple-family dwelling unit or apartment
house. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-10: CONNECTION COSTS:
Any property owner desiring to make such sewer connection as referred to in
section 8-3-9 of this chapter shall pay all costs of the installation,
inspection and other expenses in connection with the work of installing such
sewer connection from the point where the sewer connection connects with the
adjacent sanitary sewer to the property line of the property to be served by
such sewer connection. In addition thereto, the property owner shall pay to the
city treasurer the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-
2013)
8-3-10-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful to permit or cause the flow of any of the following
substances into the sanitary sewer system of the city:
   A.   Prohibited Discharges: The discharge of any waters containing any
substance or any toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly, or by interaction with other wastes, as determined by
the city, to contaminate the sludge (biosolids) of any municipal system, or to
injure or interfere with any wastewater conveyance or treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the water receiving any discharge
from the wastewater treatment works is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Prohibition Of Groundwater Heat Pump Discharges, Drainage Water, And
Runoff: The discharge from groundwater heat pumps or from groundwater heating
or cooling systems, roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, stormwater drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building or a public sanitary sewer is hereby prohibited.
   C.   Pretreatment: The city may require pretreatment of any discharge to the
municipal sewer system that may be detrimental to the wastewater conveyance or
treatment structures or processes, or that may be detrimental to compliance
with any federal or state discharge limitation. Pretreatment prior to discharge
to the municipal system may be required to meet requirements established by the
city for any substance, or may be required for the complete elimination of a
substance prior to discharge.
   D.   Prohibition Of Septic Tank, Chemical Toilet, And Vault Toilet Wastes:
The discharge of any wastes from septic tanks, chemical toilets, vault toilets,
and the biosolids or other wastes from any other wastewater treatment facility
to the municipal wastewater conveyance or treatment system is prohibited.
   E.   Damage To Facilities: In the event that either wastewater conveyance or
treatment structures or processes are damaged, or the flow through said
structures or processes is hampered by a customer's wastewater discharge, the
city may make or require to be made, at the customer's expense, such repairs as
are necessary to restore conveyance or treatment structures or processes to
normal system operations. (Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-10-2: SEWER USE FEES; SCHEDULE:
   A.   Minimum Monthly Charge: There is hereby levied and assessed a service
charge against any entity or person in the city requiring sewage disposal into
the sanitary sewer system as follows:
A minimum monthly charge for the water measured through each water meter based
upon the size of the water meter as follows:
 
Meter Size Minimum
           Monthly Charge
3/4 inch  $ 10.14
1 inch    20.28
11/2 inch 40.56
2 inch    70.98
3 inch    162.24
4 inch    283.92
6 inch    608.40
Plus $1.84 per 1,000 gallons per month of water metered
 
   B.   Sewer System Only: For those entities or persons connected to the
sanitary sewer system, but not receiving water from the city water system, the
charge shall be nineteen dollars thirty four cents ($19.34) per month.
   C.   Surcharge: The city has determined that the average total suspended
solids (TSS) and five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings
for the average residential user are two hundred (200) ppm BOD and two hundred
fifty (250) ppm TSS. The city has assessed a surcharge rate for all
nonresidential users discharging wastes with BOD and TSS strengths greater than
the average residential user. The surcharge will be sufficient to cover the
costs of treating such user's above normal strength wastes. Such users will pay
an additional service charge of 7.4 cents per month per one thousand (1,000)
gallons for each twenty five (25) ppm over two hundred (200) ppm BOD, and 7.4
cents per month per one thousand (1,000) gallons for each twenty five (25) ppm
over two hundred fifty (250) ppm TSS. The minimum monthly flow rate to be used
for both BOD and TSS calculations shall be the assumed equivalent single
residential unit monthly flow rate of five thousand (5,000) gallons per month.
The city will periodically sample wastewater discharges for nonresidential
users discharging to the wastewater system as determined necessary by the city
administrator, or by his/her designee, to determine the billing rates for
nonresidential users in association with the above outlined costs.
Nonresidential users will be notified of sampling results if changes to charges
for their facility are warranted by the results of the testing. Nonresidential
users may present sample results of their own to the governing body if they
want to dispute increases in charges as a result of high TSS or BOD findings.
(Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
   D.   Service Charges: The following charges apply to all levels of service
in addition to any other charges:
 
Account set up charge                      $35.00
Monthly paper statement charge per account 0.50
Returned payment charge                    30.00
 
   (Ord. 2013-08, 5-21-2013)
8-3-10-3: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
All bills for use of wastewater service furnished shall be due and payable
within fifteen (15) days of the bill date. Payment of bills shall be as
outlined in the city electric ordinance, chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2013-
13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-10-4: REVIEW OF SEWER USE FEES:
The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance as
well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than
every two (2) years, and will review the system as necessary to assure equity
of the service charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient
funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment
works. The city shall apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to
the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next
year and adjust the rate accordingly. If a significant user, such as an
industry, has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's
wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present, at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the governing body, such factual information and the city
shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be
changed. The City shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible.
(Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
ARTICLE II.  PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS AND GREASE TRAPS
8-3-11: PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS, ETC., DECLARED NUISANCES; REMOVAL WHERE CITY SEWER
AVAILABLE; PORTABLE TOILETS:
In the interests of sanitation and the protection of public health, any and all
privy vaults, portable toilets and cesspools within the City or its police
jurisdiction are hereby declared to constitute a nuisance and a menace to
health, and the same shall be removed whenever a connection to a City sewer is
available.
Notwithstanding the above, a portable toilet may be placed temporarily in the
City limits on property where any of the following is occurring:
   A.   At an active construction site for which a building permit has been
issued;
   B.   At an active street, utility, or pipeline project that is a City
project, or for which a City encroachment permit has been issued; and,
   C.   At a special event held in a public or non-profit venue, for up to
seven (7) days.
For any other instance where a portable toilet may be necessary, a written
request shall be submitted to City Hall staff, and the Public Works Director
and Community Development Director shall determine whether and under what
conditions the request may be granted, based on concerns with odor, aesthetics,
health hazards, and safety. The Directors are specifically authorized to
approve or deny any specific location, to require screening, to prescribe time
limits for placement, to add other conditions and limitations they deem
appropriate, and to require immediate removal if compliance with these
standards is not maintained.
All portable toilets shall be pumped and cleaned regularly to prevent odor and
health impacts to neighboring properties.
This section shall not apply to the permitted storage of portable toilets not
in use in a commercial or industrial storage yard. (Ord. 2018-18, 11-20-2018)
8-3-12: CLEANING GENERALLY:
All grease traps shall be cleaned once in April or May and once in September or
October, and more often if so ordered by the Administrator or his/her designee.
The City of Cody must also receive a notice from the grease trap cleaner
certifying that an establishment has had their grease trap cleaned as outlined
above. All privy vaults and cesspools must be cleaned whenever the contents
thereof shall be within two feet (2') of the top or surface of the ground.
(Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-13: ABANDONMENT OF PRIVY VAULTS AND CESSPOOLS:
Whenever the use of any privy vault or cesspool is discontinued, such vault or
cesspool must be cleaned to the bottom and filled with earth or other suitable
material. Such work shall be done under the supervision of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2013-13, 6-18-2013)
8-3-14: REMOVAL AND TRANSPORTATION OF CONTENTS; DESIGNATION OF DUMPING GROUND:
The contents of privy vaults, grease traps or cesspools shall be removed
therefrom and transported through any alley, street or public place within the
City only in the most improved sanitary manner, using airtight covered tanks,
so as to prevent the escape of any noxious or offensive odors, and preserve
such contents from sight or exposure during transportation. All appliances and
vehicles used in such cleaning and removal shall be maintained in perfect
sanitary condition, subject at all times to inspection by the City Engineer or
his/her designee. The City Engineer or his/her designee shall designate the
dumping grounds upon which such material shall be disposed of. (Ord. 2013-13,
6-18-2013)
8-3-15: DEPOSIT OF CONTENTS NOT PERMITTED IN CITY, ETC.:
No night soil, grease trap or cesspool matter shall be deposited or buried in
or on any premises within the City or its police jurisdiction. (Ord. 2013-13,
6-18-2013)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Official Generally
9-1-2: Contractor Licensing Board Established
9-1-3: Authority To Establish Administrative Procedures And Policies
9-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL GENERALLY:
There is hereby created the Office of Building Safety and the official in
charge thereof shall be known as the building official. The building official
shall be an employee of the City, to be hired by the City Administrator. The
building official is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all ordinances
relating to the construction, equipment, management, conditions and zoning of
all property within the City. (Ord. 2011-22, 12-6-2011)
9-1-2: CONTRACTOR LICENSING BOARD ESTABLISHED:
   A.   There is hereby established a Contractor Licensing Board, also to act
as the Board of Appeals as referenced in the adopted Building Codes, and
referred to herein as "the Board".
   B.   The Board shall consist of ten (10) members. One member shall be an at-
large member who is either a resident of the City or who owns a contracting
business physically located within the City; one member shall be an architect,
structural engineer or civil engineer; one member shall be a licensed
mechanical/HVAC contractor; one member shall be a City Council member; two (2)
members shall be licensed general contractors; two (2) members shall be
licensed plumbing contractors; and, two (2) members shall be licensed
electrical contractors.
   C.   With the exception of the City Council member, each member of the Board
must be:
      1.   An individual who is a licensed contractor within the specialty he
or she is designated to represent on the Board; or
      2.   A certified journeyman electrician, certified journeyman plumber or
certified journeyman HVAC installer who is not individually licensed, but is
employed by a licensed contractor that is licensed within the specialty the
employee is designated to represent on the Board. If a member of the Board who
is not individually licensed, and is serving as an employee of a licensed
contractor, resigns, terminates, severs or otherwise loses his or her
employment with such licensed contractor, then he or she may continue to serve
as a member of the Board until the end of his or her term. If the Board member,
at the end of his or her term, is not individually licensed in the specialty he
or she is designated to represent, or is not employed by a licensed contractor,
then he or she cannot serve as a member of the Board, and the Mayor and
Governing Body shall appoint a new member who is licensed to fill the vacancy
as described below.
   D.   The members of the Board shall each be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Governing Body, for a three (3) year term. Terms of members
shall begin on January 1 and shall be staggered, with no more than four (4)
members reaching the end of their term at the end of each calendar year.
Subsequent appointments shall be for three (3) years each unless to fill an
unexpired term. Members appointed to fill vacancies shall serve until the end
of the term which they were appointed to fulfill, and may be reappointed for
successive three (3) year terms. At the discretion of the Governing Body,
members may be appointed for more than one term.
   E.   The Board shall meet at such intervals as necessary for the proper
performance of its duties, but in any case, shall meet not less than twice each
year. (Ord. 2019-04, 7-9-2019)
9-1-3: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND POLICIES:
The building official and Contractor Licensing Board are authorized and
directed to establish administrative procedures and policies for the
application, review, examination and licensing of building contractors, as
necessary to implement chapter 3 of this title. Each person who submits the
required application materials and meets the established qualifications
therefor shall be issued an appropriate annual license. The Community
Development Department shall keep an official record of all licenses issued.
(Ord. 2019-04, 7-9-2019)
CHAPTER 2
CODES ADOPTED
SECTION:
9-2-1: Adoption By Reference; Copies To Be Kept On File
9-2-2: Downtown Architectural District
9-2-3: Meeting With Planning, Zoning And Adjustment Board Required Before
Building Permit Issued
9-2-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE; COPIES TO BE KEPT ON FILE:
   A.   The 2018 editions of:
      1.   The International Building Code;
      2.   The International Existing Building Code;
      3.   The International Fire Code including appendices D, E, F and G;
      4.   The International Mechanical Code; and,
      5.   The International Fuel Gas Code; as well as:
      6.   Provisions of the International Residential Code and the
International Property Maintenance Code as said codes are referenced in the
International Building Code, the International Fire Code, the International
Mechanical Code, and the International Fuel Gas Code, but only to the extent
that the referenced provisions apply to fire and life safety issues;
as adopted and published by the International Code Council (ICC), are made a
part hereof by this reference, the same as though incorporated herein at
length.
   B.   Subsequent editions, changes, amendments, replacements and supplements
of the codes referenced in subsection A of this section shall become effective
on the last day of the sixth month after adoption by the State of Wyoming.
   C.   The City of Cody shall adopt the National Electrical Code on July 31 of
the current code year and will adopt by resolution, the provisions of the
International Plumbing Code, and the International Residential Code that the
Community Development Director, the City Building Official and Council agree
are in the best interest of the City.
All fees for the issuance of permits shall be from the fee schedules approved
and adopted by the Governing Body by resolution.
One copy of all adopted codes shall be kept on file by the City, and shall be
marked with the words "Property of the City of Cody, Official Copy". (Ord.
2018-17, 10-16-2018, eff. 11-30-2018)
9-2-2: DOWNTOWN ARCHITECTURAL DISTRICT:
   A.   There is established a Downtown Architectural District. The Planning,
Zoning and Adjustment Board shall review all applications and plans for
building and sign permits insofar as they pertain to the exterior of commercial
buildings in the Downtown District described as follows:
Block 22, Lots 9-16; Block 23, Lots 6-12; Block 24, Lots 11-17 and 8-22; Block
4, Lots 9-24; Block 5, Lots 9-24; Block 6, Lots 9-24; Blocks 7, 8, 9, 50, 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 29, 10, 11, 12; Block 13, Lots 1-16; Block 14, Lots 1-16;
Block 15, Lots 1-16; Block 28, Lots 1-8; Block 27, Lots 1-8; Block 26, Lots 1-
8; all of Original Town Subdivision, and a tract of land bounded on the north
by the northerly boundary line of NW1/4 SW1/4 of Section 32, now Tract 79
Resurvey, T. 53 N., R. 101 W., 6th P.M., on the west by the centerline of
Eighth Street on the south by the south line of Beck Avenue, and on the east by
the center line of Ninth Street, and a tract of land bounded on the east by
Tenth Street, on the north by Park Lane, on the west by Ninth Street and on the
south by Rumsey Avenue, and a tract of land in the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 32, Township 53 North, Range 101 West of the 6th P.M. more particularly
described as follows: Beginning at corner 1/82 proceeding in a near northerly
direction to a projection of the South line of Rumsey Avenue thence proceeding
in a near easterly direction to the west line of Ninth Street and Sheridan
Avenue thence to the point of beginning all in Cody, Park County, Wyoming.
   B.   The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall examine and evaluate
applications and plans involved in building and sign permits insofar as they
pertain to the exterior of commercial buildings within the Downtown District as
herein described and shall make recommendations and suggestions to the
applicants, property owners or occupants. (Ord. 2011-22, 12-6-2011)
9-2-3: MEETING WITH PLANNING, ZONING AND ADJUSTMENT BOARD REQUIRED BEFORE
BUILDING PERMIT ISSUED:
Before the issuance of any permit under the International Building Code for
commercial buildings situated within the City, the applicant, property owner
and occupant shall meet with the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board to
review the application and plans insofar as they pertain to the exterior of a
commercial building and site plan conditions. The issuance of a permit shall be
conditioned upon the applicant receiving an affirmative vote of a majority of
the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board members in attendance at said
meeting. (Ord. 2011-22, 12-6-2011)
CHAPTER 3
CONTRACTOR LICENSING
SECTION:
9-3-1: Contractor License Required; Exceptions; Licensing Categories
9-3-2: Application And Review Process
9-3-3: Term Of License; Renewal Required
9-3-4: Grounds And Procedure For Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Effects
Thereof
9-3-5: Insurance Required
9-3-6: Inactive Status
9-3-1: CONTRACTOR LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; LICENSING CATEGORIES:
   A.   Contractor License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
participate in any form of "construction contracting" within the City unless
that person is either:
      1.   Licensed in the particular contracting category under the provisions
of this chapter for the work being performed;
      2.   Performing construction contracting solely for work that is entirely
exempt from all building, plumbing, HVAC, and electrical permits; or,
      3.   Exempt from contractor licensing as otherwise provided in subsection
B of this section, or a non-compensated volunteer laborer while overseen by
someone otherwise authorized to perform construction contracting pursuant to
this chapter.
"Construction contracting" as used herein shall include the: demolishing;
erecting; constructing; assembling; enlarging; altering; moving; removing;
repairing; improving; converting; and performing work on electrical, plumbing
or HVAC systems; of or on any building, structure or device in a manner
regulated by the adopted Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, or Electrical Codes.
Activities specifically excluded from construction contracting include, but are
not limited to: carpeting, decorating, installing flooring, painting, tiling,
and wallpapering.
Furthermore, it shall be illegal to solicit construction contracting work or
claim to be licensed or otherwise authorized to perform construction
contracting work within the City without holding a contractor's license
pursuant to this chapter for the applicable category of work that is
advertised.
   B.   Licensing Exemptions: The following exemptions to the above contractor
licensing requirement are provided. These exemptions do not absolve a person
from obtaining necessary permits and inspections, or from completing the work
in accordance with adopted codes. Persons claiming such an exemption shall
submit documentation for such to the building official and complete any
applicable affidavits as noted herein.
      1.   Owner-Occupied Property Owner Exemption: A property owner who is not
a licensed contractor may be issued permits to perform work that would
otherwise require them to hold a contractor's license, if one of the following
scenarios applies, and they otherwise meet the requirements herein:
         a.   The structure, building, or device falls within the jurisdiction
of the International Residential Code and the work will be performed by the
property owner on the property where they currently reside.
         b.   The structure, building, or device falls within the jurisdiction
of the International Residential Code, the work will be performed by the
property owner, and the property owner intends to reside on the property once
the work is completed.
         c.   The permit is for either installation or repair of a fence, or
minor demolition work, and the work will be performed by the property owner.
The building official shall determine whether any demolition is minor based on
the specific characteristics of the demolition project and experience of the
property owner performing the work.
The language indicating work is to be performed by the property owner does not
preclude the property owner from hiring licensed contractors/subcontractors, or
from having immediate family members of the property owner and non-compensated
volunteers participate in the permitted work while overseen by the property
owner or a contractor licensed for the work being performed.
The property owner, whether their ownership of the property is individual,
joint, or part of a group (e.g., partnership or corporation), may be issued
permits for the construction of no more than two (2) new dwelling units in any
five-year period. The property owner requesting a permit for construction of a
new dwelling unit shall sign a sworn affidavit indicating their intent to
reside on the property for at least one year after the certificate of occupancy
is issued. If a person fails to meet the one-year minimum occupancy
requirement, they shall not be entitled to further utilize this exemption to
construct a dwelling unit.
For work on existing dwellings subject to the International Residential Code,
there shall be no limit on the number of building, plumbing, mechanical or
electrical permits a property owner may receive to perform work on their own
property where they reside.
      2.   Residential Property Owner Exemption: A property owner that does not
reside on their property may be issued permits to perform work on an existing
dwelling or an accessory structure on their property without possessing a
contractor's license, subject to the limitations specified herein. This
exemption does not authorize creation of a new dwelling unit.
The dwelling or structure must fall within the jurisdiction of the
International Residential Code. A permit shall be issued to the property owner
for any type of work on the existing dwelling except: electrical work; plumbing
work; and heating, ventilation, and A/C (HVAC) work. Provided, if the property
owner can demonstrate relevant experience and knowledge to safely perform work
in any of those areas, the building official may issue a permit to the property
owner for the work, or part thereof, for which the property owner has relevant
experience and knowledge. In no case shall the building official issue a permit
pursuant to this exemption for installation of an electrical service or startup
of a new HVAC system, unless the property owner has a contractor's license for
such.
      3.   Property Owner Construction Management Exemption: A property owner
may perform the construction management aspect of overseeing construction
activities on their commercial or residential property, subject to the
conditions and limitations of this section, and be issued the building permit
for such project. In such cases, a general contractor is not required. Where a
property owner is issued a building permit as a construction manager, it does
not authorize them to perform any construction work requiring a contractor's
license. All construction and demolition work on the project shall be performed
by licensed contractors/subcontractors, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
      4.   City Inspector Exemption: Construction work for the City may be
performed by the City building inspectors when they hold an International Code
Council (ICC) certificate or Wyoming contractor license for the type of work
performed.
   C.   Contractor Licensing Categories: Licenses for construction contracting
are categorized and defined as follows. A license authorizes the company or
person(s) holding the license to perform work within the trade(s) identified
for that license, to the extent specified herein. Provided, each contractor is
responsible to ensure that they do not accept or perform work that is clearly
beyond their level of proficiency and skill - doing so is grounds for
suspension and revocation of their license, as may be determined by the
Contractor Licensing Board.
      1.   General Contractor: This category authorizes the construction of all
components of commercial and residential structures, except those components
requiring an electrical license, plumbing license, or mechanical/HVAC license.
A general contractor is also authorized to manage all work on the permitted
project.
Persons requesting a general contractor license after adoption of this section
shall show that they have passed the International Code Council (ICC) National
Standard Exam for Class A Commercial or Class B Commercial and Residential
contracting (or equivalent), and have at least sixty (60) months of experience
as a general contractor, journeyman carpenter, architect, engineer or similar
work that demonstrates the skills and proficiency needed to act in the capacity
of a general contractor.
      2.   General Contractor - IRC: This category authorizes the construction
of all components of a residential structure that is subject to the
International Residential Code (e.g., single-family dwellings, duplexes, and
townhouses), except those components requiring an electrical license, plumbing
license, or mechanical/HVAC license. An IRC general contractor is also
authorized to manage all work on the permitted project.
Persons requesting a "general contractor - IRC" license shall show that they
have passed the ICC Class C Residential Contractor Exam (or equivalent) and
have at least twenty four (24) months of experience that demonstrate the
knowledge, skills and proficiency needed to perform work of this nature.
      3.   Master Electrical Contractor: This category authorizes electricians
licensed by the State of Wyoming as master electricians to perform electrical
work regulated by the National Electric Code within the City of Cody. Their
employees that perform electrical work must also be registered with the State
of Wyoming. Persons requesting to be licensed by the City as an electrical
contractor must provide a copy of their current Wyoming master electrician
license and electrical contractor's license (card) issued by the State of
Wyoming.
      4.   Master Plumbing Contractor: This category authorizes plumbing work
(including fuel gas) within all types of buildings and structures.
Persons requesting a master plumbing contractor license shall show that they
have passed the ICC "Master Plumber With Fuel Gas" Exam (or equivalent) and
have at least forty eight (48) months of experience that demonstrate the
knowledge, skills and proficiency needed to perform work of this nature.
      5.   Plumbing Contractor - IRC: This category authorizes all plumbing
work within buildings and structures regulated by the International Residential
Code (IRC).
Persons requesting a "plumbing contractor - IRC" license shall show that they
have passed the ICC "F26 National Standard Residential Plumber" Exam (or
equivalent) and have at least twelve (12) months of experience that
demonstrates the knowledge, skills and proficiency needed to perform work of
this nature; or, have at least thirty six (36) months of experience that
demonstrate the knowledge, skills and proficiency necessary to perform work of
this nature.
      6.   Master Mechanical/HVAC Contractor: This category authorizes
mechanical/HVAC work within all types of buildings and structures.
Persons requesting a master mechanical/HVAC contractor license shall show that
they have passed the ICC "Master Mechanical" Exam (or equivalent) and have at
least twenty four (24) months of experience that demonstrate the skills and
proficiency needed to perform work of this nature; or, have at least forty
eight (48) months of experience that demonstrate the knowledge, skills and
proficiency necessary to perform work of this nature.
      7.   Mechanical/HVAC Contractor - IRC: This category authorizes all
mechanical/HVAC work within buildings and structures regulated by the
International Residential Code (IRC).
Persons requesting a "mechanical/HVAC contractor - IRC" license shall show that
they have passed the ICC "F32 National Standard Residential Mechanical" Exam
(or equivalent) and have at least twelve (12) months of experience that
demonstrates the skills and proficiency needed to perform work of this nature;
or, have at least thirty six (36) months of experience that demonstrate the
skills and proficiency necessary to perform work of this nature.
      8.   Specialty Contractor: This category authorizes the person to work in
one or more of the following trades, on any type of building or structure. Work
only in those trades for which the person applies and meets the minimum
experience therefor is authorized. The minimum experience need not be provided
if the person has passed an ICC or equivalent professional exam for the trade
and otherwise demonstrates the applicable knowledge, skills and proficiency to
the Contractor Licensing Board.
 
Trade Minimum Experience
Asbestos abatement                            24 months
Commercial fire suppression systems           36 months
Commercial railings                           24 months
Conveyor systems                              36 months
Demolition                                    24 months
Drywall                                       24 months
Elevator installation                         48 months
Fencing                                       6 months
Framing                                       48 months
Ground stabilization/mud jacking              24 months
Insulation                                    24 months
Masonry                                       48 months
Refrigeration                                 24 months
Roofing                                       24 months
Sheet metal installation                      24 months
Siding                                        24 months
Sign/awning installation                      24 months
Steel fabrication/erection                    48 months
Structural concrete                           48 months
Stucco/plaster                                12 months
Underground utilities (sewer, water, conduit) 12 months
Windows/glass glazing                         12 months
 
      9.   Specialty Contractor - IRC: This category authorizes the person to
work in any of the following specialty contractor activities when the work is
conducted on a building or structure subject to the IRC. The minimum experience
need not be provided if the person has passed an ICC or State of Wyoming exam
for the trade, or if the building official or Contractor Licensing Board is
otherwise satisfied that the person has the knowledge and training necessary to
perform the work in a competent manner.
 
Trade Minimum Experience
Demolition               6 months
Drywall                  6 months
Fencing                  3 months
Fire suppression systems 6 months
Framing                  12 months
Insulation               6 months
Masonry                  6 months
Roofing                  6 months
Sheet metal installation 6 months
Siding                   6 months
Structural concrete      6 months
Stucco/plaster           6 months
Windows/glass glazing    6 months
 
(Ord. 2019-03, 7-9-2019)
9-3-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Any person desiring a contractor's license to perform work within the
City of Cody shall complete an application therefor, and provide evidence of
relevant experience, skills, and proficiency. The format and content of the
application form shall be specified by the Contractor Licensing Board. All
contractor license applications shall be accompanied by an application fee, as
specified in a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body. The
application fee is non-refundable.
   B.   All applicants for a contractor's license shall submit an application
to the Community Development Department and be interviewed by the building
official for a determination as to their qualifications and level of
proficiency for the license requested, as set forth in the application. Those
applicants that have previously been licensed for the type of license requested
(whether in Cody or another jurisdiction), clearly meet the minimum
qualifications of this chapter, and clearly demonstrate the proficiency
required, shall be issued a contractor's license. The building official is
authorized to issue the license on behalf of the Contractor Licensing Board in
such instances, provided the applicant is not currently in violation of the
City's contractor licensing provisions (e.g., has not performed construction
contracting within the City without a license and/or required permit).
When an applicant either does not have previous licensing for the type of
license requested, has performed construction contracting in the City without a
license, or when in the judgement of the building official the application
would be better considered by the Contractor Licensing Board for whatever
reason, the application shall be presented to the Contractor Licensing Board
for review. Applicants should be present at the Board meeting to provide
information when their application is considered.
Upon reviewing a contractor's license application, the Contractor Licensing
Board has authority to approve it, deny it, approve a lesser license (e.g., IRC
level instead of master), or issue a conditional/limited license. Applicants
that meet the qualifications shall be issued the license(s) requested, except
the Board may delay issuance of a license as a penalty for an applicant
performing construction contracting work within the City without a license.
Such delay shall be based on the severity of the violation, but in no case
shall exceed ninety (90) calendar days. This penalty shall be in addition to
other penalties the City may pursue through the court.
The option of issuing a conditional/limited license is available to the Board
when they have concerns with the applicant's level of skills and/or knowledge,
as related to the type and/or level of license requested. A conditional/limited
license may be tailored by the Board in any manner they deem necessary to
address their concerns. Examples include precluding work of a certain type,
issuing the license for a specific project only, and requiring reevaluation
after a specified time period.
Applications for persons that do not meet minimum qualifications to be issued a
license or conditional/limited license shall be denied. Any person whose
application is denied must wait a minimum of forty five (45) days before they
can reapply. Reapplication shall be accompanied by an additional application
fee.
Appeals from any action of the Board must be made within ten (10) days of their
decision and shall be submitted in written form to the Governing Body. (Ord.
2019-03, 7-9-2019)
9-3-3: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL REQUIRED:
All contractor licenses issued by the City are annual licenses and shall expire
at the end of the calendar year in which they are issued.
Licensed contractors desiring to perform construction contracting in the new
year shall submit an application for renewal of their license by December 15th
of the current year. Licensed contractors that submit a completed renewal
application, provide evidence of current insurance, pay the specified renewal
fee, and are in good standing with the City, shall be issued a proper
contractor's license for the new year. "Good standing" shall mean the
contractor has maintained compliance with the standards of this chapter and
timely obtained all required permits throughout the past year. The building
official is authorized to issue the new annual license on behalf of the
Contractor Licensing Board in such cases. If the contractor is not in good
standing, the renewal application must be reviewed by the Contractor Licensing
Board.
Contractors that apply for renewal after the December 15th deadline, but before
January 15th of the new year shall have their renewal considered upon payment
of an additional thirty dollar ($30.00) late fee. Renewal applications for
contractor licenses shall not be accepted after the January 15th deadline (or
the following Monday if January 15th falls on a weekend). Contractors licensed
in the prior year that do not submit a renewal application by the January 15th
deadline shall not be relicensed except upon submittal and review of a new
application to perform construction contracting.
Annual renewal pursuant to this section shall not require a contractor to pass
an examination listed for their category of license if they were not previously
required by the City to do so, nor does it require reexamination based on a new
set of adopted Building Codes. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-9-2019)
9-3-4: GROUNDS AND PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; EFFECTS
THEREOF:
   A.   Grounds: The Contractor Licensing Board may suspend, revoke, limit, or
reclassify any license issued under the provisions of this chapter when the
licensee or an employee of the licensee commits one or more of the following
acts or omissions:
      1.   Improperly obtaining a license and/or a building permit through
nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation of a material fact;
      2.   Performing a form of construction contracting work for which they
are not licensed;
      3.   Accepting and performing work clearly beyond their level of
proficiency and skill, which work does not meet code requirements;
      4.   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter;
      5.   Combining or conspiring with any unlicensed person to evade the
provisions of this chapter by permitting one's license to be used by such
person;
      6.   Acting as agent, partner, associate or in any other capacity with
any unlicensed person, to evade the provisions of this chapter; and,
      7.   Violating any provisions of the City ordinances pertaining to
construction activities, including but not limited to failure to obtain
required permits in a timely manner.
   B.   Procedure: When the building official believes that a contractor's
license should be suspended, revoked, limited, or reclassified based on a
violation of one or more of the items listed in subsection A of this section,
the building official shall notify the licensee that the building official will
recommend to the Contractor Licensing Board that the licensee's license be
suspended, revoked, limited or reclassified. The building official shall give
written notice either in person or by certified mail to the licensee of the
facts and circumstances giving rise to the recommendation, including reference
to the applicable sections of this Code which the licensee has violated. The
notice shall state the requirement that the licensee shall have ten (10) days
to request a hearing before the Contractor Licensing Board, and that if the
licensee fails to request such a hearing, the Board shall act on the building
official's recommendation at its next meeting. The notice shall state the
place, date and time of the meeting where the Board will hear the building
official's recommendation.
      1.   Upon receipt of notice, the licensee may request a hearing before
the Board. Such request shall be in writing to the Board within ten (10) days
of receipt of notice. Failure by the licensee to request the hearing shall be
deemed a waiver of any right to a hearing on the matter and the order of
suspension or revocation shall become final.
      2.   At such hearing, the licensee shall be given an opportunity to show
compliance with all lawful requirements for the retention of the license. The
licensee shall be given the opportunity to present testimony, oral and/or
written, and shall have the right of cross examination. All testimony shall be
under oath. The Board shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas
and compel the attendance of witnesses. The decision of the Board shall be
based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made a part of the record
thereof. The hearing shall be conducted in compliance with the procedures
promulgated in accordance with the Wyoming Administrative Procedures Act.
   C.   Effects:
      1.   A person whose license has been revoked or suspended shall not be
entitled to file a new application by the establishment of a new legal entity,
or otherwise, during the length of such revocation or suspension.
      2.   In addition to the revocation or suspension of any license as
provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provisions of this
chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, the penalty for which is prescribed under title 1, chapter 4 of
this Code. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-9-2019)
9-3-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   All contractors licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain
liability insurance of the type and amount specified below for themselves and
any employees, agents, and representatives.
      1.   Bodily injury liability insurance: Insurance coverage with limits
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
sustained by one person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each
occurrence; and,
      2.   Property damage liability insurance: Coverage with limits not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence.
The contractor shall provide to the building official a copy of their insurance
certificate at the time of their initial application and as each new insurance
certificate is issued, as necessary to show required coverage at all times that
they have an active permit. No permit shall be issued to a contractor without
proof of the required insurance being on file with the building official. (Ord.
2019-03, 7-9-2019)
9-3-6: INACTIVE STATUS:
   A.   A licensed contractor may elect to designate his or her license as
"inactive" by submitting a written statement to the building official. The
following conditions shall apply to every contractor who is designated as
"inactive":
      1.   Inactive licensees shall pay the appropriate annual renewal fees
required for licensed contractors.
      2.   Inactive licensees shall not be required to comply with the
insurance requirements that otherwise apply to licensed contractors under this
chapter.
      3.   Inactive licensees shall not perform work that must be performed by
a licensed contractor under this Code, and may not receive any permits to
perform work under this Code, except as may be permitted under the listed
property owner exemptions of subsection 9-3-1B of this chapter.
      4.   Inactive licensees shall not be eligible to serve any additional
term on the Contractor Licensing Board - however, they may complete their term
if currently serving on the Board.
      5.   If an inactive licensee wishes to change status of his license to
active so that he may perform work and receive permits to do work, he or she
shall provide evidence of the required liability insurance to the building
official, and deliver a written statement to the building official stating that
he or she wishes to change his license to active. Upon receiving such
information, the building official shall designate the licensee as active.
(Ord. 2019-03, 7-9-2019)
CHAPTER 4
FENCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: General Provisions
9-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Fence Defined: "Fence" means a constructed vertical structure, barrier
or partition of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose,
screen, or separate outdoor areas, and which has no roof or overhead covering.
   B.   Permit Required: No person shall build, rebuild, replace, construct or
erect, or cause to be built, rebuilt, replaced, constructed or erected anywhere
within the city, any boundary or division fence or wall of any kind, without
first having secured a permit therefor from the building official or his or her
designee. For purposes of this section, a fence is considered to be rebuilt or
replaced if thirty feet (30') or more of an existing fence is removed and
rebuilt or replaced within a twelve (12) month period from the time work on the
fence begins.
   C.   Property Owner Requirements: Prior to installing any part of the fence,
including posts, the property owner shall:
      1.   Application: Submit an application, signed by the property owner,
which shall include a site plan showing the dimensions and location of the
proposed fence. The application shall be on a form prescribed and approved by
the building official;
      2.   Meet With The Building Official: Meet with the building official, or
his or her designee, to show where the fence will be located; and
      3.   Identification Of Lines And Boundaries: Demonstrate to the building
official, or his or her designee, that the fence will not cross, interfere
with, or encroach into or upon any neighboring property or city rights of way.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to accurately identify the
property lines and boundaries of his or her property where the fence will
stand. The building official, or his or her designee, may require the property
owner to survey the property boundaries to ensure that the fence will not
encroach into or upon a neighboring property or city rights of way. "Rights of
way", as used herein, shall be defined as public streets, public sidewalks and
public alleys.
   D.   Materials: Fencing materials are limited to wood, vinyl, masonry,
wrought iron, decorative metal, wire mesh (e.g., chainlink), bamboo, and
similar materials. Pallets, tarps, scrap metal, tires, signs, and similar
materials are not permitted for fencing purposes.
   E.   Height: Fences are subject to the following height limits. Fence height
is measured from the finished grade of the property upon which the fence is
located.
      1.   Within all of the residential zoning districts:
         a.   Fences are limited to a maximum of four feet (4') in height in
any front yard setback area; and, fences taller than three feet (3') in the
front yard setback area must be at least forty percent (40%) open - as in the
measurement of the spaces and voids between the fence components.
         b.   Fences may be a maximum of seven feet (7') in height in any
portion of a lot that is outside of the front yard setback area.
      2.   Within the nonresidential zoning districts (e.g., industrial, light
industrial, commercial, business), fences up to seven feet (7') tall are
permitted within the property; provided, no view obscuring fence over four feet
(4') tall shall be less than fifteen feet (15') from the edge of an arterial or
collector street (measured from face of curb). For purposes of this section,
"view obscuring" shall mean a fence that is less than forty percent (40%) open
- as in the measurement of the spaces and voids between the fence components.
Notwithstanding the above, the planning and zoning board may approve a fence
taller than that specified when the additional height will not have any adverse
impacts to neighboring properties or the public health and safety. Before
making such a determination, the applicant shall notify the owners of all
adjacent lots of the request in writing and allow them up to ten (10) days to
provide comments to the board. The board may take action on the request at any
time after all neighbor responses are received, or after the ten (10) day
comment period, whichever occurs sooner.
Regardless of the above permitted fence heights, all fences shall be located so
that required intersection sight triangles are maintained at all street
intersections.
   F.   Encroachments, Easements After March 1, 2010: In subdivisions approved
or built on or after March 1, 2010, nobody shall build a fence within a city
easement. Fences which are built on or nearly on a property line, and which
encroach into a city easement by twelve inches (12") or less shall not be
considered a violation of this subsection. For subdivisions approved or built
after March 1, 2010, the property lines separating the lots within the
subdivision and the property boundaries of the subdivision shall, as nearly as
feasible, not fall within the city utility easements, and shall be located
outside the city utility easements. Fences may cross an easement so that the
fence is nearly perpendicular to the easement. If a fence crosses an easement,
the property owner shall do one of the following:
      1.   The property owner must include a removable panel or gate which is
the same width as the easement, and must allow the city to access the easement
quickly and easily, and which must be approved by the building inspector; or
      2.   The property owner must provide to the city a separate easement for
ingress and egress to the utility easement. The easement must run with the land
in perpetuity, and the width, form and route of the ingress and egress easement
must be approved by the building inspector, and must be recorded with the Park
County clerk's office.
   G.   Encroachments, Easements Before March 1, 2010: Owners of subdivisions,
homes and fences approved or built prior to March 1, 2010, may build, rebuild,
replace, construct or erect fences within or across a city utility easement
under the following conditions:
      1.   The fences shall not be built directly over, under or within one
foot (1') of any existing utility lines, pipes or conduit, including, but not
limited to, water, electrical, wastewater, gas and telecommunications lines;
      2.   The property owner shall obtain a fence permit as described in
subsection B of this section, and shall arrange for a utility line locate prior
to beginning any construction or excavation, to ensure compliance with this
section; and
      3.   Such fence shall remain in the easement at the property owner's
risk, subject to the conditions in subsection L of this section.
   H.   Final Inspection: The property owner or the contractor building the
fence shall call for a final inspection upon completion of the fence.
   I.   Removal For Violation: Any fence which is built in violation of any of
the provisions of this section is subject to removal at the expense of the
property owner. If the city finds that a property owner has built, or caused to
be built, any fence or portion of a fence which violates any of the provisions
of this code, the city may order the property owner to remove the fence at his
or her expense. The city shall notify the property owner in writing of the
alleged violation, and shall order the property owner to remove the fence
within thirty (30) days of the written notice, which may be delivered in
person, by mail or by posting a copy of the notice on the door of the residence
where the fence has been built. The building official may give the property
owner an extension or allow a longer period of time if the building official
determines there is just cause for such extension. Such extensions shall be in
writing.
   J.   Refusal To Comply; Removal By City: If the property owner refuses or
fails to remove the fence within the required time, the city may remove the
fence at the property owner's expense, and the property owner may be cited as
described in subsection K of this section.
   K.   Violation: Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and
punishable by a fine to be determined by the municipal court of the city.
   L.   Emergency, Nonemergency Removal: If at any time, the city, through its
officers, employees or agents, must access a city easement, right of way or
property, and a fence or other structure, prevents or in any way interferes
with access to the city easement, right of way or property, including, but not
limited to, fences lawfully built within easements pursuant to subsection G of
this section, the city may, in emergency situations, immediately remove such
fence or wall at the expense of the property owner. "Emergency situations"
shall include, but not be limited to, locates of utility lines, unplanned power
outages, and leaks, breaks or ruptures in water, sewer or other utility lines.
If the city needs to access an easement in a nonemergency situation, and the
easement is blocked or obstructed by a fence or other structure, the city shall
give notice to the property at least two (2) business days in advance by
mailing or posting written notice to the last known address of the owner of the
property or to the subject property. The notice shall inform the property owner
of the date and reason the city needs to access the easement, and that if the
owner does not remove the fence or structure prior to that date, that the city
will remove the fence or structure, or such portions of the fence or structure,
as are necessary to access the utility. The notice shall also include a copy of
the ordinance codified herein. In any situation, whether emergency or
nonemergency, where the city must access an easement requiring the removal of a
fence or other structure, such removal shall be at the expense of the property
owner, and the city shall not be responsible for damage to the property caused
by the removal of the fence or other structure or the use of the property, and
shall not be responsible for replacement of the fence or other structure.
   M.   Compliance Required: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
relieve the property owner of his or her responsibility to comply with state
and federal laws governing locates of utility lines prior to digging,
excavating or otherwise beginning any work on a fence. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to relieve the property owner of their responsibility to
ensure that they do not damage or destroy any utility lines and equipment.
(Ord. 2016-05, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 5
TOWNHOUSES AND CONDOMINIUMS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definition Of Condominium; Charter Required
9-5-1: DEFINITION OF CONDOMINIUM; CHARTER REQUIRED:
The definition of a "condominium" shall be as defined in the zoning title.
Before a building permit is issued for the construction of any condominiums, an
owners' association charter shall be drafted and submitted for review by the
city attorney and final approval by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2005-
08, 10-18-2005)
CHAPTER 6
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
Article I.  In General
9-6-1: Definitions
Article II.  Administration And Compliance
9-6-2: Permit; Required
9-6-3: Permit; Application Requirements
9-6-4: Permit Application; Review And Investigation
9-6-5: Plans And Specifications Requirements
9-6-6: Permit Issuance
9-6-7: Construction Inspection
9-6-8: Permit Denial; Hearing
9-6-9: Conditions Or Practices; Violations
9-6-10: Existing Nonconforming Mobile Home Developments
9-6-11: Inspection Of Mobile Home Communities
9-6-12: Inspection; Private Or Public Property Access
9-6-13: Register Inspection
9-6-14: Access; Repairs Or Alterations
9-6-15: Notices, Hearings And Orders
9-6-16: Notice; Hearing
9-6-17: Hearing; Findings
9-6-18: Emergency Orders
9-6-19: Exemptions
9-6-20: Exemptions; Correction Period Commencement
9-6-21: Gradual Improvements
9-6-22: Variances
Article III.  Development Standards
9-6-23: Environmental, Open Space And Access Requirements; Generally
9-6-24: Provision Of Site Planning Improvements
9-6-25: Density
9-6-26: Recreation Area
9-6-27: Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips, Screening And Height Limits
9-6-28: Streets
9-6-29: Sidewalks
9-6-30: Mobile Home Lots
9-6-31: Water Supply And Distribution System
9-6-32: Sewerage Disposal
9-6-33: Solid Waste Collection System
9-6-34: Electrical Distribution System
9-6-35: Gas Distribution System
Article IV.  Community Maintenance Standards
9-6-36: Management; Responsibilities
9-6-37: Management; To Notify Residents Of Duties
9-6-38: Management; Mobile Home Placement Supervision
9-6-39: Management; Register Maintenance
9-6-40: Park Directory; Lots To Be Numbered Or Lettered
9-6-41: Residents; Responsibilities
9-6-42: Residents; Mobile Home Placement Compliance
9-6-43: Pets
9-6-44: Skirtings, Porches, Awnings And Additions
9-6-45: Rubbish And Garbage Storage And Disposal
9-6-46: Fire Extinguishers
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Any structural addition to the mobile home, which includes
awnings, cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets
and similar appurtenant structures.
BUILDING: A roofed structure erected for permanent use.
COMMON AREA: Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying
mobile home developments.
COMMUNITY SYSTEM (WATER - SEWERAGE): A central system which serves all living
units and is not publicly owned.
DENSITY: The number of mobile homes and mobile home stands per gross acre.
DRIVEWAY: A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home
lot or for common access to common facilities.
DWELLING: See definition of Living Unit.
EASEMENT: A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a
specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than the owner who
holds title to the land.
ENFORCING AGENCY: The city or its building official, or other agencies of the
city charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The state of Wyoming department of environmental quality, its
authorized representative or the appropriate political subdivision.
HOUSING: Living units, dwellings and/or other structures that shelter or cover.
LICENSE: A written document issued by the enforcing agency allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home development under the provisions of this
chapter.
LIVING UNIT: A residential unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
LOT AREA: The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a
mobile home.
LOT LINE: A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan.
MOBILE HOME: Manufactured relocatable housing.
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY: A body of people living in a mobile home development.
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT: The person who owns or has charge, care or
control of the mobile home development.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT: A contiguous parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for the placement of a mobile home.
NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER: A six foot (6') solid fence or a visual barrier
at least six feet (6') high of shrubs or other vegetation.
NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT: Any mobile home development that is not
fully in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
OCCUPIED AREA: That area of an individual mobile home lot which has been
covered by a mobile home and its accessory structures.
PERMANENT BUILDING: A building, except a mobile home accessory structure.
PERMIT: A written document issued by the enforcing agency permitting the
construction, alteration or expansion of a mobile home development.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association
or corporation.
PLAT: Any map, plan or chart of a city, town, section or subdivision,
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PLOT: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which
is described by reference to a recorded plat or metes and bounds.
POWER SUPPLY ASSEMBLY: The conductors, including the grounding conductors,
insulated from one another, the connectors, attachment plug caps, and all other
fittings, grommets, or devices installed for the purpose of delivering energy
from the service equipment to the distribution panel within the mobile home.
PRIVATE STREET: A private way which affords principal means or access to
abutting individual mobile home lots and auxiliary buildings.
PRIVATE SYSTEM (WATER - SEWERAGE): A system which is constructed, owned and
operated by the mobile home community management which is controlled by the
"health authority", as defined in this section.
PROPERTY: A plot with any buildings or other improvements located thereon.
PROPERTY LINE: A recorded boundary of a plot.
PUBLIC STREET: A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting
properties.
PUBLIC SYSTEM (WATER - SEWERAGE): A system which is owned and operated by the
local governmental authority or by an established public utility company which
is adequately controlled by a governmental authority. Such systems are usually
existing systems serving a municipality, a township, an urban county, or a
water or sewer district established and directly controlled under the laws of a
state.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The area, either public or private, over which the right of
passage exists.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities
as may be required by this regulation.
SERVICE EQUIPMENT: The necessary equipment, usually consisting of circuit
breaker or switch and fuses and their accessories located near the point of
entrance of supply conductors to or in a building or mobile home and intended
to constitute the main control and means of cutoff for the supply to that
mobile home or building.
SEWER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile home
development.
SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to
the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.
SHALL: Indicates that which is required.
SHOULD: Indicates that which is recommended but not required.
SITE: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which
is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
WATER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distributing system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE: That portion of the water supply system serving the mobile
home development which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot. (Ord. 84-9)
ARTICLE II.  ADMINISTRATION AND COMPLIANCE
9-6-2: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile
home development within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit
issued by the enforcing agency in the name of such person for the specific
construction, alteration or extension proposed. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-3: PERMIT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for permits shall contain the following:
   A.   Name and address of applicant.
   B.   Location and legal description of the mobile home development.
   C.   A plan prepared by a Wyoming registered engineer and land surveyor of
the proposed development showing, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
      2.   The lot number, location and size of all mobile home lots and
recreation areas;
      3.   The location and width of existing and proposed streets and walkways
and the same shall be in compliance with any master plan of the city;
      4.   The location of existing and proposed water and sewer lines and
riser pipes;
      5.   A vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more than four
hundred feet to the inch (400' = 1") shall be shown on or accompany the
proposed plan. This map shall show all existing subdivisions, streets, tract
lines of acreage parcels, together with the names of the record owners of
parcels of land immediately adjoining the proposed mobile home development and
between it and the nearest existing thoroughfares. It shall also show how
streets and alleys in the proposed mobile home development may connect with
existing and proposed streets and alleys in neighboring subdivisions or
undeveloped property, to produce the most advantageous development of the
entire neighboring area:
         a.   North direction and scale shall be shown, the scale upon the
detail map shall not exceed one hundred feet to the inch (100' = 1");
         b.   Contours referenced to the city primal bench mark shall be shown
with a minimum interval of two feet (2');
         c.   The location of all existing and proposed utilities within the
parcel and immediately adjacent thereto with all details and locations
indicated;
         d.   The refuse collection system. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-4: PERMIT APPLICATION; REVIEW AND INVESTIGATION:
The building official shall review the plan, investigate the application and
the site for compliance with this chapter and other applicable regulations, and
report the findings and recommendations to the planning and zoning commission.
The cost of the review and investigation shall be borne by the applicant and
the rate shall be the inspection fee of the currently adopted edition of the
international building code for special inspections. The planning and zoning
commission shall review the site, location, design, layout and the building
official's recommendation, and shall recommend to the governing body to allow
or not allow the mobile home park. After approval by the governing body, the
applicant shall proceed with the requirements of section 9-6-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-09, 6-5-2007)
9-6-5: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant shall provide the following:
   A.   Water, Sewer Facilities: Plans and specifications of the water supply
and sewage disposal facilities that have been prepared by a Wyoming registered
engineer and approved by the health authority;
   B.   Buildings: Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to
be constructed within the mobile home development. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-6: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
When, upon review of the application, plans and specifications, the enforcing
agency is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this
chapter, a permit shall be issued. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-7: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:
The mobile home community management shall retain a Wyoming registered engineer
to inspect the construction, alteration or extension allowed by the permit. The
engineer shall provide the enforcing agency with daily logs of construction
activities and required materials testing results. Upon completion, the
engineer shall furnish the enforcing agency a reproducible set of as
constructed plans and specifications, and his certificate of construction
pursuant to the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-8: PERMIT DENIAL; HEARING:
Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been denied
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the enforcing
agency under the procedure provided by sections 9-6-15 through 9-6-18 of this
chapter. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-9: CONDITIONS OR PRACTICES; VIOLATIONS:
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home community constructed after the
effective date hereof, the enforcing agency finds that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of this chapter, the enforcing agency shall give
notice in writing in accordance with section 9-6-15 of this chapter to the
person to whom the permit was issued, or the present owner, that such
conditions or practices are to be corrected within a reasonable period of time
specified in the notice by the enforcing agency. At the end of such period, the
enforcing agency shall reinspect such mobile home community and, if such
conditions or practices have not been corrected, he may issue a complaint for
such violation. (Ord. 84-9; amd. Ord. 87-1)
9-6-10: EXISTING NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENTS:
All mobile home developments existing as of the effective date hereof not
meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be declared nonconforming by the
enforcing agency and shall not be permitted to add spaces or make any
improvements inconsistent with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Any
such nonconforming mobile home developments which discontinue operating shall
not reopen until the conditions of this chapter shall have been complied with.
(Ord. 84-9; amd. Ord. 87-1)
9-6-11: INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES:
The enforcing agency is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections
as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
84-9)
9-6-12: INSPECTION; PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY ACCESS:
The enforcing agency shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-13: REGISTER INSPECTION:
The enforcing agency shall have the power to inspect the register containing a
record of all residents of the mobile home community. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-14: ACCESS; REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS:
It shall be the duty of every resident of a mobile home community to give the
management thereof, or his designated agent, access to any part of such mobile
home development at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 84-
9)
9-6-15: NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
Whenever the enforcing agency determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
enforcing agency shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to
whom the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
   A.   Be in writing;
   B.   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
   C.   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
   D.   Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly
served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered
mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by
any method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
   E.   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-16: NOTICE; HEARING:
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the enforcing agency; provided, that such person
shall file in the office of the enforcing agency a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
ten (10) days after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a
hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in
the case of an order issued under section 9-6-18 of this chapter. Upon receipt
of such petition, the enforcing agency shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filed;
provided, that upon application of the petitioner, the enforcing agency may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten (10) day
period when in his judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reasons for such postponement. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-17: HEARING; FINDINGS:
After such hearing, the enforcing agency shall make findings as to compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue an order in writing
sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as
provided in subsection 9-6-15D of this chapter. Upon failure to comply with any
order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing a notice, the general penalty
provision of section
1-4-1 of this code shall be applicable. (Ord. 84-9; amd. Ord. 87-1)
9-6-18: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Whenever the enforcing agency finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the
emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the enforcing agency, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of section 9-6-17 of
this chapter shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued
thereafter. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-19: EXEMPTIONS:
Where the enforcing agency finds that compliance with provisions of this
chapter would result in undue hardship, an exemption may be granted by the
enforcing agency without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter.
Deviations from design, construction and installation provisions shall be
brought into compliance within one of two (2) periods of time. Either a period
of time hereinafter referred to as a "minimum period" not to exceed five (5)
years, or a period of time hereinafter referred to as a "maximum period" not to
exceed twenty five (25) years. Factors to be considered in determining the
length of time and the given period in which to correct any deviation in and
from the standards shall include, but not be limited to, the economic
feasibility of improvement, nature, significance and extent of the deviation,
depreciation of materials, improvements, the existing layout, and other similar
factors. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-20: EXEMPTIONS; CORRECTION PERIOD COMMENCEMENT:
Such period shall begin after the enforcing agency has given notice of a
certain and specific deviation from this chapter to the person to whom the
permit or certification was issued. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-21: GRADUAL IMPROVEMENTS:
Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity shall be permissive;
provided, that there shall be complete conformity at the end of a period
prescribed by the enforcing agency. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-22: VARIANCES:
When it is shown that there are extraordinary hardships because of the complete
and strict compliance with this chapter, the city council shall have the power
to vary the requirements of this chapter so that there is substantial
compliance in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and
the public interest is still served. Before any such variance is granted, it
shall be determined that same will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 84-9)
ARTICLE III.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9-6-23: ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY:
   A.   A mobile home development shall be located only upon property zoned a
mobile home F-1 district by the appropriate public planning agency and shall
have a minimum of two (2) acres of land.
   B.   No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except
such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well being of park
residents, and for the management and maintenance of the park. Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile
home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities.
   C.   Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not
create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The
site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors or other
adverse influences, and no portion subject to predictable sudden flooding or
erosion, and shall not be used for any purpose which would expose persons or
property to hazards. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-24: PROVISION OF SITE PLANNING IMPROVEMENTS:
Site planning improvements shall provide for:
   A.   Facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the occupants.
   B.   Safe, comfortable and sanitary use by the occupants under all weather
conditions.
   C.   Practical and efficient operation and maintenance of all facilities at
reasonable costs. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-25: DENSITY:
   A.   The maximum density of mobile homes shall be regulated by separation
requirements, occupied lot area ratios and recreation area requirements as set
forth in this standard. Density will vary considerably in accommodating
different sizes of mobile home units with its accessory structures used in the
locality and in the type of layout proposed.
   B.   No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') from any
other mobile home or permanent building within the mobile home development.
   C.   Mobile home stands shall not occupy an area in excess of one- third (1/
3) of the respective lot area. The accumulated occupied area of the mobile home
and its accessory structures on a mobile home lot shall not exceed two-thirds
(2/3) of the respective lot area. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-26: RECREATION AREA:
Not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area shall be devoted to
recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. Recreation
areas may include parks, playgrounds, space for community buildings and
community use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools,
hobby shops and service buildings. If construction of developments is in
stages, then recreation areas shall be proportionately developed. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-27: REQUIRED SETBACKS, BUFFER STRIPS, SCREENING AND HEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from
any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway, and
at least fifteen feet (15') from other park property boundary lines.
   B.   There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet (10') between the mobile
home stand and the abutting park street.
   C.   The mobile home shall maintain a minimum distance of ten feet (10')
from the side and rear lines of a mobile home space.
   D.   Accessory buildings may be located at least five feet (5') from the
rear and side lines of a mobile home space, and must be at least twenty feet
(20') from a front line and ten feet (10') from a corner line.
   E.   All mobile home developments located adjacent to industrial or
commercial land uses shall be provided with screening, such as fences or
natural growth along the property boundary line separating the development and
such adjacent nonresidential uses.
   F.   Mobile homes are limited to a maximum height of twenty feet (20').
Other structures in the mobile home park are limited to two (2) stories, and
thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2017-03, 3-7-2017)
9-6-28: STREETS:
   A.   Entrance Streets: Entrances to mobile home developments shall have
direct connections to a public street and shall be designed to allow free
movement of traffic on such adjacent public streets. No parking shall be
permitted on the entrance street for a distance of one hundred feet (100') from
its point of beginning.
   B.   Circulation: The street system should provide convenient circulation by
means of residential streets and properly located collector streets. Dead end
streets shall be limited in length to five hundred feet (500') and their closed
end shall be provided with an adequate turnaround (80 feet diameter cul-de-
sac).
   C.   Pavement Widths: Pavements should be of adequate widths to accommodate
the contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of
street, with ten feet (10') minimum moving lanes and eight feet (8') minimum
lanes for parallel parking, and in all cases shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
      1.   Collector streets and residential streets: Twenty eight feet (28').
      2.   Street widths are from back to back of curb.
   D.   Street Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure
adequate surface drainage, but should not be more than eight percent (8%).
   E.   Intersections: Street intersections should generally be at right
angles. Offsets at intersections and intersections of more than two (2) streets
at one point should be avoided.
   F.   Extent Of Improvements: All streets shall be constructed with materials
and thicknesses that comply with city standards and specifications. The streets
shall have curb and gutter on both sides.
   G.   Streetlights: Lighting shall be designed to produce a minimum of 0.1
foot-candle throughout the street system. Potentially hazardous locations, such
as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps shall be individually
illuminated with a minimum of 0.3 foot-candle. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-29: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Required: Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of residential
streets and on the side of collector streets that are adjacent to mobile homes.
   B.   Construction: Sidewalks shall be constructed to city standards and
specifications. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-30: MOBILE HOME LOTS:
   A.   General: The limits of each mobile home lot should be marked on the
ground by suitable means. Location of lot limits on the ground should be the
same as shown on accepted plans. A lot shall have a minimum of four thousand
(4,000) square feet.
   B.   Mobile Home Stands: The mobile home stand shall be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie down of the mobile home. The stand
shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home
due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on
the structure. Anchors or tie downs, if provided, such as cast in place
concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete screw augers or arrow head
anchors, shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand and
each device shall be able to sustain a minimum load of four thousand eight
hundred (4,800) pounds.
   C.   Driveways: Improved driveways should be provided on lots where
necessary for convenient access to mobile homes. The minimum width shall be ten
feet (10').
   D.   Parking Spaces: The design criteria for automobile parking shall be
based upon two (2) parking spaces for each mobile home lot. Parking may be in
tandem.
   E.   Outdoor Living Area: Each mobile home lot should be provided with an
outdoor living and service area. Such area should be improved as necessary to
assure reasonable privacy and comfort. The minimum area should be not less than
three hundred (300) square feet.
   F.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures remain per definition
provided in section 9-6-1 of this chapter, dependent upon the mobile home and
shall not be used as complete independent living units with permanent
provisions for sleeping, cooking and sanitation. Such structures shall be
erected, constructed or occupied on a mobile home lot as directed by the
management of the mobile home development, as required by applicable national,
state or local standards and as specified herein:
      1.   Accessory structures shall be designed in a manner that will enhance
the appearance of the mobile home development.
      2.   Accessory structures shall not obstruct required openings for light
and ventilation of the mobile home and shall not prevent inspection of mobile
home equipment and utility connections.
      3.   Construction and electrical installations shall comply with city
standards and specifications.
      4.   Electrical circuits supplying the accessory structure shall be
independent of the circuit supplying the mobile home. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-31: WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
   A.   General Requirements: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply
of water shall be provided in each mobile home development. Where a public
supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available at
the site or at the boundary of the site, connection shall be made thereto and
its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not
available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved
by the health authority.
   B.   Water Distribution System:
      1.   Public distribution systems intended to be operated and maintained
by the enforcing agency shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications of the enforcing agency.
      2.   Private distribution systems intended to be operated and maintained
by the mobile home community management shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the health authority.
      3.   Fire hydrants shall be located within two hundred fifty feet (250')
of any mobile home, service building or other structure in the development.
   C.   Individual Water Riser Pipes And Connections:
      1.   Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the area of the
mobile home stand and approximately thirty feet (30') from the front of such
stand.
      2.   Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches (4") above
ground elevation. The pipe diameter shall be at least three- fourths inch (3/
4"). The water outlet shall be capped when a mobile home does not occupy the
lot.
      3.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted
from the location of the riser pipe.
      4.   A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the
water riser pipe on each mobile home lot. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-32: SEWERAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   General Requirements: An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be
provided in all mobile home developments for conveying and disposing of all
sewage. Wherever feasible, connection shall be made to a public system.
   B.   Sewerage Systems:
      1.   Public sewerage systems intended to be operated and maintained by
the enforcing agency shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications of the enforcing agency.
      2.   Private sewerage systems intended to be operated and maintained by
the mobile home community management shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the health authority.
   C.   Individual Sewer Connections:
      1.   Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a four inch (4")
diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be located within the
area of the mobile home stand, and approximately forty feet (40') from the
front of such stand.
      2.   Provisions shall be made for sealing the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away
from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four inches
(4") above ground elevation.
   D.   Sewerage Treatment And/Or Discharge: Where the sewer lines of the
mobile home development are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed
sewage disposal facilities shall be private, and constructed and operated by
the mobile home community management and shall be approved by the health
authority prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities
shall be discharged only as permitted by the health authority. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-33: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SYSTEM:
A design for solid waste collection system shall be submitted by the mobile
home community management to the enforcing agency with the initial application
for a permit.
The same shall be reviewed and approved by the enforcing agency before the
system is implemented. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-34: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
The electrical distribution system shall be designed, constructed and operated
in accordance with the applicable standards, specifications and regulations of
the enforcing agency. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-35: GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
   A.   General: Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home
development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable
codes adopted by the supplying public utility company, which are on file with
the Wyoming public service commission, and a copy on file at the utility
company's local office.
   B.   Required Gas Supply: Gas piping shall be sized so as to assure an
adequate supply of gas to each mobile home unit. All underground piping shall
be, when required, black steel pipe of not less than standard weight (schedule
40), coated and wrapped (with approved wrap).
   C.   Installation: All gas piping installed belowground shall have a minimum
earth cover of twenty four inches (24"). Gas piping shall not be installed
under any mobile home.
   D.   System Shutoff Valve: A readily accessible and identified shutoff valve
controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas piping system shall be installed
near to point of connection to the service piping or supply connection of the
liquefied petroleum gas tank.
   E.   Mobile Home Lot Shutoff Valve: Each mobile home lot shall have an
approved gas shutoff valve installed upstream of the mobile home lot gas outlet
and located on the outlet riser at a height of not less than four inches (4")
above grade. Such valve shall not be located under any mobile home. Whenever
the mobile home lot outlet is not in use, the outlet shall be equipped with an
approved cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas.
   F.   Mobile Home Connector: Each mobile home shall be connected to the
mobile home lot outlet by an approved three-fourths inch (3/4") mobile home
connector not more than six feet (6') in length. Approved pipe and fittings may
be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home lot gas outlet when
the distance between the mobile home lot gas outlet and the mobile home gas
service connection exceeds that required to make a safe installation with only
a mobile home connector.
   G.   Mechanical Protection: All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters,
valves or other exposed equipment shall be protected from mechanical damage by
vehicles or other causes.
   H.   Location: The mobile home gas connection shall be installed at the edge
of the mobile home stand, approximately thirty feet (30') from the front of
such stand; and located as not to terminate beneath the mobile home. (Ord. 84-
9)
ARTICLE IV.  COMMUNITY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
9-6-36: MANAGEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES:
The person to whom a license for a mobile home community is issued shall
provide adequate supervision to maintain the community in compliance with this
chapter and keep its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-37: MANAGEMENT; TO NOTIFY RESIDENTS OF DUTIES:
The management shall notify the community residents of all applicable
provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities
under this chapter. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-38: MANAGEMENT; MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT SUPERVISION:
The management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile
home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility
connections. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-39: MANAGEMENT; REGISTER MAINTENANCE:
The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all community
residents identified by lot number or street address. Such register shall be
available to any authorized person inspecting the community. Each lot shall
have a sign conspicuously placed that indicates the number of the lot. (Ord.
84-9)
9-6-40: PARK DIRECTORY; LOTS TO BE NUMBERED OR LETTERED:
At the entrance of each mobile home park, a directory, approved by the planning
and zoning commission, shall be erected and maintained at all times in good
order and repair. Each lot shall be numbered or lettered in a conspicuous
manner pursuant to the specifications and requirements set forth and delineated
by the city. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-41: RESIDENTS; RESPONSIBILITIES:
Each resident shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and
shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair
and in clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-42: RESIDENTS; MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT COMPLIANCE:
The resident shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on
its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in
accordance with the instructions of the management. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-43: PETS:
Pets, if permitted in the community, shall be prohibited to run at large or to
commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-44: SKIRTINGS, PORCHES, AWNINGS AND ADDITIONS:
Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions shall be installed only if
permitted and approved by the management. When installed, they shall be
maintained in good repair. The space immediately underneath a mobile home shall
be used for storage only if permitted by the management. If permitted, the
following conditions shall be satisfied:
   A.   Base Material: The storage area shall be provided with a base of
impervious material.
   B.   Location Of Stored Items: Stored items shall be located so as not to
interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home.
   C.   Skirting Required: The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
(Ord. 84-9)
9-6-45: RUBBISH AND GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
The resident shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean,
sanitary and safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof,
insectproof and watertight. (Ord. 84-9)
9-6-46: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
First aid fire extinguishers for class A, B and C fires are recommended to be
kept at the premises and maintained in working condition. (Ord. 84-9)
CHAPTER 7
HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Lawful Numbers Required
9-7-2: Notice To Comply With Chapter
9-7-1: LAWFUL NUMBERS REQUIRED:
Every dwelling and business house in the city now or hereafter erected, shall
be numbered in the manner to be determined by the building official; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any house numbers which
do not conform with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-08, 10-18-2005)
9-7-2: NOTICE TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER:
The building official shall notify the owner or agent of any building or
premises which is not numbered in compliance herewith, to affix or inscribe the
proper number in plain and legible figures, on the front of such building or
premises. Such notice shall be served personally on such owner or agent, by
leaving the same at the residence or premises or place of business of such
owner or agent, or in case such owner or agent cannot be found, such notice
shall be served on the occupant of such building or premises. It shall be the
duty of such owner, agent or occupant to comply with such notice, within ten
(10) days from date thereof. (Ord. 2005-08, 10-18-2005)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Scope And Purposes
10-1-3: Compliance Required
10-1-4: Rules Of Interpretation
10-1-5: Enforcement
10-1-6: Processing Fees, Notice Costs, And Refunds
10-1-7: Districts Established
10-1-8: Zoning Lots
10-1-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CODY, WYOMING. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-2: SCOPE AND PURPOSES:
This title is in pursuance of the authority conferred by Wyoming Statutes
sections 15-1-601 through 15-1-611, and shall apply to all properties and
developments within the Cody City limits, except those that are federally
exempted.
The purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the City by:
   A.   Preserving the character of the City of Cody and its neighborhoods;
   B.   Conserving the value of buildings;
   C.   Encouraging the most appropriate use of land;
   D.   Encouraging compatible uses within the neighborhoods or districts;
   E.   Lessening congestion in the streets;
   F.   Securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
   G.   Ensuring provisions for adequate light and air;
   H.   Preventing the overcrowding of land;
   I.   Avoiding undue concentration of population; and
   J.   Facilitating adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public requirements.
This title is implemented in accordance with the City of Cody Master Plan (aka
Comprehensive Plan). (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No land shall be used, or structure constructed, except in accordance with the
regulations and requirements of this title, including the requirement to obtain
applicable approvals and permits prior to the development of the property. No
application for the development of land shall be approved unless the
application is determined to be in conformance with the requirements of this
title and all applicable development regulations, including any standards,
plans or policies that have been adopted by the City so as to have a regulatory
effect. All development applications filed on or after the effective date of
this title, as initially adopted and subsequently amended, whether for new
development or for the expansion or alteration of existing development, shall
be processed in accordance with the standards, requirements and procedures
established herein. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-4: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting the language of this title, the rules set out in this section
shall be observed unless the interpretation would be inconsistent with the
express language of this title.
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions in
this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
protection of health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience or the general
welfare. In case of conflict between this title and any other laws that
exercise control over the same feature, the more stringent regulation shall
apply.
   B.   Meaning And Intent: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this title shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the
intent of the Governing Body. Words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage in the language, but technical words and phrases
that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to that meaning. Such terms, words, and
phrases used in this title, when defined herein or elsewhere in this Code,
shall have the meaning noted. Terms, words and phrases not defined by this Code
shall have the meanings prescribed by Wyoming Statutes for the same terms, when
defined therein. Any term, word or phrase not specifically defined or
prescribed in this Code or Wyoming Statutes shall have the ordinary meaning
ascribed to it in a dictionary of common usage.
   C.   Text Controls: In case of any conflict between the text of this title
and any figure or table, the text shall control.
   D.   Computation Of Time: The time within which an act is to be performed
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or other day that the City
offices are officially closed to the public, that day shall be excluded. The
following time-related words shall have the meanings ascribed below:
"Day" means a calendar day unless otherwise stated. "Week" means seven (7)
calendar days. "Month" means one (1) calendar month. "Year" means a calendar
year, unless a fiscal year is indicated.
   E.   Other Clarifications:
      1.   Headings: The headings contained in this title are for convenience
only and do not limit or modify the intent or meaning of the provisions.
      2.   Tense: Unless clearly indicated to the contrary, words used in the
present tense shall include the future, words used in the plural shall include
the singular, words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words of
one (1) gender shall include the other.
      3.   Use Of Certain Words: The words "shall", "must", and "will" are
always mandatory. The words "may" and "should" are discretionary.
      4.   Written Information: References to "written" information shall mean
any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or other
form or method of writing.
      5.   Conjunctions: Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
"And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
"Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or
in any combination.
   F.   Private Covenants Or Deed Clauses: No provision of this title is
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, private
covenants, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. In
cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land or
structures, the provisions of this title shall prevail and control. The City
has no power or authority to enforce private deed covenants, conditions or
restrictions to which it is not a party. Private covenants or deed restrictions
which impose conditions more restrictive than those imposed by this title, or
which impose restrictions not covered by this title, are not implemented nor
superseded by this title.
   G.   Limitations On City Action: The issuance or granting of a building
permit or approval of plans or specifications under the authority of the
building code shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any provisions of this title or any amendments thereto, or of any
other law. No permit, approval, representation, action or inaction on the part
of a City officer or employee which purports, or could be interpreted, to
authorize the violation or cancellation of any of the provisions of this title
shall limit the City's authority to enforce the provisions of this title or any
other provision of this Code. Any permit, license or other approval which is
issued in error in conflict with this title is voidable by order of the City.
   H.   Other Permits: Nothing in this title shall eliminate the need for
obtaining any other required permits, including, but not limited to building
permits; plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permits; grading permits; or any
permit, approval, or entitlement required by other titles of this Code, other
political subdivisions of the State of Wyoming, or agencies of the State of
Wyoming.
   I.   Other Limitations: No provision in this title amounts to a guarantee,
warranty or promise that any particular type of construction will be free from
defect, will perform in a certain manner, or will be exempt from other legal
requirements applicable thereto. The issuance of a permit, or the inspection or
approval of any permit, plans or work under this title, shall in no way
constitute a guarantee, warranty or promise that any particular material, labor
or construction will be free from defect, or perform in a certain manner, or
will be durable, safe or fit for a particular purpose or use. Compliance with
this title is not intended to substitute for the performance of any private
duty, nor to reduce or eliminate any private liability on the part of an owner,
developer or permittee.
   J.   Severability: If for any reason any part, section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this title, or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title.
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   General:
      1.   Purpose: Enforcement of the provisions of this title shall be
pursued in order to provide for its effective administration, to ensure
compliance with any condition of development approval, to promote the City's
planning efforts, and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   Responsibility: The provisions of this title and any conditions of
development approval which have been imposed thereunder may be enforced by the
City Administrator, City Planner, City Building Official, City Code Enforcement
Officer, City Police Department, and any other City officer or employee
designated by the City Administrator to do so. Any structure or use which is
established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this title shall be subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth in this title. A building permit, subdivision, and other
land development application may be denied for failure to comply with this
title, including any condition or standard imposed on any application granted
under this title.
      3.   Stop Work Order: A "stop work order" may be issued by any of the
persons identified in subsection A2 of this section with respect to any
construction which is in violation of this title or in violation of any
condition which has been imposed on a permit or other approval under this
title. The "stop work order" shall identify the property location, briefly
describe the reason for the stop work order, be signed and dated by the
individual issuing the order, and contain information on how to contact the
Community Development Department about the apparent violation.
   B.   Violations: Pursuant to Wyoming Statute section 15-1-610, if any
building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this title or other regulation made under its authority,
the proper authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies prescribed by
ordinance, may institute any appropriate action to prevent the violation; the
occupancy of the building, structure or land; or, any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises.
      1.   Misdemeanor: A violation of this title, or any permit issued in
accordance therewith, whether such violation was caused by disobedience,
omission, neglect, or refusal to comply, constitutes a misdemeanor, as follows:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person, whether acting as a principal,
agent or employee, to violate any provision of this title, or of any condition
or requirement imposed upon any permit or authorization granted hereunder,
including but not limited to those specified in a conditional use permit, site
development authorization (plan review), special exemption, variance,
administrative deviation, home occupation permit, sign permit, or a temporary
use permit.
         b.   It is unlawful for the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of
a building or premises or for any other person to cause, permit or assist in
the occurrence or commitment of a violation of any provision of this title, or
of any condition or requirement imposed upon a permit or authorization granted
hereunder, including but not limited to those specified in a conditional use
permit, site development authorization (plan review), special exemption,
variance, administrative deviation, home occupation permit, sign permit, or a
temporary use permit.
Upon conviction, said person shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after
notice has been given by a City representative noted in subsection A2 of this
section shall constitute a separate offence.
      2.   Administrative Action: For any violation of this title, or of any
approval granted or condition of approval imposed hereunder, the City may
pursue administrative action to:
         a.   Review, modify, suspend, or revoke an approval or permit issued
hereunder;
         b.   Require the discontinuance of a use operating as a conditional
use or special use under this Code; or
         c.   As an alternative to requiring discontinuance under subsection
B2b of this section, require that a use operating as a conditional use or
special use under this Code comply with additional conditions or limitations.
      3.   Nuisance: Any building or structure set up, erected, built, moved,
or maintained or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title
shall be, and is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance and the City
Attorney shall, upon order of the City Administrator or City Council,
immediately commence actions or proceedings for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment of it in a manner provided by law and shall take such other steps
and shall apply to the court as may have jurisdiction to grant relief to abate
or remove the building, structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person
from setting up, erecting, building, moving, or maintaining any building or
structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title.
      4.   Remedies Cumulative: All remedies provided herein shall be
cumulative and not exclusive.
      5.   Violations Continue: Any violation of a former version of the Zoning
Code, or portion thereof, shall continue to be a violation under this title and
be subject to penalties and enforcement under this section, unless the use,
development, construction, or other activity complies with the current
provisions of this title. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-6: PROCESSING FEES, NOTICE COSTS, AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Payment Of Processing Fee Required: The Governing Body shall establish
and maintain a fee schedule for the processing of applications required
pursuant to this title. The fee schedule may be adopted by resolution. No
application shall be processed without payment of the required fee.
   B.   Applications Requiring Fees: Applications requiring fees shall include,
but not be limited to: site plan reviews, planned unit developments, rezones,
text amendments, administrative deviations, special exemptions, conditional use
permits, special use permits, variances, sign permits, architectural and
landscaping reviews, and any other review conducted by the Planning and Zoning
Board.
   C.   Costs: Costs for publishing public notices in the newspaper and costs
for mailing required notices shall be paid by the applicant, and are in
addition to the City's processing fee.
   D.   Withdrawn Applications: Applications that are withdrawn prior to
receiving a decision may be eligible for a partial refund as follows. The City
Planner shall have the discretion to authorize a partial refund based upon the
application fee paid minus the approximate costs of processing the application
incurred to date.
   E.   Refunds: Refunds are not available for applications that have been
processed to the point of receiving a decision from the reviewing official.
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-7: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Adoption Of Official Zoning Map: To bring about the purposes of this
title and provide for regulations that are customized to the different
character districts and neighborhoods of the City, the City is divided into
zoning districts. The boundaries of each zoning district are delineated and
shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cody. The Official Zoning Map,
together with all notations, references, dimensions, designations and other
information shown on the map is adopted and made part of this title by
reference. The Official Zoning Map shall be stored, maintained, and kept
current by the Community Development Department.
   B.   Establishment Of Zones:
      1.   The residential zoning districts established by this title are as
follows and shall be known and cited as:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning District Name
   RR Rural Residential
   R-1 Single Family Residential
   R-2 Medium-Low Density Residential
   R-2 Medium-Low Density Manufactured Home
   R-3 Medium-High Density Residential
   R-4 High Density Residential
   MHP Mobile Home Park
 
      2.   The commercial and industrial zoning districts established by this
title are as follows and shall be known and cited as:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning District Name
   D-1               Limited Business
   D-2               General Business
   D-3               Open Business/Light Industrial
   D-4               High Tech/Data Processing/Light Manufacturing
   E                 Industrial
   HI                Heavy Industrial
 
      3.   The special area zoning districts established by this title are as
follows and shall be known and cited as:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning District Name
   PUD               Planned Unit Development
 
      4.   The overlay districts established by this title are as follows and
shall be known and cited as:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zoning District Name
   A-O               Airport Overlay
   DA-O              Downtown Architectural Overlay
   DP-O              Downtown Parking Overlay
   E-O               Entry Corridor Overlay
 
   C.   Amendments:
      1.   No change to the Official Zoning Map shall be authorized without the
approval of a rezoning application, which approval shall be in the form of an
ordinance approved by the Governing Body.
      2.   The Official Zoning Map shall show the dates and ordinance numbers
of all amendments approved hereafter.
   D.   Rules For Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries: The following
presumptions shall apply in determining boundaries of a district as shown on
the Official Zoning Map:
      1.   Where a boundary follows a public street, the centerline of the
street shall be the boundary. When there are two (2) or more adjacent streets,
the centerline of the street with the higher classification shall be the
boundary (e.g., use centerline of highway instead of frontage road).
      2.   Where a boundary follows a lot line, the lot line shall be the
boundary.
      3.   Where a property is split by a boundary, the boundary shall be
determined by the context of the situation when possible, which methods may
include, for example: review of the legal description of a former rezone
ordinance, the extension of an adjacent property line, the presence of a
physical feature such as a canal or stream, a line between two (2) known
points, and an elevation contour. When the context is not sufficiently clear to
determine the precise location of the district boundary, the boundary shall be
determined by scaling the location from the zoning map.
      4.   Where a public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the
boundary shall automatically be shifted, if necessary, to follow the new
property boundary, which is typically, but not always, the former centerline of
the vacated right-of-way. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-1-8: ZONING LOTS:
The City of Cody contains some developments and land uses that encompass
multiple lots and parcels, without respect to zoning setbacks, building code
regulations, or other development regulations. A property consisting of more
than one (1) lot or parcel, which is developed and/or utilized in such a manner
as to constitute a single development, of which no individual lot or parcel
could be excluded without causing the development to violate an applicable
provision of the Building Code, Fire Code, this title, or other adopted City
Development Code shall be treated as a single lot for purposes of this title,
which lot is termed a "zoning lot". No new zoning lots shall be created, except
pursuant to title 11, chapter 6, article B, "Lot Consolidations", of this Code.
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or structure subordinate to the principal
building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those
of the main building. Cargo containers and similar portable structures that
remain in place more than thirty (30) days shall be considered buildings
(either accessory or primary, depending on situation) for purposes of this
title, except while utilized in conjunction with permitted construction on the
property on which it is located.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): An independent, self-contained dwelling unit
within or attached to a detached single-family dwelling or building accessory
thereto. An ADU that complies with this title is considered a separate land use
for purposes of zoning definition and classification, such that it shall not
individually constitute a single-family dwelling or cause a single-family
dwelling in which it is located to be considered a two-family dwelling
(duplex), as the ADU shall be clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling unit,
both in use and appearance. Mobile homes, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles and temporary structures shall not be used as accessory dwelling
units.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental or secondary to the principal use of a lot,
building or structure and located on the same lot as the principal use. The
intensity and level of activity in an accessory use is less than that of the
primary use.
ADJACENT: To be separated by a common property line or lot line; or, to be
located directly across a street, private street or access easement, alley, or
right-of-way (other than a State highway) from the subject property.
ALLEY: A private or public way that affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property and that is not intended for general travel or circulation.
Alleys are not considered a type of street.
AMENITY: A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic quality,
visual appeal or attractiveness of a particular property, place or area.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus that is mounted on a structure and is used for
transmitting or receiving communications, including digital signals, analog
signals, radio frequencies, wireless communication signals or other
communication signals.
ANTENNA TOWER: A pole or other structure, including any supporting elements,
that is used to support one (1) or more wireless communication antennas. The
term includes a pole or other structure that supports a wireless communication
antenna, including those attached to a trailer or other portable support.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of dwelling, multi-family.
ASSISTED LIVING APARTMENTS: A multi-family building in which personal care
services are provided to elderly residents for daily living needs. Such
services may include, but are not limited to, preparation and service of meals,
housekeeping, laundry, monitoring of rooms, monitoring of medication, or
assistance with bathing. The term includes commercial uses that are ancillary
to an assisted living apartment complex as long as the total amount of floor
space dedicated to such uses does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total
gross floor area of the complex and there is no external signage for, nor
external access to, the commercial uses. The term does not include a
convalescent care facility/nursing home or other medical facility that is
specifically defined in this chapter.
AUXILIARY KITCHEN: A second kitchen in a single-family detached dwelling that
is:
   A.   Intended solely for use by members of the household for private dinner
parties or social gatherings; and
   B.   Not located within an accessory structure and is directly accessible
from the rest of the dwelling.
BASEMENT: A story, as defined herein, which is partly or completely below
finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height
measurement when the basement has more than one-half (1/2) of its height above
finished grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A private single-family detached home that is used to
provide temporary overnight lodging accommodations for a charge to the public
with not more than four (4) lodging units or not more than a daily average of
eight (8) persons per night during any thirty-day period and in which one (1)
but no more than two (2) family-style meals are offered to the guests per 24-
hour period. Total guest occupancy of a bed and breakfast inn shall not exceed
ten (10) persons. (Facilities with a guest occupancy greater than 10 persons
shall be classified as hotels under this title.) Bed and breakfast inns differ
from the short- term rental land use categories in that they allow the sleeping
rooms to be individually rented and a meal service to be provided.
BUFFER ZONE: A minimum fifteen foot (15') wide strip of land, to be landscaped
and maintained, on a commercially zoned property to separate it from any
adjacent land that is zoned residential.
BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a building site, exclusive of the required
setback areas, in which a structure or building improvements may be erected.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. Such term shall include
"structure".
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the net lot area that is covered by
buildings, and measured to the exterior wall surfaces at the ground floor.
Building coverage also includes uncovered horizontal structures such as decks,
stairways and entry bridges that are more than six feet (6') above grade. Eaves
are not included in building coverage.
BUILDING, DETACHED: One (1) building on one (1) building lot surrounded by
yards or open space; or buildings in a building group that are physically
detached one from the other.
BUILDING ELEVATION: The exterior face of a building, including all vertical
elements of the building facing in the same general direction.
BUILDING FACADE: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending
from grade to top of parapet, wall, or eaves, together with the entire width of
the building elevation.
BUILDING HEIGHT: Building height refers to the vertical distance between the
average finished grade along the front of a building and either: a) the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof; b) the deck line of a mansard roof; or c)
the height of a point midway between the eaves of the main roof and the highest
ridge line of a gable, hip or gambrel style roof. For structures without a
roof, building/structure height is the vertical distance from the average
finished grade to the highest point of the structure, except those projections
otherwise exempted or specified in this title. Note: Sign height is as measured
pursuant to the Sign Code.
BUILDING LINE: A line running parallel to a lot line, that is the same distance
from the lot line as the closest portion of a building on the site.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building devoted to the principal use of the lot on which it
is situated. On any lot in a residential district, the term refers to the
principal building, whether a single-family or multi-family building, located
on that lot.
CARPORT: A roofed structure for vehicle parking that is open on at least two
(2) sides. If less than two (2) sides are open, the structure shall be
classified as a garage.
CHILD CARE: A business service provided by an individual, partnership,
corporation or other business entity to keep or care for any minor child for a
period of less than twenty four (24) hours, at the request of the parents,
legal guardians or an agency which is responsible for the child; and which is
required to be regulated as a child care facility by the Wyoming Department of
Family Services.
  Family Child Care Center Category: A business providing child daycare for up
to fifteen (15) children at any one time in a residential or commercial type
structure. If located within a residential zone, the facility must be located
in the primary home of the child care provider.
  Family Child Care Home Category: A business providing child daycare for up to
ten (10) children at any one time. The facility must be located in the primary
home of the child care provider.
CHILD CARE CENTER: A business operating in a non-residential building that
provides child daycare for sixteen (16) or more children. Maximum size is fifty
(50) children when located in a residential zoning district.
CHURCH AND HOUSE OF WORSHIP: Any building used for religious worship services,
religious education, and fellowship activities and programs of a religious
organization. The term does not include a for-profit daycare center, general
education school, thrift shop, homeless shelter, or commercial activity - such
uses are regulated independently.
CITY: The City of Cody, Wyoming.
CITY COUNCIL (COUNCIL): The Mayor and City Council of the City of Cody,
Wyoming.
CITY STANDARDS: In their most recent editions and with the most recent
amendments, any engineering, development or design standards and specifications
adopted by the City Council. The term includes standards for public
improvements and standards for private improvements required pursuant to this
Code.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the
transportation of goods or people.
COMMUNITY CENTER, PRIVATE (ACCESSORY): A privately owned and maintained
facility associated with a planned residential development, neighborhood
organization, or multi-family development which provides for community
activities for residents of the development.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: An area of land established and used for gardening by a
community-based organization or other group of people with the intent of
harvesting produce for personal consumption or for sales or distribution to the
community on a limited basis. The term does not include a garden that is
incidental to a residential use and whose products are primarily intended for
consumption or use by those residing on the property.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DISABLED: A residential family-like living
arrangement for up to ten (10) unrelated individuals with disabilities who are
in need of the mutual support furnished by other residents, as well as the
support services, if any, provided by the operator of the community residence.
Residents may be self-governing or supervised by a sponsoring entity or its
staff that furnishes habilitative or rehabilitative services related to the
needs of the residents. Interrelationships among residents are an essential
component of a community residence. A community residence shall be considered a
residential use of property for purposes of all zoning and building codes.
However, the Fire Marshal, pursuant to and consistent with the City's Fire
Code, may require enhanced fire protection, including the installation of fire
sprinklers and other mitigating measures, where one (1) or more residents has a
lessened ability to ambulate adequately. Prior to authorization of a community
residence for more than five (5) residents, the applicant shall provide a
certification from a qualified medical practitioner that the number of disabled
residents proposed is necessary to provide the mutual support and
interrelationships required for treatment. The use does not include any of the
following:
   A.   Senior citizen apartment (aka "housing for older persons" under the
provisions of Federal law);
   B.   Child or adult daycare;
   C.   Convalescent care facility/nursing home;
   D.   Facility for transitional living for released offenders;
   E.   Facility to provide testing, treatment, or counseling for drug and
alcohol abuse;
   F.   Hospice;
   G.   Sex offender counseling facility;
   H.   Boarding house or rooming house;
   I.   Any other group living arrangement for unrelated individuals who are
not disabled; and
   J.   Any of the following:
  1. Modified medical detoxification facilities;
  2. Facility for the treatment of narcotics; or
  3. Community triage center.
CONDOMINIUM: A multi-family dwelling or a commercial building within which the
occupied area is owned individually and the structure, land, common open space
areas and facilities are owned by all of the owners on a proportional,
undivided basis. See Wyoming Statute title 34, chapter 20, Condominium
Ownership Act.
CONVALESCENT CARE FACILITY/NURSING HOME: A building or structure designed,
used, or intended to be used to house and provide care for persons who have a
chronic physical or mental illness or infirmity, but who do not need medical,
surgical or other specialized treatment normally provided by a hospital. The
term includes a rest home and nursing home, but does not include an assisted
living apartment, hospital, or other medical facility that is specifically
defined in this chapter.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one (1) connection to other streets (dead
end) and with an approved method of termination at the closed end.
CURB: A stone, concrete or other improved border that is typically used to mark
the edge of a roadway or paved surface.
CURB CUT: The opening constructed in the curb line of a street at which point
vehicles may enter or leave the roadway to access adjacent property.
DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE (DEVELOPABLE ACRES): The total area within the lot lines of
a property of a lot or parcel of land before public streets or other areas to
be dedicated or reserved for a public use are deducted from such lot or parcel
through the subdivision process. The term does not include any property that:
   A.   Has already been dedicated or reserved for such purposes;
   B.   Contains slopes in excess of thirty three percent (33%) for a
horizontal distance of at least twenty feet (20'), measured up/down the slope;
   C.   Is below the ordinary high water mark of a waterbody; or,
   D.   Is within a protected wetland.
DORMITORY: A building other than a single-family dwelling that is used for non-
transient group sleeping accommodations either in one (1) room or a series of
closely associated rooms for persons not constituting a family, and which
building is under single management. Dormitories may include common dining,
cooking, recreation, and bathing facilities. A single-family dwelling may be
converted into a dormitory pursuant to the requirements of the adopted Building
Code in order to meet this definition. Sorority and fraternity houses fall
within this category.
DWELLING: A building, structure, or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy as a separate living quarter, with
sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities provided. Dwellings may be further
classified by their number of dwelling units (e.g., two-family dwelling) and
configuration (attached or detached).
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A single-family dwelling attached to one (1) or more
single-family dwellings by common vertical walls, with each dwelling on a
separate lot. Attached dwellings are required to share a common or abutting
wall for at least twenty five percent (25%) of the length of the side of the
dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building or group of buildings that contain at least
three (3) attached dwelling units, and may be configured so that the dwelling
units are stacked one over another.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building containing two (2)
attached single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof, with each dwelling unit on a
separate lot. In other words, a single-family attached dwelling that is
attached to only one (1) other single-family attached dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling unit:
   A.   That is not attached to any other dwelling by any means;
   B.   That is located on a separate and individually owned lot;
   C.   That is surrounded by open space or yards;
   D.   That is for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a
household;
   E.   That has no more than one (1) kitchen with full kitchen facilities; and
   F.   In which all rooms used for human habitation have interior access to
one another.
Nothing in this definition, however, prohibits the construction or use of an
accessory dwelling unit in accordance with this title, or the construction or
use of an auxiliary kitchen as defined in this chapter.
DWELLING, SITE-BUILT: A dwelling that is primarily constructed on the lot on
which it is intended to be occupied, in accordance with the standards of the
City's adopted building codes. The term includes modular homes as defined
herein, and "stick built" homes. The term does not include mobile homes,
manufactured homes, and similar factory-built structures.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A row or cluster of at least three (3) single family
attached dwelling units in which each dwelling unit is located on a separate
lot; each unit is separated by one (1) or more common vertical walls; each unit
has its own front and rear yard access; and no unit is located over another
unit. A townhouse complex may include common open space and recreational areas
and facilities which are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided
basis.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (aka DUPLEX): A residential building containing two (2)
dwelling units that share a common vertical fire wall, with both dwelling units
located on the same lot or parcel.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential unit providing complete and independent living
facilities for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household,
including lawful facilities for living, cooking, eating, sleeping and
sanitation. Except where authorized otherwise by the land use table and/or
supplemental development standards, occupancy of a dwelling unit is limited to
one (1) family.
EASEMENT: A grant of one (1) or more property rights by a property owner that
allows others to use the owner's land for a specific purpose, such as for
access or to locate utilities, as defined by the granting document.
EGRESS: An exit.
ENGINEER: A person currently registered as a professional engineer to practice
in the State of Wyoming.
ESTABLISHMENT: A use, building, structure or premises used for business,
office, or commercial purposes.
FAMILY: Any number of persons living and cooking together on the premises as a
single housekeeping unit, but not including a group of more than five (5)
individuals not related by blood or marriage.
FRONTAGE (Street): The portion of a property that borders a street right-of-
way, measured along the property line.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION: A classification system that defines the purposes
and hierarchy of all streets and highways. Refer to the Master Street Plan.
GARAGE: A building enclosed on more than two (2) sides, or a portion of an
enclosed building, which is used for the parking of vehicles.
GARAGE, REAR-LOAD: A private garage with the overhead door(s) accessed from the
rear of the lot.
GARAGE, SIDE-LOAD: A private garage where the overhead door(s) are oriented
perpendicular to the front lot line.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of the City of Cody.
GRADE, FINISHED: The average proposed level of the finished surface of the
ground adjoining a building after all site development work has been completed.
GRADING: Any stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling of earth or land,
including the land in its cut or filled condition, to create new grades.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all the floors of a
building or structure measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, but
excluding basements with less than six feet eight inches (6'8") ceiling height
and any other area where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than five feet
(5').
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A substance or material, including a hazardous substance,
which has been determined by the United States Secretary of Transportation
under title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to health, safety and property and which has been so
designated; and, nuclear or radioactive materials or waste; and, chemicals
listed in Title III List of Lists Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under Title
III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986,
published July, 1987, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any material that is subject to the hazardous waste manifest
requirements of the United States Environmental Protection Agency as specified
in 40 CFR part 262; or which is regulated by the Wyoming hazardous waste rules
and regulations pursuant to the Wyoming Environmental Quality Act, Wyoming
Statutes 35-11.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business activity conducted from a residential dwelling unit
pursuant to the standards of this title, with the intent of generating income.
Home occupations are further classified as follows:
  Large-Scale: A business or professional enterprise operated out of a
residential dwelling or accessory building by a resident of the household and
potentially up to two (2) non-resident employees, which is of a scale and
character that does not alter or detract from the residential character of the
property or neighborhood, and is incidental and accessory to the primary use of
the property for residential purposes. Large-scale home occupations shall meet
the standards outlined in the supplemental development standards.
  Small-Scale: A business or professional enterprise operated out of a
residential dwelling by a resident of the household, which is of a scale and
character that does not alter or detract from the residential character of the
dwelling or neighborhood, and is incidental and accessory to the primary use of
the dwelling for residential purposes. Small-scale home occupations shall meet
the standards outlined in the supplemental development standards.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, utility, landscaping, or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such
betterment.
INDIVIDUAL CARE CENTER: A commercial facility that provides 24-hour personal
care and related services to more than ten (10) children or dependent adults in
a supervised, protective, congregate setting. Such a use is subject to the
care-related regulations and standards of the State of Wyoming Department of
Health. Services typically offered in conjunction with dependent adult care
include social and recreational activities, training, meals, and personal daily
living care. See also definition of individual care - family home for a list of
uses not included in this definition.
INDIVIDUAL CARE - FAMILY HOME: A residential dwelling used primarily as a
residence where 24-hour personal care and related services is provided to a
maximum of five (5) children or dependent adults living as a single household,
for compensation. Such a use is subject to the care-related regulations and
standards of the State of Wyoming Department of Health Aging Division, under
their category of "boarding home". Services typically offered in conjunction
with dependent adult care include social and recreational activities, training,
meals, and personal daily living care. The following uses are not included in
any of the individual care categories:
   A.   Facility for transitional living for released offenders;
   B.   Facility to provide testing, treatment, or counseling for drug and
alcohol abuse;
   C.   Hospice;
   D.   Sex offender counseling facility;
   E.   Any of the following:
  1. Modified medical detoxification facilities;
  2. Facility for the treatment of narcotics;
  3. Community triage center; or
  4. Habilitative or nursing care.
INDIVIDUAL CARE - GROUP HOME: A facility that provides 24-hour personal care
and related services to a minimum of six (6) children or dependent adults and a
maximum of ten (10) children or dependent adults living as a single household,
for compensation. When located on a single-family residential lot, the
provision of care shall take place in a dwelling used primarily as a residence.
When located on a parcel developed with multi-family housing, the provision of
care shall take place within a structure not used as a residence. In any case,
such a use is subject to the care-related regulations and standards of the
State of Wyoming Department of Health Aging Division. Services typically
offered in conjunction with dependent adult care include social and
recreational activities, training, meals, and personal daily living care. See
also definition of individual care - family home for a list of uses not
included in this definition.
INGRESS: Access or entry.
INTENSITY OF USE: The number of dwelling units per acre for residential
development and floor area ratio for nonresidential development.
KENNEL: An establishment where five (5) or more dogs, cats or other domestic
household pets age six (6) months or older, are bred, raised, trained, or
boarded, for compensation.
KITCHEN: That portion of a dwelling unit devoted to the cooking or preparation
of food for the purpose of consumption by residents of the dwelling unit. The
term includes a "kitchenette", "wet bar" or any area equipped with items such
as a counter-top hot plate, counter-top grill, or microwave oven, together with
an under-counter refrigerator and sink. "Full kitchen facilities" indicates the
presence of complete cooking facilities (i.e., stove, oven or microwave oven,
refrigerator, and sink). The presence within any food preparation area of a
ventilation hood, gas stub, two hundred twenty-volt electrical outlet or
wiring, or any combination thereof, shall be considered "full kitchen
facilities".
LANDSCAPING: The combination of natural elements such as trees, shrubs, ground
covers, and other organic and inorganic materials that are installed for
purposes of creating an attractive and pleasing outdoor environment.
LIVING AREA: For accessory dwelling unit purposes, living area is calculated by
excluding the following from the gross square footage of the building:
   A.   The exterior walls;
   B.   Garages;
   C.   Basements with less than six feet eight inches (6'8") ceiling height;
and
   D.   Other areas with ceiling height less than five feet (5').
LODGING UNIT/ROOM: A lodging unit or lodging room is a room with one (1) or
more beds, bunks or other facilities for sleeping purposes.
LONG-TERM RENTAL: A residential dwelling unit rented for periods of thirty (30)
days or more to one (1) family.
LOT: In its strictest sense, "lot" is a plot, tract, or portion of a
subdivision or addition or other parcel of land whose existence, location and
dimensions have been defined either by a legally authorized and recorded
subdivision map (plat); or as a government lot or tract in a United States
public land survey subdivision. However, for purposes of applying zoning
regulations, "lot" is typically used generically to refer to any legally
created piece of divided land, whether technically a platted lot, government
lot, lot of record, tract, plot, or parcel. The use of "lot" in this manner
avoids needless repetition (lot area, plot area, parcel area, etc.).
When it is necessary to distinguish between types of lots, such as often occurs
in the realm of surveying and subdivision regulation, the term "lot" is
typically limited to the strict definition, and the terms tract, lot of record,
deeded parcel, etc., carry their respective meanings. Due to the potential for
misinterpretation, the reviewing official has the authority to determine the
proper interpretation of "lot" consistent with the language of this title, so
that its use does not inadvertently preclude applicability of any particular
regulation.
LOT AREA: That area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
property lines of a lot, including any portion of an easement which may exist
within such property lines but exclusive of rights-of-way for street purposes.
LOT AREA, NET: As of the date of adoption of this chapter, "net lot area" means
the area of a lot (lot area) minus any portion thereof that:
   A.   Is dedicated or reserved for a public or private street;
   B.   Contains slopes in excess of thirty three percent (33%) for a
horizontal distance of at least twenty feet (20'), measured up/down the slope;
   C.   Is below the ordinary high water mark of a waterbody;
   D.   Is within a protected wetland; or,
   E.   Is in the "pole" portion of a flag lot.
[Note: Historically, some plats used the term "net lot size" to differentiate
between the size of a lot after right-of-way dedication through the plat
process, from its size before. The terms are not interchangeable.]
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
with frontage on at least two (2) streets.
LOT DEPTH: The length of a line connecting the mid-point of the front and rear
property lines of a lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot (not a corner lot) that adjoins two (2) streets
that are parallel or within forty five degrees (45°) of being parallel to each
other.
LOT, FLAG: A lot with two (2) distinct parts: the "flag", which is the only
building site; and is located behind another lot; and the "pole", which
connects the flag to the street and provides the only street frontage for the
lot. Flag lots are prohibited, except as may be authorized through the
subdivision variance or PUD process. A lot that is at least as wide, at all
points, as the minimum frontage required for the lot, or forty feet (40'),
whichever is greater, shall not be considered a flag lot, regardless of its
appearance.
LOT FRONTAGE: The portion of the lot that fronts on a street or drive.
LOT, IMPROVED: A lot provided with the infrastructure and utilities required
for a building to be authorized to be constructed and occupied thereon; or, a
lot with existing buildings or structures.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: For purposes of this title, "lot line" means a line that divides one
(1) lot from another lot, or from a street right-of-way or easement, or any
other area reserved or dedicated for public use. In situations where underlying
property ownership extends under a street or highway right-of-way or easement,
the lot line shall be considered to be at the boundary of the right- of-way or
easement.
LOT LINE, CORNER: The lot line abutting a street or drive, other than a front
lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating the lot frontage from a street right-
of-way or access easement. On corner lots, the front lot line will typically be
the line with the narrowest frontage. However, if the lot will contain only one
(1) dwelling, or if neither street is a collector or arterial, then the
property owner may choose which of the two (2) lot frontages shall be
considered the front lot line for setback purposes, and all other setbacks
shall be applied accordingly. In the case of a through lot, either frontage may
be considered the "front", except in cases where deed restrictions,
regulations, or plat notes prohibit access from one (1) street, in which case
said restricted frontage may be considered a rear property line.
Notwithstanding the above, the City may specify the curb cut/driveway location
to any City street.
LOT LINE, REAR: The property line opposite and most distant from the front
property line. In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot
with no clear rear lot line, a line ten feet (10') in length entirely within
the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front property line
shall constitute the rear lot line for setback purposes.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any property line which is not a front lot line, rear lot line
or corner lot line. A side lot line is roughly perpendicular to a front or rear
property line.
LOT OF RECORD: A plot, tract, or parcel of land that:
   A.   Was not created through an approved subdivision, or as a government lot
or tract in a United States Public Land Survey; and,
   B.   Was created by a deed or legal instrument other than a plat, which was
executed before December 4, 1989, and which has been recorded in the County
Clerk's Office.
LOT, REVERSE CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another
lot.
LOT SIZE, MINIMUM: The smallest area permissible for any lot that is to be
created or modified in size; and, the smallest lot on which a use or structure
may be located, except as may be authorized pursuant to section
10-13-3, "Legal Nonconforming Lots", of this Code. For any lot created after
adoption of this chapter, minimum lot size shall meet the "minimum net lot
area" standard. Unmanned public utility facilities are exempt from minimum lot
size requirements.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot that has less than the minimum area or minimum
dimensions required by the zoning district in which the lot is located.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel streets or that fronts
upon two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Also
known as "lot, double-frontage".
LOT, TRANSITION: A lot in one (1) zoning district which abuts another zoning
district.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
LOT, ZONING: A property consisting of more than one (1) lot, which is developed
and/or utilized in such a manner as to constitute a single development, of
which no individual lot could be excluded without causing the development to
violate an applicable provision of the Building Code, Fire Code, Sign Code,
Parking Code, this title, or other adopted Development Code. A zoning lot shall
be considered a single lot for purposes of this title. New zoning lots shall
not be created except pursuant to title 11, chapter 6, article B, "Lot
Consolidations", of this Code.
MAINTENANCE (Also MAINTAINED): The upkeep of a property, building, structure,
amenity, parking facility, landscaping or lot including repair, painting,
trimming, pruning, watering, weeding, and other on-going activities that are
associated with property maintenance.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built to the Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code effective June 15, 1976) and that
displays an official red certification label indicating such on the exterior of
each transportable section. Manufactured homes are built in a plant and are
transported in one (1) or more sections on a permanent chassis. Manufactured
homes are further classified as follows:
   A.   "Multi-wide" (aka double-wide or triple-wide manufactured home) has a
minimum width of more than eighteen feet (18') as measured at all points
perpendicular to the length of the manufactured home;
   B.   "Single-wide", has a width of eighteen feet (18') or less as measured
at any point perpendicular to the length of the manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME: A dwelling on one (1) or more chassis for towing to the point of
use, which dwelling does not meet the Federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards (HUD Code effective June 15, 1976). Mobile homes are
further classified as follows:
   A.   "Multi-wide" (aka double-wide mobile home) has a minimum width of more
than eighteen feet (18') as measured at all points perpendicular to the length
of the mobile home;
   B.   "Single-wide", has a width of eighteen feet (18') or less as measured
at any point perpendicular to the length of the mobile home.
This definition does not include manufactured homes, modular homes, commercial
coaches, recreational vehicles or motor homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot used for the placement of three (3) or more mobile and/
or manufactured homes, which are used as dwellings. The term does not include
unoccupied mobile or manufactured homes in a sales lot or commercial storage
lot.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: That portion of a mobile home park designated, used, or
designed for the occupancy of not more than one (1) mobile or manufactured home
and includes that area set aside or used for associated automobile parking,
carports, awnings, accessory buildings or other structures, and the yard area
as required herein for each space.
MODULAR HOME: A residential dwelling constructed of pre-made parts and/or
modules manufactured at a facility, which parts and modules are transported to
a fixed site, placed by crane, and permanently affixed to and supported by a
perimeter foundation. A modular home shall be constructed in accordance with
the City's adopted Building Code, as opposed to a HUD Code. Manufactured homes,
and other dwellings with a permanent chassis designed for purposes of
transporting and supporting the structure, cannot qualify as modular homes, as
defined herein. A modular home is considered equivalent to a site-built home
for zoning purposes.
NON-TRANSIENT: Occupancy of a dwelling or sleeping room for thirty (30) days or
more.
OCCUPANCY OR OCCUPIED: With respect to a structure, refers to the residing of
one (1) or more individuals in a dwelling or to the storage or use of
equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any public, commercial, or industrial
building.
OFF-SITE PARKING: Parking provided for a specific use but located on a lot
other than the one (1) on which the specific use is located.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set
aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public use or enjoyment.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Land within or related to a development that is designed
and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development and their guests.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Open space which is normally owned by and limited to the
use of the occupants of a building or property that abuts such open space.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: Open space owned and maintained by a public agency for the
use and enjoyment of the general public.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The commercial or industrial use of an area outside of an
enclosed building for the long term retention (more than 48 hours) of
materials, machinery or equipment, regardless of whether the materials,
machinery or equipment are to be bought, sold, repaired, stored, incinerated,
or discarded. The term does not include new or used motor vehicle sales and
rental display, nor does it include accessory and incidental parking of
vehicles for residents, guests, customers or employees in connection with a
principal use.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district that may be imposed on one (1) or more
underlying base zoning districts, which provides additional requirements and
standards beyond those required by the underlying zoning district.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation
having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land.
OWNER-OCCUPIED: A property or building where the owner is living at the time
the regulated activity takes place.
PERMITTED USE: Any use allowed in a zoning district as a matter of right if it
is conducted in accordance with the restrictions applicable to that district.
Permitted uses are designated in the Land Use Table by the letter "P".
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, governmental entity, trustee, receiver, assignee or
similar representative of any of them.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, RESIDENTIAL: A residential subdivision authorized
pursuant to title 11, chapter 7 of this Code.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The board appointed as such by the Mayor with the
consent of the Governing Body. The Planning and Zoning Board serves as the
Planning Commission as authorized by Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-502, the
Zoning Commission as authorized by Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-604, and the
Board of Adjustment as authorized by Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-605; and has
the powers and duties as prescribed by State law and City ordinances.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which the principal use of the lot is
conducted. Lots with multiple uses may have multiple principal buildings. The
term does not include storage buildings, garages or other buildings which
normally are considered accessory buildings.
PRINCIPAL USE: The purpose for which land, premises or building is designed,
arranged or constructed.
PROHIBITED USE: A use that is not permitted by any means in a particular zoning
district.
PROPERTY: A lot, parcel, or tract of land together with the building and
structures located thereon.
PUBLIC PARK OR PLAYGROUND: A park, playground, swimming pool, reservoir, golf
course, or athletic field owned, operated and maintained by a Local or State
level governmental entity.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A regulated enterprise with a franchise for providing to the
public a utility service deemed necessary for the public health, safety and
welfare.
RECEPTION FACILITY: A property other than a church at which formal parties,
weddings, receptions, or social gatherings are held, for compensation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A vehicle towed, or self-propelled on its own
chassis, or attached to the chassis of another vehicle, which is designed or
used for temporary living accommodations, typically in a recreational, camping
and/or traveling situation. For zoning purposes, the term includes, but is not
limited to, travel trailers, pickup/truck campers, camping trailers,
motorhomes, camper vans, tiny houses on wheels, and converted trucks or buses.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any lot or tract of land used, or intended to be
used, for renting of space to accommodate one (1) or more recreational
vehicles. The definition does not include vehicle storage. RV parks may also
offer tent camping, cabin rental, and accessory support services such as
laundry, bath houses, and an on-site store.
REVIEWING OFFICIAL: The person, board, or Governing Body responsible for
issuing the permit, authorization, or approval that has been requested.
ROOMING HOUSE: An owner-occupied dwelling with no more than five (5) guest
lodging rooms where, for compensation, individual furnished rooms are provided
for no more than five (5) non- transient persons who are not members of the
immediate family occupying such building, and no more than two (2) such persons
occupy any guest lodging room. (Note: "Rooming house" falls within the
definition of lodging house in the International Residential Code.)
SETBACK: The minimum required separation distance between the nearest wall or
support of a structure and the lot line.
SETBACK AREA, CORNER SIDE: A yard area of which the width is measured between
the side street property line and the required corner side yard setback line;
and the depth is measured between the front yard setback line and the rear yard
setback line.
SETBACK AREA, FRONT: A yard area of which the width is measured the entire
length of the front property line between the side property lines; and the
depth is measured as the distance between the street right-of-way line and the
required front setback line.
SETBACK AREA, REAR: A yard area of which the width is measured the entire
length of the rear property line between the side property lines; and the depth
is measured as the distance between the rear property line and the required
rear yard setback line.
SETBACK AREA, SIDE: A yard area of which the width is measured between the side
property line and the required side yard setback line; and the depth is
measured between the front yard setback line and the rear yard setback line.
SETBACK, GARAGE ENTRANCE: A setback that is measured from a street lot line to
the entrance of a garage or carport. It is essentially a minimum driveway
length.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by measuring from the property line,
perpendicularly and into the property a distance equal to the required setback.
No part of a building shall project into the area between the property line and
the setback line except as otherwise provided in this title.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: The use of a residential dwelling, or portion thereof, in
which lodging, but no meal, is provided to guests in exchange for compensation
and any individual guest rents or occupies the dwelling or portion thereof for
a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. Capacity of a short-term
rental is limited to five (5) or fewer lodging units and ten (10) or fewer
guests.
SIDE STREET: A street running along a side property line of a corner lot.
SPOT ZONING: The rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a
use incompatible with surrounding land uses and that does not further the
General Plan. The fact that an individual lot is zoned differently from
adjacent properties shall not automatically mean the situation constitutes spot
zoning. Additional factors such as the relationship to the adjacent zones, size
of the property, and characteristics of the proposed zone must also be
considered.
STORAGE: A space or place where goods, materials or personal property is placed
and kept for more than forty eight (48) consecutive hours.
STORY: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above it, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
STREET: A thoroughfare which affords a principal means of access to abutting
property. The term does not include an "alley" as that term is defined in this
title.
STRUCTURE: Any object constructed or installed, the use of which requires
location in or on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent
location in or on the ground. "Structure" includes but is not limited to
buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects.
"Structure" does not include paved areas, or vegetative landscaping materials.
TRACT: A piece of land created and designated as part of a land division that
is not a lot, lot of record, or a public right-of- way. Tracts are created and
designed for a specific purpose. Land uses within a tract are restricted to
those uses consistent with the stated purpose as described on the plat, or in
the maintenance agreements, or through Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions
(CC&Rs). Examples include stormwater management tracts, private alley tracts,
and open space tracts. Note: The term "tract" has not consistently been applied
in this manner in the past - e.g., some plats label open space or stormwater
basins as lots.
USE: The purpose (type and extent) for which land or a building is arranged,
designed, or intended; or for which either land or a structure is occupied or
maintained.
USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES: A lot that is two (2) acres or less in area and
contains a residential dwelling unit.
UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE SITE: Electric substations, domestic water treatment and
storage facilities, natural gas regulator stations, fiber optic booster
stations, outdoor pumping stations, and similar large-scale utility
infrastructure sites.
VISUAL SCREEN: A fence or evergreen hedge at least six feet (6') in height and
of sufficient density or construction to prevent visual contact from opposite
sides. If the option for an evergreen hedge is used, it must be of sufficient
size at planting to achieve the required height within two (2) years.
WALL HEIGHT: For purposes of accessory building setback regulation, the
vertical distance from the building floor to the top plate of the wall.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower or supporting structure, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity sized for on-site electric usage
(typically 10 kW or less for a single-family dwelling) and which is primarily
intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility power. For purposes of this
title, the use shall not be deemed an accessory use.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA: An antenna that transmits and/or receives
wireless communication signals. The term does not include any device, such as a
radio antenna, telephone antenna, television antenna, satellite dish antenna or
amateur radio antenna, that is accessory or incidental to a residential use and
is employed by an ultimate user to receive radio, television or other
communication signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEFINITIONS: (Applicable to the definition and
regulation of wireless communication facilities only.)
  Applicant: Any person engaged in the business of providing wireless
communication services or the wireless communications infrastructure required
for wireless communications services and who submits an application.
  Base Station: A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
commission-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as
defined in this chapter or any equipment associated with a tower.
   A.   The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as microwave backhaul.
   B.   The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed
antenna systems and small cell networks).
   C.   The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time
the relevant application is filed with the City under this title, supports or
houses equipment described in this section that has been reviewed and approved
under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under State or local
regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or
primary purpose of providing such support.
   D.   The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the State or the City under this title, does not
support or house equipment described in this section.
  Collocation: The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an
eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio
frequency signals for communications purposes.
  Distributed Antenna System Or DAS: A network consisting of transceiver
equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations
throughout the desired coverage area.
  Eligible Facilities Request: Any request for modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
   A.   Collocation of new transmission equipment;
   B.   Removal of transmission equipment; or
   C.   Replacement of transmission equipment.
  Eligible Support Structure: Any tower or base station as defined in this
section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is
filed with the City under this title.
  Existing: A tower or base station that has been reviewed and approved under
the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local
regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and
approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully
constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.
  FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
  Macrocell: An antenna or antennas mounted on a tower, ground- based mast,
rooftops and other towers or structures, at a height that provides a clear view
over the surrounding buildings and terrain. Macrocells are typically designed
to provide coverage to large areas.
  Monopole (aka Slim-Line Pole): A wireless communication facility, consisting
of a pole and one (1) or more antennas, on which the antenna panels are narrow
and closely spaced with one another atop the pole and extend no more than one
foot (1') beyond the circumference of the pole.
  Public Utility: A regulated enterprise with a franchise for providing to the
public a utility service deemed necessary for the public health, safety and
welfare.
  Site: In relation to a tower that is not in the public right- of-way, the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and
any access or utility easements currently related to the site. In relation to
support structures other than towers, site means an area in proximity to the
structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.
  Small Cells: Compact wireless communication equipment containing their own
transceiver equipment and which function like cells in a mobile network but
provide a smaller coverage area than traditional macrocells.
  Stealth Design: Technology that minimizes the visual impact of wireless
communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening or blending
into the surrounding environment such that it is not readily seen or
discernable as a wireless communication facility to a casual passerby. Examples
of stealth design include but are not limited to antennas integrated into
architectural elements such as steeples, cornices, and bell towers; facilities
disguised as trees and flagpoles; and architecturally screened roof-mounted
antennas.
  Substantial Change: A modification that substantially changes the physical
dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following
criteria:
   A.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases
the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one
(1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna
not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater; for other eligible
support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten
percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater. Changes in
height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where
deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings'
rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the
dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved
appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of
the Spectrum Act (47 USC section 1455(a));
   B.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves
adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the
edge of the tower more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width of the
tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for
other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the
body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by
more than six feet (6');
   C.   For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more
than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way
and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on
the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than
ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground
cabinets associated with the structure;
   D.   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
   E.   It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
   F.   It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval
of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base
station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any
modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the
thresholds identified in subsections A through D of this subdefinition.
  Tower: Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any
FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including
structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including,
but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul, and the associated site.
  Transmission Equipment: Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-
licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not
limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and
regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with
wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
  Utility Support Structure: Utility poles or utility towers supporting
electrical, telephone, DAS, small cells, cable or other similar facilities;
street light standards; or pedestrian light standards.
  Wireless Communication Antenna: An antenna that transmits and/or receives
wireless communication signals. The term does not include any device, such as a
radio antenna, telephone antenna, television antenna, satellite dish antenna or
amateur radio antenna, that is accessory or incidental to a residential use and
is employed by an ultimate user to receive radio, television or other
communication signals.
  Wireless Communication Facility Or WCF: A staffed or unstaffed facility or
location or equipment for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF)
signals or other wireless communications or other signals for commercial
communications purposes, typically consisting of one (1) or more antennas or
group of antennas, a tower or attachment support structure, transmission cables
and other transmission equipment, and an equipment enclosure or cabinets, and
including small cell technologies.
  Wireless Communication Facility, Non-Stealth Design: A wireless communication
facility that does not qualify as a stealth design wireless communication
facility.
  Wireless Communication Signals: Communication signals, including analog
signals, digital signals and other spectrum- based communication signals. The
term does not include television broadcast signals; direct broadcast signals;
direct broadcast satellite services; multi-channel, multi-point distribution
services; or amateur radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY, STEALTH DESIGN: A wireless communication
facility that is screened or designed to blend into the surrounding environment
such that it is not readily seen or discernable as a wireless communication
facility to a casual passerby. Examples include roof-mounted antennas with
architectural screening; panel antennas mounted against the wall of an existing
building and painted or finished to match the existing structure; antennas
integrated into architectural elements such as steeples or cupolas; and
antennas and antenna structures designed to look like streetlight poles or
flagpoles.
YARD: The areas on a lot that are unoccupied by structures, except for
projections and the specific accessory structures allowed in those areas under
the provisions of this title.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: The yard of a corner lot extending from the front yard to
the rear yard and between the side street and the primary structure.
YARD, FRONT: The yard area extending along the entire length of the front
property line and the depth between the street right- of-way line and the
primary structure. (See also definition of lot line, front.)
YARD, REAR: The yard area extending along the entire length of the rear
property line and the depth between the rear property line and the primary
structure.
YARD, SIDE: The yard area extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
between the side property line and the primary structure.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area designated on the Official Zoning Map in which certain
uses are permitted and certain others are not permitted, all in accordance with
this title. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2017-11, 6-6-2017)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-4-1: Established; Membership
10-4-2: Meetings
10-4-3: Appeals; Powers
10-4-4: District Court Review
10-4-5: Preferential Issues
10-4-6: Court Judgment; Appeal To Supreme Court
10-4-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission, consisting of
seven (7) members, each to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
governing body, for a three (3) year term. The mayor shall also appoint a
member of the governing body to act as a nonvoting, nonparticipating member in
the commission and to report to the council on the activities and actions of
the commission. Any member of the planning and zoning commission may be removed
for cause by the governing body upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term
becomes vacant. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide
appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by, the administrative officer charged with the enforcement of this title. It
shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title. (Ord. 2007-22, 11-16-2007)
10-4-2: MEETINGS:
The commission shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
title. Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson
and at such other times as the commission may determine; provided, that the
commission shall meet not less than four (4) times per year. The chairperson
or, in his/her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the commission are open to the public.
The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that
fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. All
minutes shall be filed immediately in the office of the commission and are
public records. (1960 Compilation § 26-104; amd. Ord. 74-16; Ord. 80-7; Ord.
85-1; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 99-11)
10-4-3: APPEALS; POWERS:
   A.   Appeal: Appeals to the planning and zoning commission may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city
affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Appeals shall be taken
within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the commission by filing
with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the planning and zoning
commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the commission all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the planning and zoning commission, after notice of appeal has
been filed with him/her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his/her opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property; in
which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order, granted by the district court for the fifth judicial district, or a
judge thereof, on notice to the officer from which the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
   C.   Hearing; Powers: The planning and zoning commission shall fix a
reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give public notice, adequate notice to
the parties in interest and appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The
planning and zoning commission has the following powers:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this title.
      2.   To hear and decide special exemptions to the terms of this title
upon which the commission is required to pass.
      3.   To vary or adjust the strict application of any of the requirements
of this title in the case of an irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lot or
other physical condition applying to a lot or building as a result of which
strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or building
involved. No adjustment in the strict application of any provision of this
title may be granted by the commission unless it finds:
         a.   That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully
described in the findings of the commission, applying to the land or building
for which the adjustment is sought, which circumstances or conditions are
peculiar to the land or building and do not apply generally to land or
buildings in the neighborhood, and have not resulted from any act of the
applicant subsequent to the adoption of July 8, 1952;
         b.   That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings of the
commission, the circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of the land or of the land or building, and that the adjustment
as granted by the commission is the minimum adjustment that will accomplish
this purpose; and
         c.   That the granting of the adjustment will be in harmony with the
general purposes and intent of this title, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
      4.   To grant exceptions and variances upon request after a showing that
an illegal construction or a nonconforming building or use existed for a period
of at least five (5) years in violation of this title and the city has not
taken steps toward enforcement.
      5.   To prepare and recommend to the governing body, a comprehensive plan
of public improvements, looking to the present and future development and
growth of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the governing body, will
be known as the master plan.
      6.   Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to
streets, alleys and public grounds within the corporate limits and in
contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/
2) miles from such limits and not included in any municipality; such
requirements to be effective if any such land shall be subdivided after the
adoption of such plan.
      7.   To prepare and recommend to the governing body, from time to time,
such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the
governing body or by the planning and zoning commission.
      8.   To prepare and recommend to the governing body, from time to time,
plans or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such master
plan.
      9.   To give aid to the city officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the master plan, to further the
making of such improvements and generally to promote the realization of the
master plan.
      10.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
      11.   To cooperate with county and regional planning commissions and
other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
      12.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by
statute.
   D.   Decision: In exercising its powers, the commission may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as necessary, and to that end has all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. (1960 Compilation § 26-104; amd. Ord. 74-16;
Ord. 80-7; Ord. 85-1; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 99-11)
   E.   Vote Required: A concurring vote of a majority of the commission is
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance or to effect any
variation of this title. (Ord. 2007-23, 11-6-2007)
10-4-4: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW:
   A.   Manner Of Review: The decision of the planning and zoning commission
concerning an appeal from an alleged error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
title, but not decisions of the commission concerning matters of city planning,
may be reviewed by the district court upon appeal taken in the following
manner:
      1.   Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decision of the commission or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city shall file written notice of appeal with the secretary of
the commission within ten (10) days after the decision has been entered on the
commission's records, setting forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after filing the notice of appeal with the
secretary of the commission, the appellant shall file with the clerk of the
district court a transcript consisting of the order, requirement, decision or
determination of any administrative official charged with the enforcement of
this title, and the commission's decision on the matter, together with a copy
of this title and the record of the administrative officer and the commission,
covering all their acts in the matter.
      3.   Upon payment of the necessary fees therefor, the transcripts shall
be furnished by the secretary of the commission, and by him/her certified to
contain full, true and correct copies of all matters and proceedings required
to be included in the transcript. The fees shall be the same as the fees
payable to the clerk of the district court on appeal to the supreme court in
civil cases.
      4.   At the time of filing the notice of appeal with the clerk of the
district court, the appellant shall execute and file with the clerk of the
district court a sufficient bond in a penal sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00), with at least two (2) sureties, to be approved by the judge of the
court, conditioned to prosecute the appeal without delay, and if unsuccessful,
to pay all costs to which the city is put because of the appeal. The court may
order the appellant upon application therefor, to execute and file such
additional bond or bonds, as the necessity of the case may require.
      5.   Within three (3) days after the transcript is filed in the district
court, the appellant shall give written notice to the city attorney and to the
secretary of the commission that the transcript is filed. The notice shall set
a time, not less than three (3) days from the service thereof, for hearing and
the district court shall, at that time or at a time fixed by order of the court
or judge, hear and determine the appeal.
      6.   If it appears to the court that testimony is necessary for the
proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to
take evidence as it may direct and report to the court. The referee's findings
of fact and conclusions of law shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon
which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the decision brought up for review.
   B.   Costs Against Commission; Conditions: Costs shall not be allowed
against the commission, unless it appears to the court that it acted with gross
negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
Any costs allowed by the court against the commission shall be paid by the
city. (1960 Compilation § 26-104; amd. Ord. 74-16; Ord. 80-7; Ord. 85-1; Ord.
87-3; Ord. 99-11)
10-4-5: PREFERENTIAL ISSUES:
All issues in any proceeding under this chapter have preference over all other
civil actions and proceedings. (1960 Compilation § 26-104; amd. Ord. 74-16;
Ord. 80-7; Ord. 85-1; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 99-11)
10-4-6: COURT JUDGMENT; APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT:
The judgment of the court shall conform, correct, modify or annul the decision
appealed from, insofar as it affects the appellant or his property. A certified
copy of the judgment of the court shall be filed with the clerk of the
commission, and he shall modify and correct the decision in accordance with
that judgment. An appeal shall lie to the supreme court from the judgment of
the district court, as in other cases. The appeal shall be taken within fifteen
(15) days after the date of entry of the judgment in the district court. The
record and opening brief of the appellant shall be filed with the supreme court
within sixty (60) days after the appeal has been taken by notice as provided in
this chapter. The time for filing the record, service and filing of briefs may
be extended by order of the district court, or by stipulation of the parties
concerned. The supreme court may correct, change, modify, confirm or annul the
decision of the administrative officer, the commission or the district court,
insofar as it affects the appellant or his property. A certified copy of the
order of the supreme court shall be filed with the secretary of the commission,
who shall modify and correct the decision of the commission in accordance with
that decision. (1960 Compilation § 26-104; amd. Ord. 74-16; Ord. 80-7; Ord. 85-
1; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 99-11)
CHAPTER 5
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: City Council Authority
10-5-2: Protest
10-5-3: Petition
10-5-1: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The city council may by ordinance at any time, on its own motion or petition,
or upon the recommendations by the planning and zoning commission, amend,
supplement or change the regulations or districts herein or subsequently
established; provided, however, that a public hearing shall first be held in
relation thereto, after one publication of notice of the time, place and
purpose of such hearing, in an official newspaper, at least fifteen (15) days
prior to such hearing. (1960 Compilation § 26-115; amd. Ord. 86-5; Ord. 87-3)
10-5-2: PROTEST:
If there is a protest against any change signed by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change, or of
those immediately adjacent within a distance of one hundred forty feet (140'),
the amendment shall not become effective except upon the affirmative vote of
three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council. In determining the
one hundred forty feet (140'), the width of any intervening street or alley
shall not be included. The provisions for public hearings and notice apply to
all changes or amendments. (1960 Compilation § 26-115; amd. Ord. 86-5; Ord. 87-
3)
10-5-3: PETITION:
Whenever the owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of the frontage in any
proposed new district shall present to the council a petition duly signed and
acknowledged, requesting an amendment to the districts map, the city council
shall act upon such petition within ninety (90) days after the filing thereof.
(1960 Compilation § 26-115; amd. Ord. 86-5; Ord. 87-3)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Applicability
10-6-2: Table
10-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to each of the residential zoning districts, except as
follows:
   A.   Properties within the Mobile Home Park Zoning District shall be subject
to the development standards of title 9, chapter 6 of this Code.
   B.   Properties that are approved and developed as a planned unit
development shall be subject to the development standards authorized and used
for the planned unit development. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-6-2:TABLE: 
 
Standard Zoning District
         RR R-1 R-2 R-2MH R-3 R-4
 Lot dimension 
and density                                                    
requirements:
 Minimum lot 0.40 acre n/a (Use minimum net lot area or developable acreage
  area*1                per dwelling, as applicable.)
                                                      3,200 sq.
                                                      ft. for
                                                      detached*,
                                  5,500 sq. 5,500 sq. semi-
                                  ft. for   ft. for   detached*,      n/a
                                  single-   single-   and          (Use
  Minimum net           7,000 sq. family    family    attached*    developable
 lot area*1  n/a       ft.       dwelling; dwelling; single-      acreage per
                                  10,000    10,000    family       dwelling
                                  sq. ft.   sq. ft.   dwellings    requirement)
                                  for       for       only. (For
                                  duplex    duplex    multi-unit
                                                      dwellings
                                                      see next
                                                      row.)
                                                      4,000 sq.
                                                      ft. for
                                                      multi- unit
                                                      dwellings,
                                                      including
                                                      those in
  Developable                                         condominium  1,800 sq.
 acreage per n/a                                     ownership;   ft.
  dwelling*                                           also, for
                                                      dwellings in
                                                      residential
                                                      subdivisions
                                                      with yards
                                                      in common
                                                      area
                                                      30' for      20' for
 Minimum lot 100'      50'       50'       50'       interior     interior
  width*                                              lot, 40'     lot, 30'
                                                      corner lot   corner lot
  Maximum lot
 depth to    3:1       3:1       3.5:1     3.5:1     5:1          5:1
  width ratio
                                                                   20' for up
  Minimum                                                          to 5
  frontage on                                                      dwelling
 street/     80'       45'2      45'2      45'2      30'          units; 30'
  access                                                           for >5
  easement                                                         dwelling
                                                                   units
Building
height,
placement,                                                     
and size
requirements:
  Number of
 main        1         1         1         1         n/a          n/a
  buildings*
  on a lot
  Maximum
 building    30%       40%       50%       50%       65%          85%
  coverage*
  Maximum     2 stories 2 stories 2 stories 2 stories 2 stories    3 stories
 building    and 30'   and 30'   and 30'   and 30'   and 30'      and 40'
  height*     above     above     above     above     above grade  above grade3
              grade     grade     grade     grade
  Minimum
  size of
  dwelling in 1,000 sq. 1,000 sq. 864 sq.   720 sq.
 gross floor ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       720 sq. ft.  240 sq. ft.
  area,
  excluding
  garage
  Minimum
  garage
  entrance                                            20'; and 25' 20'; and 25'
  setback                                             from any     from any
 from front  35'       25'4      25'4      25'4      arterial or  arterial or
  lot line*,                                          major        major
  applicable                                          collector R/ collector R/
  to                                                  W4           W4
  direction
  of approach
  Minimum
  garage                22'; and  22'; and  22'; and
  entrance              25' from  25' from  25' from  22'; and 25' 22'; and 25'
  setback               any       any       any       from any     from any
 from corner 30'       arterial  arterial  arterial  arterial or  arterial or
  lot line*,            or major  or major  or major  major        major
  applicable            collector collector collector collector R/ collector R/
  to                    R/W4      R/W4      R/W4      W4           W4
  direction
  of approach
  Minimum                         20'; and  20'; and
  front yard                      25' from  25' from  15'; and 25' 10'; and 25'
  setback                         any       any       from any     from any
 (see also   35'       25'4      arterial  arterial  arterial or  arterial or
  minimum                         or major  or major  major        major
  garage                          collector collector collector R/ collector R/
  entrance                        R/W4      R/W4      W4           W4
  setback)
  Minimum
  side yard
  setback
 from side   30'       15'4      15'4      15'4      15'4         10'
  street5
  (corner lot
  line)
  Minimum                         5';       5';
  side yard                       except 0' except 0' 5'; except   5'; except
 setback     15'       5'        at a      at a      0' at a      0' at a
  from                            common    common    common wall  common wall
  neighboring                     wall      wall
  lot
  Minimum
 rear yard   15'       15'       15'       15'       15'          10'
  setback
  Minimum
  setback     Edge of easement, and no overhang unless authorized otherwise by
 from        the easement grantee
  utility
  easement
  Minimum
  separation
 between     n/a       n/a       n/a       n/a       10'          10'
  main
  buildings*
  within lot
Reduced
setbacks for
accessory
buildings                                                      
(exceptions
to above
setbacks):
  From
  neighboring
  lot, when
  wall
 height* of  10'       5'        3'6       3'6       3'6          3'6
  accessory
  building is
  10'6" or
  less
                                  3'; 0' if 3'; 0' if
                                  no        no        3'; 0' if no 3'; 0' if no
                                  doorway   doorway   doorway      doorway
  From                            (garage/  (garage/  (garage/     (garage/
  adjacent                        person)   person)   person) in   person) in
 alley or    5'        5'        in wall   in wall   wall next to wall next to
  common open                     next to   next to   alley/ OS -  alley/ OS -
  space (OS)                      alley/ OS alley/ OS no overhang  no overhang
                                  - no      - no      permitted    permitted
                                  overhang  overhang
                                  permitted permitted
Multi-family
development                                                    
standards:
  Multi-
  family                                              See Supplemental
 development n/a                                     Development Standards,
  with >4                                             "Multi-Family
  dwelling                                            Development"
  units
 
* Means term is defined.
(Italics) - Language italicized and within parenthesis are instructions for
utilizing the table.
Notes:
   1.    Must be served with public sewer and public water to qualify for the
sizes noted. If public sewer and public water are not available, minimum lot
area is 1.0 acre.
   2.    Lots located entirely along the circular portion of a cul-de-sac bulb
or outside knuckle of a street corner may be reduced to a minimum of 30 feet,
provided the lot width requirement is met.
   3.    Buildings taller than 2 stories and 30 feet shall be set back from any
adjoining residential property in a RR, R-1, R-2, R-2MH, R-3, or MHP Zone at
least 40 feet.
   4.    Park strip option: When the yard of the property abuts an improved
street right-of-way with an existing park strip (aka planting strip - an area
between the back of the curb and the sidewalk) that is at least 5 feet wide,
the minimum yard setback requirement is 10 feet, provided any garage opening
shall be not less than 22 feet from the back of the public sidewalk in this
situation.
   5.    See definition of "lot line, front" for options on selecting the front
yard on corner lots. See also minimum garage entrance setback.
   6.    Placing a structure closer than 5 feet from an adjacent lot triggers
fire-resistant construction requirements pursuant to the adopted Building Code.
If the structure is not constructed to such fire-resistant standards, the
minimum setback requirement is 5 feet.
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 7
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT LAND USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Land Use Classifications
10-7-2: Residential Land Use Table
10-7-1: LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Use When Permitted; Requirements: Buildings, structures and land shall
be used only in accordance with the uses permitted in the following Land Use
Table, and subject to all other applicable requirements of this title.
   B.   Interpretation Of The Residential Land Use Table: The symbols and
letters in the Residential Land Use Table have the following meanings:
 
Symbol   Meaning
P        The use is permitted in that zoning district by right.
         The use is permitted as an accessory use only. An accessory use cannot
A        be established on a property unless it is in conjunction with a
         permitted use.
         The use may be considered through the conditional use review process.
C        See section
         10-14-1 of this title.
N        The use is not permitted in that zoning district.
         The use is subject to requirements applicable specifically to that
*        use, as listed in chapter 8, "Supplemental Development Standards For
         Residential Zoning Districts", of this title.
See note Refer to the corresponding residential supplemental development
         standards, found in chapter 8 of this title.
 
   C.   Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments shall be subject
to the land use regulations of the underlying zoning district, unless specified
otherwise in the planned unit development authorization. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-
2017)
10-7-2:RESIDENTIAL LAND USE TABLE: 
 
Land Uses Zoning District
          RR R-1 R-2 R-2MH R-3 R-4 MH Park1
Accessory
buildings and     A    A        A        A        A        A        A
uses, not
otherwise listed
Accessory         C    C        A        A        A        A        A
dwelling unit*
Amateur radio     See  See note See note See note See note See note See note
antenna*          note
Assisted living
apartments/       N    N        N        N        C        P        N
facility*
Bed and breakfast N    N        C        C        C        P        N
inn*
Child care,
family home
category (up to   A    A        A        A        A        A        A
10 children, in
home)
Child care,
family center     N    N        C        C        P        P        C
category (up to
15 children)
Child care
centers and
preschools, when
located within an A    A        A        A        A        A        A
existing church,
public school, or
similar existing
building
Child care
centers and
preschools - not  N    N        N        N        C        C        N
listed above*
(maximum 50
children)
Churches and
houses of         C    C        P        P        P        P        C
worship*
Community center, C    C        A        A        A        A        A
private
Community         P    P        P        P        P        P        P
gardens*
Community         See  See note See note See note See note See note See note
greenhouses*      note
Community
residence for the P    P        P        P        P        P        P
disabled*
Convalescent care
facility/nursing  N    N        N        N        C        C        N
home
Dormitories*      N    N        N        N        C        C        N
Home occupation,  C    N        C        C        C        C        C
large-scale*
Home occupation,  A    A        A        A        A        A        A
small-scale*
Horticulture,
cultivation of    P    P        P        P        P        P        P
crops
Hospice center    N    N        N        N        N        C        N
Individual care -
family home       A    A        A        A        A        A        A
category
Individual care -
group home        C    N        C        C        C        P        C
category*
Individual care - N    N        N        N        C        C        N
center*
Long-term rental* P    P        P        P        P        P        P
Mobile home park
(refer to title   N    N        N        N        N        N        P
9, chapter 6 of
this Code)
Museums, when
located at an     C    C        C        C        C        C        C
existing historic
site
Outdoor
recreational
facilities:
parks,
playgrounds,
playfields,
pathways, golf
courses
(including
clubhouse), and   P    P        P        P        P        P        P
similar
recreation
facilities. Not
including
stadiums,
amphitheaters,
and commercial
amusement
facilities
RV, temporary -
while
constructing/     A    N        A        A        A        A        A
remodeling
single-family
dwelling*
Reception         C    C        C        C        C        C        C
facility*
Rooming house, 2
to 5 lodging      N    N        N        N        P        P        N
rooms*
School, public or C    C        C        C        P        P        C
private*
Short term
rental, not       N    N        N        N        P        P        N
owner-occupied*
Short-term
rental, owner-    N    N        A        A        P        P        N
occupied*
Solar energy      P    A        A        A        A        A        A
panel system
Utility
infrastructure    C    C        C        C        C        C        C
site
Wireless
communication
facility - small  See  See note See note See note See note See note See note
cells and         note
distributed
antenna systems*
Wireless
communication
facility - non-
stealth design*   C    C        C        C        C        C        C
(not including
small cells and
DAS)
Wireless
communication     C    C        C        C        C        C        C
facility -
stealth design*
Wind energy       See  See note See note See note See note See note See note
system, small*    note
Residential
dwelling                                                       
categories:*
  Single-family
 detached                                                     
  dwelling
  categories:
    Dwelling
  moved onto    C    N        C        P        C        P        P
    lot*
    Manufactured
    home, new
    multi- wide;
  and meeting   N    N        N        P        P        P        P
    residential
    architectural
    standards*
    Manufactured
    home, new
    single- wide;
  and meeting   N    N        N        P        C        C        P
    residential
    architectural
    standards*
    Manufactured
    home, used;
  and meeting   N    N        N        P        N        C        P
    residential
    architectural
    standards*
    Manufactured
    home that
  does not meet N    N        N        C        N        N        P
    residential
    architectural
    standards*
  Mobile home*  N    N        N        N        N        N        P
  Modular home* P    P        P        P        P        P        P
  Site-built    P    P        P        P        P        P        P
    home, new
  Attached
 dwelling                                                     
  categories:
    Semidetached
  single-family N    N        P        P        P        P        N
    dwelling
    Townhouse
    dwellings, 3
    or 4 attached
    dwelling
    units (*If
    development
  >4 units, see N    N        N        N        P        P        N
    also multi-
    family
    category in
    supplemental
    development
    standards)
    Townhouse
    dwellings, 5
  or more       N    N        N        N        N        P        N
    attached
    dwelling
    units*
  Multi-unit
 dwelling                                                     
  categories:
    Two-family
  dwelling (aka N    N        P        P        P        P        N
    duplex)
    Multi-family
    dwelling,
    with 3 or 4
    dwelling
    units per
    building (*If
  development   N    N        N        N        P        P        N
    >4 units, see
    also multi-
    family
    category in
    supplemental
    development
    standards)
    Multi-family
    dwelling,
  with 5 or     N    N        N        N        N        P        N
    more dwelling
    units per
    building*
                  Note: Condominium refers to a form of ownership only - not
  Residential   a type of use or method of construction. Conversion to
    condominium   condominium ownership requires review by the City and
                  filing of a condominium plat
 
Note:
   1.    See title 9, chapter 6 of this Code.
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2017-12, 6-6-2017)
CHAPTER 8
SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Applicability
10-8-2: Supplemental Development Standards
10-8-1: APPLICABILITY:
The land uses that are identified with an asterisk (*) in the Residential Land
Use Table are subject to the corresponding regulations of this chapter, which
regulations are in addition to other applicable sections of this title and any
conditions that may be imposed pursuant to a conditional use permit review. The
standards of this chapter shall apply unless waived or altered pursuant to the
zoning variance process; provided, those standards identified herein with "
(SE)", may be waived or altered pursuant to the special exemption process of
section
10-14-2 of this title. In no case shall any of the following standards be
waived or modified to the extent that the result is tantamount to a rezone or
the use no longer meets the specified definition thereof. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-
2017)
10-8-2: SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The supplemental development standards are listed by use, in alphabetical
order.
   A.   "A" Uses:
Accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
      1.   Location: An accessory dwelling unit, where permitted, may be
located only in one (1) of the following manners:
   a. Within a detached single-family dwelling, either initially at time of
construction, or any time thereafter.
   b. Within an addition to a detached single-family dwelling.
   c. Above or within a residential garage or other building accessory to a
detached single-family dwelling.
   d. Within an accessory building on the same parcel as a detached single-
family dwelling unit.
      2.   Lot Area, Dwelling Size, And Density: The minimum lot size required
for an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
Accessory dwelling units are not subject to the minimum dwelling size
requirement of this title and are not included in the density calculations for
a lot.
      3.   Number: Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit (ADU) per lot may be
permitted and the ADU must be accessory to a detached single-family dwelling. A
lot already occupied by two (2) or more dwellings is not permitted to have an
accessory dwelling unit.
      4.   Height And Setbacks: A single-story ADU that does not exceed fifteen
feet (15') in building height is subject to the setback standards applicable to
private garages. ADU structures that are taller than fifteen feet (15') in
building height shall conform to setback standards applicable to a primary
residence. (SE)
      5.   Lot Coverage: The footprint of a proposed building containing an ADU
that is structurally detached from the primary residence may cover up to twenty
percent (20%) of the lot. (SE)
      6.   Living Area: The total living area of an ADU may not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the living area of the primary dwelling, or eight hundred
(800) square feet, whichever is less, with the following exception: When the
ADU will be located on one (1) level of an existing building (e.g., basement)
and it is not feasible to utilize the area remaining on that level as part of
the primary dwelling, then the reviewing official may authorize the ADU to
occupy the entire level.
      7.   Type Of Construction: Within the RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning
Districts, ADUs are to be of conventional site-built construction, be assembled
and inspected on site, and meet the requirements of the adopted Building Code
for residential dwellings. Provided; a new modular home may be authorized as an
ADU in these zones through the conditional use permit process when the home
compliments, rather than detracts from, the architectural character of the
neighborhood. Within the R-2MH, R-4, and all commercial and light industrial
zoning districts, manufactured homes and modular homes may be utilized as ADUs
when placed on a traditional concrete or masonry foundation, and the home is no
more than fifteen (15) years old at time of installation (SE). Mobile homes,
manufactured homes except as noted above, recreational vehicles, and temporary
or seasonal structures (e.g., units on skids, yurts, and tents) shall not be
used as ADUs.
      8.   Bedrooms: An ADU may not contain more than two (2) bedrooms/sleeping
areas.
      9.   Parking: An ADU must have a minimum of one off street parking space,
when located outside of the Downtown Parking District. (SE) The required
parking space shall meet the standards of chapter 16, "Off Street Parking", of
this title. Any required existing parking may not be displaced by the ADU,
unless such parking is replaced elsewhere on the lot.
      10.   Owner Occupancy: Within the RR and R-1 Zoning Districts, the owner
of the property must utilize the primary dwelling unit or ADU as their primary
residence; the dwellings shall not both be occupied unless this is the case.
      11.   Short-Term Rental: An ADU may be utilized as a short-term rental
when located in an R-2, R-2MH, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District, provided applicable
short-term rental requirements are met, which includes an owner- occupancy
requirement in the R-2 and R-2MH Zones.
      12.   Utilities: Both the primary dwelling and the ADU must be connected
to public sewer and public water, and be served with a functional fire hydrant
meeting applicable requirements for distance to the dwellings. Both dwelling
units are to be serviced from a single water meter and a single electric meter.
(SE)
      13.   Home Occupations: Any home occupation within an ADU shall be
limited to the small-scale home occupation standards.
      14.   Addressing: The ADU will be assigned an individual address, which
must be posted as required by Code.
Amateur radio antennas (e.g., ham radio antennas).
      1.   Within residential districts, towers supporting amateur radio
antennas that do not exceed the maximum building height limit for the district
in which they are located shall be deemed an accessory use. Towers supporting
amateur radio antennas that exceed fifty feet (50') or the building height
limit for the district in which they are located shall require a conditional
use permit, with the intent of minimizing visual impacts.
      2.   Towers and other structures supporting amateur radio antennas shall
comply with building setback requirements. (SE) (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017; amd.
Ord. 2017-24, 11-7-2017)
   B.   "B" Uses:
Bed and breakfast inns.
      1.   The bed and breakfast inn must meet the definition set forth in
chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   The owner must be living on the property at the time the bed and
breakfast is in operation.
      3.   Total guest occupancy of a bed and breakfast inn property is limited
to no more than ten (10) persons. (Establishments exceeding 10 persons fall
within the zoning classification of "hotel".) The Planning and Zoning Board may
further limit total guest occupancy (e.g., beds and/or guest rooms) of a
proposed bed and breakfast inn based on lack of parking and other neighborhood
impacts identified in the review process.
      4.   Vehicle access must comply with the requirements of the
International Fire Code, appendix D, or other established standard acceptable
to the Fire Marshal.
      5.   Cooking facilities in guest rooms are not permitted.
      6.   The facility must pass a fire and life safety inspection before it
may be used as a bed and breakfast inn. At a minimum, the bed and breakfast inn
shall be equipped with functional smoke detectors, a fire extinguisher (minimum
rating 2A10BC), and a carbon monoxide alarm if applicable. Each sleeping room
shall be provided with Code compliant means of egress. The authority having
jurisdiction (i.e., Fire Marshal and/or Building Official) may have additional
requirements pursuant to the adopted Fire and/or Building Code.
      7.   Individual guest occupancy is limited to temporary periods of less
than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days, and less than one hundred
twenty (120) days in any one-year period.
      8.   Bed and breakfast inns shall not be used as "reception facilities"
as defined in this title, unless such use is otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which the property is located and authorization for such has been
granted by the reviewing official.
      9.   The bed and breakfast must maintain compliance with the WY
Department of Revenue licensing requirements, including payment of lodging
taxes.
      10.   All bed and breakfasts must maintain compliance with the Wyoming
Food Safety Rule (WY Department of Agriculture) and related licensing
requirements.
      11.   Unless otherwise exempted or authorized by this title, one (1) off-
street guest parking space shall be provided for every two (2) lodging units or
fraction thereof. The guest parking shall be in addition to the two (2) spaces
required for the owners/manager.
      12.   All bed and breakfast inns, whether existing or proposed, shall
register with the City of Cody, pass the fire safety inspection, and provide
evidence of compliance with the Wyoming Food Safety Rule. The Community
Development Department is authorized to create application form(s) and
procedures as necessary to manage and enforce these provisions, both for the
initial authorization and for ongoing compliance. Authorized bed and breakfast
inns shall post a document issued by the City identifying such authorization in
a manner that is visible from the public way.
   C.   "C" Uses:
Child care centers and preschools - not listed above.
      1.   If located in a residential zone, access to the child care center
shall be by means of a collector street or larger. (SE)
      2.   The site shall be designed so that all discharging or loading of
passengers from a vehicle is accomplished on the site. The layout of driveways,
circulation patterns and parking must be approved by the City Engineer.
      3.   When located within or adjacent to a residential zoning district,
outdoor recreation shall be limited to daylight hours, and not earlier than
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (SE)
Churches.
      1.   Churches with a seating capacity for services of five hundred (500)
persons or more shall be located adjacent to an arterial or major collector
street, so as to minimize traffic impacts to the residential area. (SE)
Community gardens.
      1.   Community gardens must be managed and actively tended so as to avoid
weeds, odors, or other characteristics that would constitute a nuisance or
detriment to neighboring property values.
      2.   In the Rural Residential and R-1 Zoning Districts, the community
garden must be located in the back yard of a property, or located so that it is
screened from the public way.
Community greenhouses.
      1.   One (1) greenhouse, up to one hundred twenty (120) square feet in
size, and of typical frame and ridged panel (e.g., glass, acrylic, or
polycarbonate) construction is permitted as an accessory use to a community
garden. A larger or additional community greenhouse, or one (1) of other
construction, shall be reviewed as a conditional use.
      2.   In the Rural Residential and R-1 Zoning Districts, the community
greenhouse must be located in the back yard of a property, or located so that
it is screened from the public way.
Community residence for the disabled.
      1.   Prior to authorization of the community residence, the applicant
shall provide a certification from a qualified licensed medical practitioner
that the number of disabled residents proposed is necessary to provide the
mutual support and interrelationships required for treatment.
      2.   A community residence is considered a residential use of property
for purposes of zoning and building codes. However, the Fire Marshal, pursuant
to and consistent with the adopted Fire Code, may require enhanced fire
protection, including the installation of fire sprinklers and other mitigating
measures, where one (1) or more residents has a lessened ability to ambulate
adequately.
   D.   "D" Uses:
Dormitories.
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for
the first five (5) occupants of the building's designed occupancy and nine
hundred (900) square feet for each additional residential occupant, up to a
maximum of ten (10) occupants.
      2.   Parking shall be provided at a rate determined through the
conditional use process.
Dwelling moved onto lot. The dwelling must be of conventional stick built
construction and compliment, rather than detract from, the architectural
character of the neighborhood. The reviewing official may require exterior
maintenance, repair, or enhancements (e.g., painting, roof repair, residing)
that are needed to achieve architectural compatibility prior to occupancy of
the dwelling, or require a financial security from the owner to ensure
completion of such within eight (8) months of building placement.
   E.   "E" Uses: Reserved.
   F.   "F" Uses: Reserved.
   G.   "G" Uses: Reserved.
   H.   "H" Uses:
Home occupation, large-scale. The purpose of the "large- scale home occupation"
land use category is to provide an option for consideration of businesses or
professional enterprises that somewhat exceed the limitations of the "small-
scale home occupation" category, but that still maintain such characteristics
and/or are located such that they are able to operate in a manner that does not
interfere with the residential character of the neighborhood.
      1.   In addition to the conditional use permit criteria of this Code,
large-scale home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
   a. The home occupation must be clearly incidental and accessory to the
residential use.
   b. All on-premises work and storage areas must be conducted within the home,
garage, or an accessory structure.
   c. All on-premises activities related to the home occupation are to be
conducted only by members of the household, provided up to two (2) non-resident
employees may work on the premises, when authorized through the conditional use
permit review.
   d. No structural alteration or addition may be made to accommodate the home
occupation, unless it is made in such a manner that the area would be suitable
for typical residential purposes if it were not occupied by the home
occupation.
   e. No equipment shall be installed, no products shall be stored, and no
activities shall be conducted in the dwelling or attached garage that would
violate the Fire or Building Code limitations for a non-rated wooden structure
(Construction Type V-B), regardless of the construction type of the dwelling.
Any accessory structure used in the home occupation shall meet the Fire and
Building Code requirements applicable to its use.
   f. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, electrical
interference, or other detriments to neighboring properties or dwelling units
shall be produced.
   g. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation, other than
those indications complying with subsections h through l of this use.
   h. No more than a total of four (4) vehicles/trailers associated with the
home occupation (including employee vehicles) shall be at the premises at any
time. (SE)
   i. Any vehicle or trailer associated with the home occupation that is not a
typical passenger car or pickup must be parked off-street. Furthermore,
vehicles and trailers are not to occupy any area within the front yard that is
not designed for parking (e.g., no parking on the front lawn).
   j. The combined number of customer and employee visits to the property shall
not typically exceed eight (8) per day, and they shall not typically occur
earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., nor later than seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. For calculation purposes, each customer or employee visit shall count as
one (1) visit. In situations where a person is dropped off and later picked up,
it shall count as only one (1) visit, as the customer is the person visiting,
not the one dropping off and picking up (e.g., a parent dropping off a child at
music lessons and later picking them up). (SE)
   k. On-street parking that is available along the property frontage may be
authorized to satisfy needed customer/visitor parking, when such will not
create a significant safety concern. If more customer/visitor parking is needed
than can be provided along the property frontage, it must be provided on site.
   l. Signage must comply with the provisions set forth in City of Cody Sign
Code. (SE)
      2.   Examples of possible large-scale home occupations include: small-
scale manufacturing or fabrication in an accessory building (no use of
production line or automated equipment); contractors not meeting the small-
scale home occupation requirements; and, small- scale repair services.
      3.   The following uses are not permitted as large-scale home
occupations, due to their non-residential character, failure to meet home
occupation standards, and/or potential impacts to neighboring properties:
   a. Animal kennel, stable, daycare, and training;
   b. Barber or beauty parlors, with more than one (1) chair;
   c. Equipment rental;
   d. Funeral home or crematorium;
   e. On-premises bookstores or entertainment establishments;
   f. Restaurants/drinking establishments;
   g. Slaughter and meat processing services;
   h. Storage facilities (aka mini-storage);
   i. Towing services;
   j. Vehicle or heavy equipment repair (including body, engine and chassis),
impound, and dismantling/wrecking. This provision does not prohibit mobile
mechanic services that provide repair services only at the customer's residence
or place of business.
      4.   Any large-scale home occupation may be subject to inspection and
review at any reasonable time for purposes of verifying compliance with the
requirements of this section and the conditional use permit. If, at any time,
any of the large-scale home occupation requirements are not met, enforcement
action may be taken pursuant to section
10-1-5, "Enforcement", of this title.
Home occupation, small-scale.
      1.   A small-scale home occupation permit may be authorized when the
business meets all of the following requirements:
   a. The home occupation must be clearly incidental and accessory to the
residential use. Only residents of the home may participate in any business
activity on the premises.
   b. All on-premises work and storage must occur within the main residence or
attached garage. The home occupation shall not occupy more than five hundred
(500) square feet of the residence and attached garage.
   c. All on-premises activities related to the home occupation are to be
conducted only by members of the household.
   d. No structural alteration or addition may be made to accommodate the home
occupation, unless it is made in such a manner that the area would be suitable
for typical residential purposes if it were not occupied by the home
occupation.
   e. No equipment shall be installed, no products shall be stored, and no
activities shall be conducted that would violate the Fire or Building Code
limitations for a non-rated wooden structure (Construction Type V-B),
regardless of the construction type of the dwelling.
   f. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, electrical
interference, or other detriments to neighboring properties or dwelling units
shall be produced.
   g. There shall be no exterior indications of the home occupation, other than
those indications complying with subsections h through l of this use.
   h. No more than a total of two (2) vehicles/trailers associated with the
home occupation shall be at the premises at any time. In addition, the vehicle
(s) shall not be larger than a typical passenger van or 1-ton pickup and the
trailer(s) no more than twenty feet (20') long (overall length). Box-style
cargo vans, semi tractors/trailers, heavy equipment, and similar vehicles are
not authorized.
   i. Any vehicle or trailer associated with the home occupation that is not a
typical passenger car or pickup must be parked off-street. Furthermore,
vehicles and trailers are not to occupy any area within the front yard that is
not designed for parking (e.g., no parking on the front lawn).
   j. Within the R-1 Zoning District, on-site customers and employee visits are
not permitted. In the other residential zoning districts, the combined number
of customer and employee visits to the property shall not typically exceed six
(6) per day (SE), and they shall not typically occur earlier than seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., nor later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. each day. In situations
where a person is dropped off and later picked up, it shall count as only one
(1) visit, as the customer is the person visiting, not the one dropping off and
picking up (e.g., a parent dropping off a child at music lessons and later
picking them up).
   k. On-street parking that is available along the property frontage may be
authorized to satisfy needed customer/visitor parking, when such will not
create a significant safety concern. If more customer/visitor parking is needed
than can be provided along the property frontage, it must be provided on site.
   l. Signage must comply with the provisions set forth in City of Cody Sign
Code. (SE)
      2.   Examples of possible small-scale home occupations include: artist;
consultant; computer work (accountant, architect, drafter, engineer, typist);
internet sales (off-site delivery); music instructor; photographer; seamstress/
tailor; and, personal teacher/tutor.
      3.   The following uses are not permitted as small-scale home
occupations, due to their non-residential character, failure to meet home
occupation standards, and/or potential impacts to neighboring properties:
   a. All uses prohibited as large-scale home occupations.
   b. Any use generating, storing or utilizing hazardous materials in amounts
measurably greater than a typical household.
   c. Machining, welding, or metal shop;
   d. Pawn shop;
   e. Retail storefronts;
   f. Small engine repair; and
   g. Vehicle or heavy equipment alteration, repair (including body, engine and
chassis), painting, sales, rental, service, impound, or storage. This provision
does not prohibit: mobile mechanic services that provide repair services only
at the customer's residence or place of business, hobby work on not more than
two (2) vehicles per year, and rental/car sharing of no more than two (2)
personal vehicles of the property owner or tenant.
      4.   A small-scale home occupation may be subject to inspection and
review at any reasonable time for purposes of verifying compliance. If, at any
time, any of the small-scale home occupation requirements are not met,
enforcement action may be taken pursuant to section
10-1-5, "Enforcement", of this title.
   I.   "I" Uses:
Individual care center category.
      1.   Access to the individual care center shall be by means of a
collector street or larger. (SE)
      2.   The site shall be designed so that all discharging or loading of
passengers from a vehicle is accomplished on the site. The layout of driveways,
circulation patterns and parking must be approved by the City Engineer prior to
the issuance of any building permits.
      3.   Where the facility structures or play areas have residential
adjacency:
   a. A six foot (6') high solid fence shall be installed along the common
property line. (SE)
   b. Vehicle access shall be oriented away from residential uses on local
streets. (SE)
      4.   When located within or adjacent to a residential zoning district,
outdoor recreation shall be limited to daylight hours, and not earlier than
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (SE).
Individual care - group home category.
      1.   When located on a single-family residential lot, the provision of
care shall take place in a dwelling used primarily as a residence.
      2.   When located on a parcel developed with multi-family housing, the
provision of care shall take place within a structure not used as a residence.
      3.   When located within or adjacent to a residential zoning district,
outdoor recreation shall be limited to daylight hours, and not earlier than
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (SE)
   J.   "J" Uses: Reserved.
   K.   "K" Uses: Reserved.
   L.   "L" Uses:
Long-term rental. Occupancy of a residential dwelling unit is limited to one
(1) "family", except as otherwise permitted under this title (e.g., community
residence for the disabled, dormitory, rooming house, short-term rental).
   M.   "M" Uses:
Manufactured home.
      1.   All manufactured homes placed outside of a mobile home park must be
"attached" to the property so as to be taxed as real property (i.e., title
elimination process).
      2.   In addition to any restriction of a specific zoning district, no
more than two (2) manufactured homes shall be placed on a single lot, unless
the property is developed in accordance with the mobile home park/manufactured
home park standards of this Code.
      3.   The above restrictions shall not apply to manufactured homes
displayed on a commercial sales lot, or stored in a commercial manufactured
home production or storage facility.
Mobile home. All mobile homes and manufactured homes located in a mobile home
park shall:
      1.   Be placed and anchored per the manufacturer's installation
instructions or per the design of a professional engineer or architect licensed
in Wyoming;
      2.   Maintain a minimum crawl space of eighteen inches (18") under the
entire unit;
      3.   Have the axle(s) removed;
      4.   Have skirting or sidewalls installed to enclose all areas between
the lower edge of the outside walls and the ground;
      5.   Have steps or inclined ramps affixed to all entrances.
Modular home. The home must meet the definition of "modular home" as found in
this title. Manufactured homes are not modular homes. Refer to the definitions
for proper classification. It is recommended that you refer to the publication
"Builder's Guide to Modular Home Set-up and Completion", by the National
Modular Housing Council. The document can be found on their website
www.manufacturedhousing.org.
Multi-family development. This use shall apply to all multi- family
developments containing more than four (4) dwelling units. A multi-family
development project that includes multiple lots shall be considered as one (1)
property or development for purposes of implementing the standards set forth in
this use.
1. Purpose:
   a. To create multi-family housing that is safe and convenient and that
enhances the quality of life of its residents.
   b. To create quality buildings and designs for multi-family development that
will enhance the visual character of the community.
   c. To create building and site design in multi- family development that is
sensitive to, and well- integrated with, the surrounding neighborhoods.
   d. To create open space areas that contribute to the aesthetics of the
community, provide an attractive setting for buildings, and provide safe,
interesting outdoor spaces for residents.
2. Site Design:
   a. Multi-family housing developments shall be separated from any abutting
single-family housing (attached or detached) by a six foot (6') tall fence, of
traditional construction (e.g., vinyl, wood, block), that provides a solid
visual barrier to a height of at least five feet (5'). Provided, the reviewing
official may waive all or part of the fence requirement when the design and
characteristics of the multi-family housing development otherwise provide
reasonable privacy for abutting single-family housing. (SE)
   b. All waste storage facilities (e.g., dumpsters) shall be located in an
area not readily visible from a public street, or shall be screened from view
from a public street. (SE)
   c. Provide a central mailbox, including provisions for parcel mail, which is
located to provide safe pedestrian and/or vehicular access and complies with
USPS standards.
   d. A minimum of sixty (60) square feet of private, usable open space shall
be provided for, and immediately adjacent to, each dwelling unit. This
requirement can be satisfied through porches, patios, decks, and/or enclosed
yards. Common open space, building entryways, stairs, and parking areas shall
not count towards this requirement. (SE)
   e. Multi-family developments with twenty (20) units or more shall provide
the following:
(1) A property management office; or signage indicating a phone number for the
property manager.
(2) A directory and map of the development at an entrance or convenient
location for those entering the development.
3. Common Open Space Requirements:
   a. A minimum area of outdoor common open space shall be provided and
maintained as follows:
(1) One hundred fifty (150) square feet for each dwelling unit containing five
hundred (500) square feet or less of living area.
(2) Two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each dwelling unit containing more
than five hundred (500) square feet.
   b. Common open space may be located in multiple areas; provided, each area
shall be not less than four hundred (400) square feet in size and shall have
minimum length and width dimensions of twenty feet (20') at all points. (SE)
   c. In phased developments, common open space shall be provided in each phase
of the development consistent with the requirements for the size and number of
dwelling units. (SE)
   d. Common open space areas shall not be immediately adjacent to collector or
arterial streets, unless separated from the street by a berm or constructed
barrier at least four feet (4') in height. (SE)
4. Architectural Character:
   a. All multi-family building elevations shall have a portion of the
elevation devoted to architectural features designed to provide articulation
and variety. These features shall include, but are not limited to: windows,
bays, offsetting walls, and multiple siding finishes/materials.
   b. Main entrances, which are the primary point(s) of entry where the
majority of building users will enter and leave, shall be designed as an
obvious entrance and focal point of the building through architectural
treatment, lighting, and address identification.
   c. Roof forms shall include variety and detail when viewed from the street
and/or front elevation. Roofs shall have at least one (1) variation in the roof
(e.g., gabled wing or overbuild, dormer, pitch break) for every four (4) units,
or fraction thereof, in the building.
   d. All roof mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service
equipment should be screened from public view from the adjacent public streets
and residential properties by the use of parapets, walls, enclosures, or other
suitable means.
5. Landscaping:
   a. All street-facing building elevations shall have landscaping along their
foundation. The foundation landscaping shall meet the following minimum
standards:
(1) The landscaped area shall be at least three feet (3') wide.
(2) For every four (4) linear feet of foundation, a shrub, perennial, or tree
having a minimum mature height of twenty four inches (24") shall be planted.
(3) Ground cover (plants or decorative rock) shall cover the remainder of the
landscaped area.
   N.   "N" Uses: Reserved.
   O.   "O" Uses: Reserved.
   P.   "P" Uses: Reserved.
   Q.   "Q" Uses: Reserved.
   R.   "R" Uses:
RV, temporary. The Community Development Department may authorize the owner of
a residential lot, and their household, to live in an on-site recreational
vehicle (RV) while constructing or remodeling a residence on the property. The
permit shall be valid for up to twelve (12) months, and only during such time
as a valid building permit is in effect and construction activity is ongoing at
the site. Appropriate provisions for sewer, power, and water shall be made
while the RV is occupied.
Reception facility.
1. Minimum lot area shall be at least 1.0 acre.
2. A reception facility shall only be permitted in association with a detached
single-family dwelling and its grounds.
3. Seating capacity shall not exceed that which can be accommodated by parking
available on site, along the property frontage, and in any shared parking lot
available through an off-site parking agreement authorized pursuant to section
10-16-7 of this title.
4. Unless otherwise specified by the Planning and Zoning Board, events shall
end by nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. during September thru May, and ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. during June through August.
Residential architectural standards. Within all residential zoning districts
except the Mobile Home Park (MHP) Zone, all dwellings constructed after the
effective date of this chapter shall be constructed in the following manner
(SE); provided, manufactured homes not meeting these standards may be
considered as specified in the land use table:
1. Roof pitch shall average at least 3:12 in steepness.
2. Eaves shall extend at least twelve inches (12") from the building.
3. The building shall be constructed or placed on a permanent foundation of
concrete, masonry, or material of similar appearance and durability approved by
the building official.
4. The structure shall have at least one (1) story above ground level (i.e., no
basement houses).
Residential dwelling categories.
1. All residential dwellings shall comply with applicable residential
architectural standards, as specified in this chapter. (SE)
2. Within the RR, R-1, R-2, and R-2MH Zoning Districts, no more than one (1)
principal residential building shall be located on a single lot.
3. In addition to any restriction of a specific zoning district, no more than
two (2) manufactured and/or mobile homes, or combination thereof, shall be
placed on a single lot, unless developed in accordance with the mobile home
park/manufactured home park standards of this Code.
4. The commercial use of a residential dwelling unit for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, wherein any individual guest rents or occupies the unit for
a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days is prohibited,
except as otherwise permitted under this title (e.g., bed and breakfast, short-
term rental).
5. Occupancy of a residential dwelling unit is limited to one (1) "family",
except as otherwise permitted under this title (e.g., community residence for
the disabled, dormitory, rooming house, short-term rental).
Rooming house.
1. No more than two (2) persons shall occupy any individual lodging room.
2. Unless otherwise exempted or authorized by this title, one (1) off-street
parking space shall be provided for each guest lodging room. The guest parking
shall be in addition to the two (2) spaces required for the owner(s).
   S.   "S" Uses:
School, public or private. It is anticipated that due to coordination between
the City and the school district that existing schools and planned school sites
will be located within a civic zoning district, as permitted uses. However, the
option to establish a public or private school elsewhere is provided as
outlined in the land use table. Careful consideration shall be given to avoid
potential impacts associated with traffic, off-site parking, pedestrian/bicycle
access, drop off/pick up areas, noise sources, and lighting associated with
sporting events.
Short-term rental.
1. Authorized owner-occupied methods of short-term rental are limited to:
   a. Rental of a portion of the owner's dwelling (room rental), while the
owner is living in the dwelling.
   b. Rental of an accessory dwelling unit while the owner is living in the
main dwelling.
   c. Rental of the main dwelling while the owner is living in the accessory
dwelling unit.
   d. Rental of a dwelling while the owner is living on a lot immediately next
door.
2. Within the residential zoning districts, the short- term rental may be
operated out of any form of dwelling except a multi-family dwelling. In
addition, short-term rental shall not be offered by a renter of the property -
i.e., a sublet situation.
3. Occupancy of a dwelling used for short-term rental is limited to the lesser
of 2.6 guests per guest sleeping room (total rounded to nearest whole number)
or a total of ten (10) guests. In addition, short-term rental dwellings shall
only be rented to only one (1) group at any one (1) time - a single booking.
Separate dwellings on a property may be booked individually.
4. Use or conversion of an existing dwelling to an owner-occupied short-term
rental shall require one (1) off-street guest parking space meeting the
requirements of chapter 16, "Off Street Parking", of this title for every two
(2) guest sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, unless otherwise exempted or
authorized by this title. The guest parking shall be in addition to the spaces
required for the owners. A non-owner-occupied short- term rental does not
require additional parking to be provided.
5. Prior to use of the dwelling as a short-term rental, the dwelling shall be
inspected for fire and life safety items. At a minimum, the short-term rental
shall be equipped with functional smoke detectors, a fire extinguisher (minimum
rating 2A10BC), and a carbon monoxide alarm if applicable. Each sleeping room
shall be provided with Code compliant means of egress. The authority having
jurisdiction (i.e., Fire Marshal and/or Building Official) may have additional
requirements pursuant to the adopted Fire and/or Building Code. Notwithstanding
the above, short-term rentals existing at the date of adoption of this
provision shall have until June 30, 2017, to obtain their inspection and until
December 31, 2017, to correct any fire and life safety items; no short-term
rental activity shall occur if the dwelling is not in compliance with these
deadlines.
6. Short-term rentals are classified as lodging facilities by the State. As
such, the owner of the short-term rental must register the lodging facility
business with the WY Department of Revenue and pay lodging tax as required.
7. All short-term rental facilities, whether existing or proposed, shall
register with the City of Cody, provide evidence of compliance with this use,
and pass the fire/safety inspection. The Community Development Department is
authorized to create application form(s) and procedures as necessary to manage
and enforce these provisions, both for the initial authorization and for
ongoing compliance. Authorized short-term rental facilities shall post a
document issued by the City identifying such authorization in a manner that is
visible from the public way.
   T.   "T" Uses: Reserved.
   U.   "U" Uses: Reserved.
   V.   "V" Uses: Reserved. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
   W.   "W" Uses:
Wind energy system, small.
1. No small wind energy system shall be erected on any lot less than 1.0 acre
in size. (SE)
2. Total height may be up to fifty feet (50'); provided, properties five (5)
acres or greater are allowed up to eighty feet (80'). (SE)
3. The minimum height of the lowest extent of a turbine blade/rotor shall be
twenty feet (20') above the ground, if on a horizontal axis turbine. There is
no minimum rotor height for a vertical-axis turbine, provided the blades/rotor
must be located or isolated (e.g., fenced) such that they are not easily
accessible to anyone but maintenance personnel.
4. The small wind energy system shall have a maximum rotor speed of less than
five hundred (500) rpm (revolutions per minute) at the manufacturer's rated
wind speed. (SE)
5. No tower shall have a climbing apparatus within ten feet (10') of the
ground.
6. Small wind energy systems shall be finished and maintained as manufactured.
7. Every small wind energy system shall be equipped with an automatic over
speed control and a manual brake.
8. The small wind energy system shall be set back from any public road right-
of-way and overhead communication or electrical line at least 1.5 times its
total height.
9. The following standards apply, provided an affected neighboring owner(s) may
grant an easement or written agreement to reduce or eliminate the requirement
as applicable to the protection of their property. The document must be
recorded in the Office of the County Clerk before a building permit for the
wind energy system is issued.
   a. A small wind energy system shall be set back from the nearest neighbor's
property line at least 1.5 times its total height.
   b. The small wind energy system shall be located and maintained such that
sound levels do not exceed fifty (50) dBA as measured at any neighbor's
residentially zoned property, or forty five (45) dBA as measured at any
neighbor's habitable building, assuming a wind speed of twelve (12) m/s (26.8
mph). If the sound rating for the wind energy system is known for a given
distance, the method of deducting six (6) dB for every doubling of distance
shall be sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the sound limitation. (See
NREL Wind Testing website for data on some models.) If the sound rating is not
known, the applicable setback from any neighboring residential property shall
be one hundred twenty five feet (125'), and two hundred twenty feet (220') from
any neighbor's habitable building.
Wireless communication facility, non-stealth design.
1. Non-stealth design wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection 10-11-2W of this title.
2. Non-stealth design is not permitted in the residential zones within the
Downtown Architectural District.
Wireless communication facility, small cell and distributed antenna systems.
1. Small cell and DAS wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection 10-11-2W of this title.
2. Distributed antenna systems and small cells that comply with the height
limit of the zoning district and do not require installation of a new tower,
utility support structure or building are permitted uses in all residential
zones, provided the applicant complies with all Federal laws (such as the
Americans With Disabilities Act) and State laws. Distributed antenna systems
and small cells that do not meet those conditions, and which are located in a
residential zoning district, shall be subject to conditional use permit review.
3. Within the residential zoning districts, a small cell or DAS must be mounted
on either an existing building, or existing or replacement utility pole, and
extend no more than three feet (3') horizontally or six feet (6') vertically
from the building or utility pole on which it is mounted.
4. Within the Downtown Architectural District, the proposed facility must be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board.
5. The proposal shall clearly demonstrate that the small cell and distributed
antenna systems mounting location is one (1) of the least visually obtrusive
options in the area.
Wireless communication facility, stealth design.
1. Stealth design wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection 10-11-2W of this title.
2. Within the Downtown Architectural District, the proposed facility must be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord.
2017-12, 6-6-2017)
   X.   "X" Uses: Reserved.
   Y.   "Y" Uses: Reserved.
   Z.   "Z" Uses: Reserved. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 9
RESERVED
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 10
BUSINESS, INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  LIMITED BUSINESS D-1 DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10A-1: Intent And Purpose
10-10A-2: Uses Permitted
10-10A-3: Area
10-10A-4: Buffer Zone
10-10A-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent that the Limited Business D-1 District shall provide services
normally accessory to a residential area, with only moderate interference with
the tranquility of the adjacent residential neighborhood. Services shall be
limited to business hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord.
87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10A-2: USES PERMITTED:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered unless otherwise permitted herein, except for one or more
of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in the C Districts, except no manufactured homes
shall be permitted for commercial purposes. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15)
   B.   Antique shops; art galleries, including dealers and art supplies;
barbershops; beauty shops; book and stationery stores; clothing stores;
department stores; retail electrical stores; appliance stores, including sales
and repairs; drugstores; variety stores; florist and gift ships; furniture
stores; grocery stores; hardware stores; jewelry stores, including watch repair
shops; craft and hobby stores; music stores; radio, television and video
stores, including repair shops; office supply stores; paint stores; wallpaper
stores; glass stores; floor covering stores; tack supply stores; photography
studios; camera shops; private schools; shoe stores, including sales and
repairs; sporting goods stores; toy stores; insurance offices; real estate
offices; travel bureaus and agencies; storage buildings; retail bakeries;
needlework, handweaving and tapestry shops; bicycle sales and repair shops;
preschool or childcare facilities; frozen food lockers; health studios, spas
and clubs; ice vending machines and dispensers; dancing schools; taxi stands
and offices; engineering and surveying offices; accounting offices; legal
offices; physician and surgeon offices; dentist offices; optician offices;
osteopath offices; chiropractor offices; counseling services; laboratories;
telephone and telegraph offices and exchanges; wireless communication
facilities; bed and breakfast inns; short-term rentals. Other similar uses,
stores and services may be permitted, but expressly excluding those listed in
D-2 and D-3 Districts. (Ord. 2005-01, 1-18-2005; amd. Ord. 2008-31, 12-16-2008;
Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017; Ord. 2018-03, 4-17-2018)
10-10A-3: AREA:
The area of an individual store, office or space shall be limited to a maximum
area of five thousand (5,000) square feet in any one story and a maximum gross
area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10A-4: BUFFER ZONE:
Where any business or commercial district is adjacent to any residential
district, there shall be provided on the business or commercial district a
buffer zone with a visual screen. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19;
Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-
15)
ARTICLE B.  GENERAL BUSINESS D-2 DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10B-1: Purpose And Intent
10-10B-2: Uses Permitted
10-10B-3: Buffer Zone
10-10B-4: Architecture And Landscaping
10-10B-5: Conditional Uses
10-10B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent that the General Business D-2 District shall provide retail
commercial and business service. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19;
Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-
15)
10-10B-2: USES PERMITTED:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered unless permitted herein, except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
   A.   Any uses permitted in the D-1 District.
   B.   Dry cleaning stores; drive-in food services; service stations;
automobile garages, including sales, service and repairs; automobile body and
paint shops, including upholstering and reconditioning; automobile leasing
offices; new and used car lots, including storage; automobile parts stores; car
washes; golf courses; canvas sales and fabrication; banks and financial
institutions; fur sales, repair and storage; employment services; bottling
plants; blacksmith or welding shops; boat sales and repairs; bookbinding;
broadcasting studios without towers; plumbing, heating and roofing supply and
workshops; building material sales and lumber yards; clothes cleaning and
laundromats; small equipment leasing and storage; art foundries; mobile home
sales; pet shops; greenhouses and nurseries; post offices; pottery
manufacturing facilities; printing and publishing shops; sign shops; swimming
pool sales and supplies; wholesale bakeries; warehouses; wireless communication
facilities. Stores and services may be permitted but expressly excluding those
listed in D-3 Districts.
   C.   Bowling alleys, roller skating rinks, theaters, restaurants, motels,
hotels, bars and lounges, amusement parks, stadiums, rodeo arenas, video
arcades, museums, pool halls and resorts; provided, however, such uses in an
area lying within the Airport Overlay Zone shall be subject to section
10-10B-5, "Conditional Uses", of this article. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15; Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
10-10B-3: BUFFER ZONE:
Where any business or commercial district is adjacent to any residential
district, there shall be provided on the business or commercial district a
buffer zone with a visual screen. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19;
Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-
15)
10-10B-4: ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPING:
All structures within the district shall be architecturally compatible.
Architectural and landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval. Architectural and landscaping details shall be
maintained as shown by the approved plans. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10B-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
In accordance with chapter 14 of this title, the following uses shall be
allowed only upon approval of a conditional use permit, for all area lying
within the Airport Overlay Zone:
Bowling alleys, roller skating rinks, theaters, restaurants, motels, hotels,
bars and lounges, amusement parks, stadiums, rodeo arenas, video arcades,
museums, pool halls and resorts; and other similar uses. (1960 Compilation §
26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord.
91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
ARTICLE C.  OPEN BUSINESS/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL D-3 DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10C-1: Purpose And Intent
10-10C-2: Uses Permitted
10-10C-3: Prohibited Uses
10-10C-4: Buffer Zone
10-10C-5: Architecture And Landscaping
10-10C-6: Conditional Uses
10-10C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent that the Open Business D-3 District shall provide a zone for
the conduct of commercial and business services not permitted within the D-
2 Zone, and certain small light industrial uses. (1960 Compilation § 26-109;
amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord.
93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10C-2: USES PERMITTED:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered unless otherwise permitted herein, except for one (1) or
more of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in the D-2 District.
   B.   Animal boarding kennels; boat building and repairs; cabinet shops;
cleaning plants; cosmetic manufacturing; dairy product processing; heavy
equipment sales and storage; livestock feed sales (no processing or
manufacturing); contractor yards; animal hospitals; taxidermist shops; wireless
communication facilities. Other similar uses may be permitted.
   C.   Drive-in theaters; manufacturing of electronic components, instruments,
jewelry, games, toys and pharmaceuticals; cold storage plants, meat processing
plants, motion picture production studios, and furniture manufacturing or
assembly facilities; provided, however, such uses in an area lying within the
Airport Overlay Zone shall be subject to section
10-10C-6, "Conditional Uses", of this article. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15; Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
10-10C-3: PROHIBITED USES:
Uses specifically prohibited within a D-3 District are grain elevators; the
storage or handling of explosives, caustics, unstable flammable liquids, toxic
or hazardous materials or substances. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-
19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord.
97-15)
10-10C-4: BUFFER ZONE:
Where any business or commercial district is adjacent to any residential
district, there shall be provided on the business or commercial district a
buffer zone with a visual screen. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19;
Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-
15)
10-10C-5: ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPING:
All structures within the district shall be architecturally compatible.
Architectural and landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval. Architectural and landscaping details shall be
maintained as shown by the approved plans. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd.
Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-
8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10C-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
In accordance with chapter 14 of this title, the following uses shall be
allowed only with the approval of a conditional use permit for all area lying
within the Airport Overlay Zone:
Drive-in theaters; manufacturing of electronic components, instruments,
jewelry, games, toys, and pharmaceuticals; cold storage plant; meat processing
plant; motion picture production studio; furniture manufacturing or assembly
facilities; and other similar uses. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-
19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord.
97-15)
ARTICLE D.  HIGH TECH/DATA PROCESSING/LIGHT MANUFACTURING D-4 DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10D-1: Purpose And Intent
10-10D-2: Uses Permitted
10-10D-3: Odors; Applicability
10-10D-4: Outside Storage; Deliveries
10-10D-5: Shift Work
10-10D-6: Height; Appearance; Lot Requirements
10-10D-7: Signage
10-10D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent that the high tech/data processing/light manufacturing D-
4 district shall provide a zone that will permit restricted business or
manufacturing uses that will be compatible with a residential district. (1960
Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord.
89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-2: USES PERMITTED:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or
structurally altered unless otherwise permitted herein, except for the
following uses:
   A.   The manufacture and/or assembly of electronic and/or computer
components and devices. The manufacturing and assembly of such devices and
components shall not produce or emit any sound of seventy (70) dBA or more at
night (7:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.), and eighty (80) dBA or more during the day (7:
00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.), as measured at twenty five feet (25') from any building
located on the property so used, or any odor that is detectable from twenty
five feet (25') outside the property line of the property so used.
   B.   Commercial information and electronic data gathering, processing and
computing operations.
   C.   Offices associated with the uses described in subsections A and B of
this section.
   D.   Engineering and surveying offices, accounting offices, legal offices,
physician and surgeon offices, dentist offices, optician offices, osteopath
offices, chiropractor offices, and similar professional offices and counseling
services. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29;
Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-3: ODORS; APPLICABILITY:
For the purposes of interpreting and applying subsection 10-10D-2A of this
article, the following apply:
   A.   An "odor" means an emission into the ambient air which stimulates human
smell;
   B.   An odor is "detectable" if it is sufficient in strength to be equal to
but not greater than that detectable after seven (7) dilutions with odor free
air, as determined by a scentometer as manufactured by the Barneby-Cheney
Company, or any other instrument, device or technique designated by the Wyoming
department of environmental quality as producing equivalent results. The
occurrence of odors shall be measured so that at least two (2) measurements can
be made within a period of one hour, these determinations being separated by at
least fifteen (15) minutes. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord.
80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-4: OUTSIDE STORAGE; DELIVERIES:
There shall be no outside storage of any supplies, materials, products or
containers of any kind, and all delivery or pick up vehicles shall be limited
to the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20;
Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-5: SHIFT WORK:
If the use of the land as described in section
10-10D-2 of this article involves "shift work", then no group of more than
twenty five (25) employees shall begin or end a shift between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. For the purposes of this
section only, the phrase "shift work" means that situation where any group of
employees, consisting of twenty five percent (25%) or more of the business
employees, begins or ends a workday at a different hour than any other
employees at the same business location. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord.
78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8;
Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-6: HEIGHT; APPEARANCE; LOT REQUIREMENTS:
No building or structure on the property shall be more than one story, and the
architecture and general appearance, size and location of any structure on the
property shall be compatible with any adjacent residential area, and the same
shall be approved prior to construction by a committee designated by the mayor
and city council. The committee shall also determine the percentage of the lot
area that can be covered by buildings, and any front, rear and side lot
requirements that would have to be met, and it shall review all landscaping
plans. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29;
Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
10-10D-7: SIGNAGE:
Any sign, insignia or identification number for any structure shall not exceed
eight feet by six feet (8' x 6'). Such sign, insignia or identification number
shall be aesthetically pleasing and, if artificial lighting is used for the
sign, such lighting shall be only an amount necessary for it to be legible to
passing motorists. (1960 Compilation § 26-109; amd. Ord. 78-19; Ord. 80-20;
Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 89-15; Ord. 91-2; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 97-15)
ARTICLE E.  INDUSTRIAL E DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10E-1: Uses Permitted
10-10E-2: Prohibited Uses
10-10E-3: Architecture And Landscaping
10-10E-1: USES PERMITTED:
No building or land shall be used and no building erected or structurally
altered unless otherwise permitted herein, except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
Any use permitted in the D-3 Districts, except residential use.
Airports, feed manufacturing, pressure treating of wood products, wireless
communication facilities. Other similar uses, not herein named, that are not
more objectionable or hazardous may be permitted. Certain uses, otherwise
permitted in this zone, are prohibited in the Airport Overlay Zone: towers,
stable flammable liquid storage and liquefied petroleum gas storage. (1960
Compilation § 26-110; amd. Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 93-8; Ord.
99-2; Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
10-10E-2: PROHIBITED USES:
Use is specifically prohibited within an E District for the storage or handling
of explosives, caustics, unstable flammable liquids, or toxic or hazardous
materials or substances. (1960 Compilation § 26-110; amd. Ord. 80-20; Ord. 82-
29; Ord. 87-3; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 99-2)
10-10E-3: ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPING:
All structures within the district shall be architecturally compatible.
Architectural and landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval. Architectural and landscaping details shall be
maintained as shown by the approved plans; provided, however, this section
shall not apply to any property situated within the boundaries of the
Yellowstone Regional Airport. (1960 Compilation § 26-110; amd. Ord. 80-20; Ord.
82-29, Ord. 87-3; Ord. 93-8; Ord. 99-2)
ARTICLE F.  HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10F-1: Purpose
10-10F-2: Permitted Uses
10-10F-3: Minimum District Size
10-10F-4: Minimum Lot Size
10-10F-5: Height Limitation
10-10F-6: Yards
10-10F-7: Buffer Zone
10-10F-8: District Regulations
10-10F-9: Site Plan Review
10-10F-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Heavy Industrial Zoning District is to maintain and preserve
an area for intensive industrial uses that are best operated in isolation from
other less intensive land uses, due to potential environmental hazards and/or
production of odors, dust, noise, vibration, heavy truck traffic or other
impacts detectable beyond the property. Industrial uses include, but are not
limited to, those that produce goods from extracted and raw materials or from
recyclable or previously prepared materials, including the design, storage, and
handling of these products and the materials from which they are produced.
(Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses in the Heavy Industrial Zoning District are:
All uses permitted in the D-3 Zoning District; except residential uses, lodging
facilities, healthcare facilities, and public schools.
Caretaker/watchmen living quarters when accessory to and within an industrial
or commercial building.
Intensive industrial uses, including, but not limited to: ammunition
manufacturing, asphalt plants, bulk storage tanks and stockpiles, concrete
plants, explosive manufacturing and storage, feed and fertilizer manufacturing,
manufacturing of gypsum products, hazardous material storage and handling,
hazardous waste recycling and treatment (not disposal), industrial and
commercial composting, pharmaceutical manufacturing plants, railroad and
freight terminals, recycling processing plants, refineries, rock quarrying and
processing, sewage treatment plants and lagoons, slaughterhouses (see also
title 4, chapter 5 of this Code), solid waste transfer stations, wrecking
yards, and uses determined by the Planning and Zoning Board to be similar in
character and intensity.
Motorized vehicle racing tracks.
Oil field services and other mining related industries.
Sexually oriented businesses, subject to all regulations set forth in title 3,
chapter 6 of this Code.
Wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-10,
4-13-2017)
10-10F-3: MINIMUM DISTRICT SIZE:
The minimum size of any Heavy Industrial Zoning District shall be twenty (20)
contiguous acres. (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-4: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
There is no minimum lot size in the Heavy Industrial Zoning District. (Ord.
2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-5: HEIGHT LIMITATION:
Maximum building and structure height is one hundred feet (100'), with any
exception to be considered through the special exemption process. (Ord. 2013-
18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-6: YARDS:
Each building and structure shall observe the following minimum setbacks:
   A.   Setback from public streets: Twenty five feet (25') from the street
right-of-way.
   B.   Interior property lines: Zero feet (0'), but not on or across lot
lines.
   C.   Abutting Residential Zoning Districts (AA, A, B, C, F-1, F-2, RR and
County R-H): Twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-7: BUFFER ZONE:
When development occurs in the Heavy Industrial Zoning District adjacent to a
Residential District (AA, A, B, C, F-1, F-2, RR and County R-H) there shall be
provided on the heavy industrial property along such residential district a
buffer zone with a visual screen; provided the Planning and Zoning Board may
waive such requirement, or portion thereof, when they determine the buffer and/
or visual screen will not be effective due to topographic features between the
proposed use and adjacent residential area. (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-8: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Uses established or conducted within this district shall comply with the
following standards:
   A.   Compliance With State, Federal And Local Requirements: Evidence of
compliance with applicable State, Federal, and Local permitting requirements
shall be provided with all applications for new or expanded intensive
industrial uses in the following manner. An outline of necessary State,
Federal, and Local permits for the proposed use and the status of those
applications shall be provided by the applicant for the Planning and Zoning
Board site plan review outlined in section
10-10F-9 of this article. Potential permits will typically relate to air
quality, stormwater, and hazardous waste storage and handling. All such
required permits shall be obtained prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, or as otherwise directed by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   B.   Emergency Response Plans: All intensive industrial uses shall submit
emergency response plans to the Park County Fire Marshal for review and
approval prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy and conducting such
operations.
   C.   Sound Level: The day-night average sound level (Ldn), measured at the
property line, shall not exceed fifty five (55) decibels (dB) where the
adjacent property is zoned residential (AA, A, B, C, F-1, F-2, RR, and County
R-H) or sixty five (65) decibels (dB) where the adjacent property is zoned
commercial, industrial, or agricultural; provided, the board may authorize a
louder threshold when a sound easement is granted by the owner(s) of the
property where the sound threshold would be exceeded. The board may require
sound testing to verify compliance at the time a new or expanded use is
established.
   D.   Landscaping And Screening: New uses, and existing uses which expand in
building size or outdoor use area by more than fifty percent (50%), shall be
provided with landscaping near the entrance to the property and/or building and
along any collector or arterial street frontage, in the following manner:
      1.   Provide a landscaped area at least two hundred (200) square feet in
size near the property entrance and/or building and include vegetation such as
decorative grasses, planted trees, shrubs, flowers, lawn, or ground cover.
Incorporating the business signage into the landscaped area is encouraged.
      2.   Provide landscaping along any collector or arterial street frontage,
consisting of a minimum of one (1) tree per fifty (50) linear feet of such
frontage (rounded to the nearest whole number) and decorative rock or ground
cover at each tree. Provided, the Planning and Zoning Board may consider
alternative landscaping methods when tree placement cannot occur due to the
restrictions of title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
      3.   Required landscaped areas shall be watered and maintained, with
replacement of dead vegetation as needed so that at least ninety percent (90%)
of the trees and ninety percent (90%) of the other landscape vegetation
initially required are living.
   E.   Height Of Open Storage: Storage of materials outside of buildings or
containers shall be no higher than eight feet (8') plus one foot (1') in height
for every additional two feet (2') of setback from a property line.
   F.   View Obscuring Barriers: When the use of the property is a wrecking
yard or similar use that stockpiles scrap or junk materials, site screening
fences up to eight feet (8') tall and/or additional landscaping sufficient to
form a view obscuring barrier shall be provided to screen those activities from
major roads and residential areas. (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-2014)
10-10F-9: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
As required by this Code, all new or expanded development in the Heavy
Industrial Zoning District shall be subject to site plan review by the
Planning, Zoning, and Adjustment Board prior to issuance of any building permit
or establishment of such use. The board shall review the site plan for the
following:
   A.   Compliance with the specific provisions of this title.
   B.   General site plan conditions and layout, including access and traffic
flow (as related to public safety), commercial signage, parking, landscaping,
lighting, site grading, stormwater facilities, and utilities. Consideration of
adjacent uses shall be made in respect to the location of specific activities
within the site, so as to reduce any potential conflicts from odors, dust,
noise, vibration, glare, visual impacts, and stormwater runoff.
   C.   Assurance of compliance with applicable State and Federal safety and
environmental standards pertaining to hazardous materials.
The board may specify conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with
applicable standards. The issuance of a development permit shall be contingent
upon the applicant receiving an affirmative vote from the majority of the board
that the applicant has satisfied the above requirements. (Ord. 2013-18, 1-21-
2014)
CHAPTER 11
SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Applicability
10-11-2: Supplemental Development Standards
10-11-1: APPLICABILITY:
The land uses that are identified with an asterisk (*) in the Limited Business
(D-1), General Business (D-2), Open Business/Light-Industrial (D-3), Industrial
(E), and Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts are subject to the
corresponding regulations of this chapter, which regulations are in addition to
other applicable sections of this title and any conditions that may be imposed
pursuant to a conditional use permit review. The standards of this chapter
shall apply unless waived or altered pursuant to the zoning variance process;
provided, those standards identified herein with "(SE)", may be waived or
altered pursuant to the special exemption process of section
10-14-2 of this title. In no case shall any of the following standards be
waived or modified to the extent that the result is tantamount to a rezone or
the use no longer meets the specified definition thereof. (Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-
2017)
10-11-2: SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The supplemental development standards are listed by use, in alphabetical
order:
   A.   "A" Uses: Reserved. (Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
   B.   "B" Uses:
Bed and breakfast inn.
1. The bed and breakfast inn must meet the definition set forth in chapter 2 of
this title.
2. The owner must be living on the property at the time the bed and breakfast
is in operation.
3. Total guest occupancy of a bed and breakfast inn property is limited to no
more than ten (10) persons. (Establishments exceeding 10 persons fall within
the zoning classification of "hotel".) The Planning and Zoning Board may
further limit total guest occupancy (e.g., beds and/or guest rooms) of a
proposed bed and breakfast inn based on lack of parking and other neighborhood
impacts identified in the review process.
4. Vehicle access must comply with the requirements of the International Fire
Code, appendix D, or other established standard acceptable to the Fire Marshal.
5. Cooking facilities in guest rooms are not permitted.
6. The facility must pass a fire and life safety inspection before it may be
used as a bed and breakfast inn. At a minimum, the bed and breakfast inn shall
be equipped with functional smoke detectors, a fire extinguisher (minimum
rating 2A:10BC), and a carbon monoxide alarm if applicable. Each sleeping room
shall be provided with Code compliant means of egress. The authority having
jurisdiction (i.e., Fire Marshal and/or building official) may have additional
requirements pursuant to the adopted Fire and/or Building Code.
7. Individual guest occupancy is limited to temporary periods of less than one
hundred twenty (120) consecutive days, and less than one hundred twenty (120)
days in any one-year period.
8. Bed and breakfast inns shall not be used as "reception facilities" as
defined in this title, unless such use is otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which the property is located and authorization for such has been
granted by the reviewing official.
9. The bed and breakfast inn must maintain compliance with the WY Department of
Revenue licensing requirements, including payment of Lodging Taxes.
10. All bed and breakfast inns must maintain compliance with the Wyoming Food
Safety Rule (WY Department of Agriculture) and related licensing requirements.
11. Unless otherwise exempted or authorized by this title, one off-street guest
parking space shall be provided for every two (2) lodging units or fraction
thereof. The guest parking shall be in addition to the two (2) spaces required
for the owners/manager.(SE)
12. All bed and breakfast inns, whether existing or proposed, shall register
with the City of Cody, pass the fire safety inspection, and provide evidence of
compliance with the Wyoming Food Safety Rule. The Community Development
Department is authorized to create application form(s) and procedures as
necessary to manage and enforce these provisions, both for the initial
authorization and for ongoing compliance. Authorized bed and breakfast inns
shall post a document issued by the City identifying such authorization in a
visible location. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
   C.   "C" Uses: Reserved.
   D.   "D" Uses: Reserved.
   E.   "E" Uses: Reserved.
   F.   "F" Uses: Reserved.
   G.   "G" Uses: Reserved.
   H.   "H" Uses: Reserved.
   I.   "I" Uses: Reserved.
   J.   "J" Uses: Reserved.
   K.   "K" Uses: Reserved.
   L.   "L" Uses: Reserved.
   M.   "M" Uses: Reserved.
   N.   "N" Uses: Reserved.
   O.   "O" Uses: Reserved.
   P.   "P" Uses: Reserved.
   Q.   "Q" Uses: Reserved.
   R.   "R" Uses: Reserved. (Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
   S.   "S" Uses:
Short-term rental.
1. Within the commercial zoning districts, a short- term rental may be operated
out of any form of a dwelling with a permanent foundation.
2. Short-term rental shall not be offered by a renter of the property - i.e., a
sublet situation.
3. Occupancy of a dwelling used for short-term rental is limited to the lesser
of 2.6 guests per guest sleeping room (total rounded to nearest whole number)
or a total of ten (10) guests. (Note: Facilities exceeding 10 guests are to be
classified as hotels/motels and may be considered pursuant to that
classification.)
4. Within the D-1 Zoning District, the following restrictions apply:
   a. No more than four (4) short-term rentals may be located on any one
property.
   b. Each short-term rental may only be rented to one group at any one time
(i.e., a single booking).
5. Within the D-2 and D-3 Zoning Districts, sleeping rooms may be rented
individually when authorized for such through the short-term rental
registration and inspection process; provided, in no case shall more than five
(5) sleeping rooms be individually rented in a dwelling.
6. Each short-term rental shall require one off- street guest parking space
meeting the requirements of chapter 16, "Off Street Parking", of this title for
every two (2) guest sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, unless otherwise
exempted or authorized by this title (e.g., nonconforming provisions). (SE)
7. Prior to use of the dwelling as a short-term rental, the dwelling shall be
inspected for fire and life safety items. At a minimum, the short-term rental
shall be equipped with functional smoke detectors, a fire extinguisher (minimum
rating 2A:10-BC), and a carbon monoxide alarm if applicable. Each sleeping room
shall be provided with Code compliant means of egress. The authority having
jurisdiction (i.e., Fire Marshal and/or building official) may have additional
requirements pursuant to the adopted Fire and/or Building Code. Notwithstanding
the above, short-term rentals existing at the date of adoption of this
provision shall have until June 30, 2018, to obtain their inspection and until
December 31, 2018, to correct any fire and life safety items involving
construction or remodeling; no short-term rental activity shall occur if the
dwelling is not in compliance with these deadlines.
8. Short-term rentals are classified as lodging facilities by the State. As
such, the owner or manager of the short-term rental must register the lodging
facility business with the WY Department of Revenue and pay Lodging Tax as
required.
9. All short-term rental facilities, whether existing or proposed, shall
register with the City of Cody, provide evidence of compliance with these
provisions, and pass the fire/safety inspection. The Community Development
Department is authorized to create application form(s) and procedures as
necessary to manage and enforce these provisions, both for the initial
authorization and for ongoing compliance. Authorized short-term rental
facilities shall post a document issued by the City identifying such
authorization in a visible location. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
   T.   "T" Uses: Reserved.
   U.   "U" Uses: Reserved.
   V.   "V" Uses: Reserved.
   W.   "W" Uses:
Wireless communication facilities.
1. Purpose/Intent:
   a. The City of Cody recognizes the benefits of quality wireless
communication services and the need to accommodate facilities that provide such
services.
   b. The City of Cody desires to protect the community's visual quality and
safety while facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless
communication services. More specifically, it is the City's goal to minimize
the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on the community,
particularly in rights-of-way and residential zones.
   c. The quality and variety of the scenic viewsheds that are available to the
residents and visitors to the area are irreplaceable and warrant protection
from unnecessary visual pollution. The City of Cody encourages providers to
maximize the use of options that conceal the components of wireless
communication facilities (i.e., stealth design) wherever feasible.
   d. The natural landforms within and around the City of Cody provide a unique
opportunity for the location and design of wireless communication facilities,
such that design engineers can utilize those natural features and topographic
elevation differences in combination with the built environment to both
minimize visual impacts and maximize coverage. Historically, almost all current
providers in the area have relied on a primary tower on Carter Mountain (in the
County), because such location provides coverage not only to the City, but to
areas west of the mountain as well. Coverage and capacity is improved through
smaller facilities dispersed throughout the Cody area, where fiber optic and
power services are existing or readily available. With LTE and LTE-Advanced
technology being implemented, more facilities, serving smaller service areas
will be needed. The locations and designs of those facilities must be sensitive
to the Cody community.
   e. The size and configuration of the City of Cody is such that a network of
tall towers is unnecessary to provide quality coverage to its residents and
visitors. The City prefers that the local network system of wireless
communication facilities be of a dispersed design - e.g., using two (2) or more
smaller facilities instead of one (1) larger tower.
   f. If modifications to these regulations are needed to accommodate the
seemingly ever-changing provisions of FCC rules and regulations, the context of
such consideration shall be as an amendment to this title, as opposed to a
special exemption or variance.
   g. The City desires to provide regulations which are specifically not
intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: 1) prohibit or
effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, 2)
unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers, or
3) regulate wireless communication facilities and wireless transmission
equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission.
2. Applicability: Every wireless communication facility located within the City
limits, whether upon private or public lands, is subject to the standards of
this section, except that the following facilities are exempt from the
standards:
   a. Amateur Radio Station Operator/Receive-Only Antennas: Amateur radio
station operator/receive- only antenna if owned and operated by a Federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or used exclusively for a receive-only
antenna;
   b. Satellite Earth Stations, Dishes And/Or Antennas: Satellite earth
stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not
exceeding one meter (1 m) in diameter;
   c. Existing Towers And Antennas: Any existing tower and antenna, provided a
valid building permit was issued for the tower or antenna prior to adoption of
this section;
   d. Emergency Services: Wireless communication facilities used exclusively
for emergency services including police, fire, and operation of the water
utility, when not located on a new freestanding antenna support structure
(e.g., tower or dedicated pole); and
   e. Temporary, Commercial Wireless Communication Facilities: A temporary,
commercial WCF installed for providing coverage of a special event such as news
coverage or sporting event, subject to administrative approval by the City. The
WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for up to one (1) week
before and after the duration of the special event.
3. Distributed Antenna Systems And Small Cells:
   a. Distributed antenna systems and small cells which comply with the height
limit of the zoning district and do not require installation of a new tower,
utility support structure or building are allowed in all zones, provided the
applicant complies with all Federal laws (such as the Americans With
Disabilities Act), State laws, and applicable City development regulations.
   b. Distributed antenna systems and small cells that do not meet the above
requirements, and which are located in a residential zoning district, shall be
subject to conditional use permit review. DAS and small cells that do not meet
the above requirements and are located in a zone that is not residential, shall
be subject to review pursuant to subsection 4 of this use.
   c. The City encourages but it does not require the use of DAS and small
cells. Each applicant will submit a statement that explains how it arrived at
the structure and design being proposed.
4. Classification And Level Of Review: Within the Limited Business (D-1),
General Business (D-2), Open Business/Light-Industrial (D-3), Industrial (E),
and Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts, all wireless communication
facilities, except collocation, as addressed herein, shall be subject to review
by the Planning and Zoning Board for analysis of the site plan and applicable
zoning standards and criteria. The level of review shall be based on the
classification of the facility according to the following standards:
   a. Permitted Uses In D-1, D-2, D-3, E, And HI Districts: Within the Limited
Business (D-1), General Business (D-2), Open Business/Light- Industrial (D-3),
Industrial (E), and Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts, the following
wireless communication facilities are permitted uses:
(1) Distributed antenna systems and small cells that do not qualify for review
under subsection 3 of this use, when not greater than thirty five feet (35') in
total height above existing natural grade, and located no more than twenty feet
(20') (SE) from an existing structure or tree that is at least twenty five feet
(25') (SE) in total height.
(2) Monopole, when: only small cells or a distributed antenna system is
attached; it is not greater than forty feet (40') in total height above
existing natural grade, and located no more than twenty feet (20') (SE) from an
existing structure or tree that is at least thirty feet (30') (SE) in total
height. For purposes of this, monopole is a pole with one (1) or more antennas,
on which the antenna panels are narrow and closely spaced with one another atop
the pole and extend no more than one foot (1') beyond the circumference of the
pole.
(3) Stealth design wireless communication facility, when architecturally
integrated into an existing building or structure that was not originally
constructed as an antenna support structure, and total height is not more than
forty feet (40') or the height limit of the zoning district, whichever is less.
   b. Permitted Uses In D-2, D-3, E, And HI Districts: Within the General
Business (D-2), Open Business/Light-Industrial (D-3), Industrial (E), and Heavy
Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts, the following wireless communication
facilities are permitted uses:
(1) Roof-top installations on non-residential buildings, so long as they are
completely enclosed within an architecturally-compatible approved housing,
comply with the height limit of the zoning district in which they are located,
and do not extend more than ten feet (10') above the roof or perimeter parapet
wall if a parapet wall exists.
(2) Installations on public water tanks and similar structures (e.g., storage
tanks) that do not extend more than twelve feet (12') above the tank.
   c. Conditional Uses In D-2, D-3, E, And HI Districts: Within the General
Business (D-2), Open Business/Light-Industrial (D-3), Industrial (E), and Heavy
Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts, the following wireless communication
facilities are conditional uses:
(1) Stealth design wireless communication facilities that do not meet the
limitations of subsection 4a(3) of this use, and which do not exceed the height
limit of the zoning district in which located.
(2) Roof-top installations on flat-roofed non- residential buildings, so long
as they comply with the following requirements:
   (A) Setback: Antennas shall be mounted at least ten feet (10') from the
closest exterior or parapet wall of a building or structure. (SE)
   (B) Height: The height shall be measured from the top of the antenna to the
roofline of the building or structure, or to the top elevation of the closest
perimeter parapet wall if a parapet wall exists. The maximum height of the
antenna is equal to half (1/2) the distance the antenna is set back from such
exterior wall or parapet wall, up to a maximum allowable height of twelve feet
(12').
   (C) Roof Mounted Antennas: Roof mounted antennas shall be constructed and/or
colored to either appear white, light grey, or match the color of the wall
above which they are located. (SE)
(3) Distributed antenna systems and small cells that do not qualify for review
under subsections 3 or 4a of this use.
   d. Wireless Communication Facility Overlay Zone: Within the Wireless
Communication Facility Overlay Zone, each of the above-listed options
(subsections 4a, 4b, and 4c of this use) shall be classified as permitted uses,
regardless of the underlying zoning. In addition, the following conditional
uses are established within the Wireless Communication Facility Overlay Zone:
(1) Freestanding wireless communication facility that has a total height equal
to or less than the height specified for the particular subarea of the overlay.
The subarea overlay locations, maximum heights, and method of measuring height
are established as follows:
 
Location                  Maximum Height Height Measured From
Beacon Hill Subarea       80 feet        Existing grade
Beck Lake Subarea         80 feet        Existing grade
Cottonwood Avenue Subarea 70 feet        Elevation of closest portion of Big
                                         Horn Avenue
Road 2AB Subarea          110 feet       Elevation of closest portion of Road
                                         2AB
West Strip Subarea        70 feet        Elevation of closest portion of
                                         Highway 14-16-20
 
* All heights are subject to compliance with title 7, chapter 3, article II,
"Airport Obstruction Zoning", of this Code.
In addition to the standard conditional use criteria, the applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed wireless communication facility is no taller than
necessary to provide the desired coverage; provided, the Planning and Zoning
Board may authorize a wireless communication facility taller than the minimum
necessary when the facility is specifically designed and made available for
collocation at market rates as evidenced by a sworn affidavit, and the
additional height does not significantly increase the visual impacts of the
facility. The board may require the applicant to provide visual simulations of
the facility to assist them in determining visual impacts, and RF propagation
maps to demonstrate coverage areas.
   e. Downtown Architectural District: Notwithstanding any language that may be
interpreted otherwise, within the Downtown Architectural District only stealth-
design wireless communication facilities that are architecturally integrated
with buildings and structures may be permitted.
   f. Cell On Wheels: Temporary wireless communication facilities (e.g., cell
on wheels) shall be subject to the same review procedures and requirements as
permanent towers; provided, in the case of failure of an existing wireless
communication facility, a temporary facility of the same height as the damaged
facility may be erected for up to ninety (90) days at the site while repair/
replacement activities are conducted, without the need for Planning and Zoning
Board review. Unless otherwise permitted through a conditional use permit
process, a temporary wireless communication facility is limited to eight (8)
months in duration, during any five (5) year period. The temporary facility
shall not be located on the property except during the authorized period.
5. Tower Locations:
   a. Preferred Tower Locations: All new towers proposed to be located in any
zoning district are permitted only after application of the following siting
priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (9):
(1) City-owned or operated property and facilities not in the Downtown
Architectural District or residential zones, and not including right-of-way;
(2) The Wireless Communication Facility Overlay Zone;
(3) Industrial Zones (HI, E);
(4) Commercial Zones (D-3, D-2, D-1 and D-4);
(5) Other non-residential zones;
(6) Parcels of land in residential zones that contain non-residential uses
(e.g., schools and churches);
(7) Residential properties in residential zones;
(8) Designated historic structures or districts;
(9) City rights-of-way.
   b. Gap In Coverage Or Capacity: Upon request by the City, the applicant
shall demonstrate the following with a tower application:
(1) A significant gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service
network exists such that users are frequently unable to connect to the service
network, or are regularly unable to maintain a connection, or are unable to
achieve reliable wireless coverage within a building;
(2) The gap can only be filled through an exception to one (1) or more of the
standards herein; and
(3) The exception is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such that the
wireless communication facility conforms to the standards of this section to
the greatest extent possible.
   c. Least Intrusive Means: For a new tower, the applicant, upon request by
the City, must also demonstrate that the manner in which it proposes to fill
the significant gap in coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service
network is the least intrusive means on the values that these regulations seek
to protect.
   d. Alternative Sites Analysis: For new towers, the applicant must address
the City's preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying why
a site of higher priority was not selected. When requested, the City's tower
location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written
alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked,
alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service
coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and
meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the
proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected
the alternative candidate location(s). Alternative site analysis is not limited
to locations within the City limits.
6. General Standards: The following regulations apply to all wireless
communication facilities in all zones and overlays, unless otherwise stated:
   a. Color: WCFs shall be placed and colored to blend into the architectural
detail and coloring of the host structure. Support towers shall be painted a
color that best allows it to blend into the surroundings.
   b. Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable State or Local building codes and the
applicable industry standards for towers, as amended from time to time.
   c. Notice: For purposes of this chapter, any conditional use permit shall
require notice to all property owners within a radius of the subject property
equal to five (5) times the total height of the facility above existing grade,
in addition to any notice otherwise required by this Code.
   d. Landscaping, Screening And Fencing: Applicant shall provide a
landscaping, screening and fencing plan that shall meet with the approval of
the reviewing official.
   e. Setbacks:
(1) A freestanding wireless communication facility shall be set back a minimum
of one hundred feet (100') from the property line of a residential zone or the
height of the tower, whichever is greater (SE), except when the facility is
located in the Wireless Communication Facility Overlay Zone. New freestanding
wireless communication facilities located in public utility substations shall
be exempt from the above residential setback requirement if the wireless
communication tower is no taller than the existing substation structures.
(2) Except as stated in subsection 6e(1) of this use, freestanding wireless
communication facilities shall conform with the setback requirements of the
zone in which located. (SE)
   f. Public Utility: When mounted on a transmission or sub-transmission line
structure, the antenna shall not extend more than six feet (6') above the top
of the existing pole, subject to the applicable maximum height limitation of
the zoning district, and any equipment cabinet(s) mounted on the structure
shall be not more than three feet (3') by four feet (4') by eighteen inches
(18") deep, with a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') above grade and a
maximum height of twenty feet (20').
   g. Lighting And Signage: Only security lighting or lighting required by a
State and/or Federal agency is allowed, and provided the location of the
lighting fixture together with its cut-off angle shall be such that it does not
shine directly on any public right-of-way or any residential premises. The only
signage that is permitted is that which is required by State or Federal law.
   h. Abandonment: All wireless communication facilities which are not in use
for six (6) consecutive months shall be removed by the wireless communication
facility owner. This removal shall take place within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be
revegetated or otherwise surfaced to blend with the existing surrounding area.
If there is no vegetation on a wireless communication facility site, the site
shall be returned to its preconstruction condition. The facility owner shall
notify the City when removal of the facility occurs. Failure to remove an
abandoned WCF within one hundred twenty (120) days shall be grounds to remove
the WCF at the owner's expense, including all costs and attorneys' fees. If
there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
   i. Interference: Every wireless communication facility shall meet the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding physical and RF
interference.
   j. Health Issues: Every wireless communication facility shall meet health
and safety standards for RF emissions as established by the Federal
Communications Commission. Certification by a qualified Wyoming licensed
engineer shall be submitted to verify such.
7. Collocation: It is the policy of the City to minimize the number of wireless
communication support towers and to encourage the collocation of antennas of
more than one (1) wireless communication service provider on a single support
tower.
Collocations are encouraged, but shall be done in the least visibly-intrusive
manner, considering available technology and coverage needs. Collocations may
be approved by the City Planner in conjunction with the building permit process
and as noted in subsection 14 of this use; provided if the Planner is not
clearly convinced that the "least visibly-intrusive manner" criterion is met,
the matter may be referred to the Planning and Zoning Board for a determination
on such.
8. Non-Conforming Wireless Communication Facilities: Non-conforming wireless
communication facilities have the rights and restrictions outlined in chapter
13 of this title; provided, such facilities are subject to the six-month
abandonment provision noted above; any expansion is limited to the definition
of a "collocation" as set forth in this Code; and, consideration of any
expansion is based on the size of the facility as it existed on April 17, 2017.
9. Application Requirements:
   a. The Community Development Department is authorized to create application
form(s) and procedures as necessary to manage and enforce the provisions of
this section.
   b. All applications shall include documentation establishing that the
installer has permission from the structure owner and property owner to install
the wireless communication antenna(s) and any associated buildings, cabinets or
equipment at the site.
10. Independent Technical And Legal Review: The City may retain the services of
independent experts of its choice to provide technical and legal evaluation of
permit applications for WCFs, including administrative and conditional use
permits. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees,
along with applicable overhead recovery, through a deposit, estimated by the
City, which is to be paid within ten (10) days of the City's written request.
11. Application Fees: In connection with the filing of an application, the
applicant shall pay all applicable application fees as required by the City.
12. Indemnification: Each permit issued shall be deemed to have as a condition
of the permit a requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the City and its officers, agents, employees, consultants, volunteers,
and contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges (including
attorneys' fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or causes
of action as a result of the permit process, a granted permit, construction,
erection, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF.
13. Eligible Facilities Request:
   a. Purpose: This section implements section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, 47
USC section 1455(a) as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No.
14153, which requires a State or Local government to approve any eligible
facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that
does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such
tower or base station. Eligible facilities requests shall be governed solely by
the provisions in this section and Federal law.
   b. Application Review:
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for an eligible facilities request
pursuant to this section, the City will review such application, make its final
decision to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in
writing of its final decision.
(2) Within sixty (60) days of the date on which an applicant submits a complete
application seeking approval of an eligible facilities request under this
section, the City will review and act upon the application, subject to the
tolling provisions below.
(3) The sixty (60) day review period begins to run when the application is
filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the City and the
applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is
incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the
review of applications.
To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice
to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
application. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant
makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the
applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or
subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
(4) In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under
this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the
request shall be deemed granted provided the applicant notifies the City in
writing after the review period has expired.
14. Collocation Applications:
   a. Purpose: This section implements, in part, 47 USC section 332(c)(7) of
the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the FCC
in its Report and Order No. 14153.
   b. Application Review:
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for a collocation request pursuant
to this section, the City will review such application, make its final decision
to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing
of its final decision.
(2) Within ninety (90) days of the date on which an applicant submits a
complete application seeking approval of a collocation request under this
section, the City will review and act upon the application, subject to the
tolling provisions below.
(3) The ninety (90) day review period begins to run when the application is
filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the City and the
applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is
incomplete.
To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice
to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
application. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant
makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the
applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or
subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
(4) In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under
this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the
applicant shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law.
15. New Site Or Tower Applications:
   a. Purpose: This section also implements, in part, 47 USC section 332(c)(7)
of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the
FCC in its Report and Order No. 14153.
   b. Application Review:
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for a request for a new site or
tower pursuant to this section, the City will review such application, make its
final decision to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision.
(2) Within one hundred fifty (150) days of the date on which an applicant
submits a complete application seeking approval of a request for a new site or
tower under this section, the City will review and act upon the application,
subject to the tolling provisions below.
(3) The one hundred fifty (150) day review period begins to run when the
application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the
City and the applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the
application is incomplete.
To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice
to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
application. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant
makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the
applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or
subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
(4) In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under
this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the
applicant shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law.
   X.   "X" Uses: Reserved.
   Y.   "Y" Uses: Reserved.
   Z.   "Z" Uses: Reserved. (Ord. 2017-10, 4-13-2017)
CHAPTER 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND USES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Generally
10-13-2: Legal Nonconforming Status
10-13-3: Legal Nonconforming Lots
10-13-4: Legal Nonconforming Structures
10-13-5: Legal Nonconforming Uses
10-13-6: Expansions And Changes
10-13-1: GENERALLY:
   A.   Within the city of Cody there are lots, structures, and uses of land
that were established before the Cody zoning ordinance was adopted,
subsequently amended, or applied to the property, which do not comply with one
or more of the present requirements of this title. Any such lot, structure, or
land use that was lawfully existing on the effective date of this title, or
subsequent amendments thereto, that does not presently comply with a
requirement of this title shall be classified as "legally nonconforming" in
respect to such requirement(s) and have all rights and restrictions pertaining
thereto as set forth in this chapter. In addition, annexed properties may
continue a nonconforming use that was lawful at the time of annexation and has
not been discontinued for more than one year after annexation, as outlined in
Wyoming Statutes 15-1-410(a).
   B.   A change of ownership, tenancy, or management personnel in a legal
nonconforming situation shall not affect nonconforming status.
   C.   It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming
structures and uses to continue until they are removed or replaced.
Nonconforming structures and uses are declared incompatible with the structures
and uses that conform to the zoning district requirements in which they are
situated.
   D.   This chapter separates nonconforming situations into three (3)
categories: nonconforming lots; nonconforming structures; and nonconforming
uses. Whether a property contains one or multiple nonconformities, each
nonconforming aspect is to be treated individually as to legal status,
termination, expansion, and all other provisions of this chapter.
   E.   When the lot area, setback, or other dimensional requirement of an
existing lot or structure is rendered nonconforming as the result of federal,
state, or local government acquisition of land, such as right of way purchase,
the lot or structure shall be deemed to be in compliance with the applicable
standard.
   F.   Land uses and structures that were established in violation of this
title, are deemed illegal and subject to abatement and compliance with this
title, except as may be authorized by the planning, zoning and board of
adjustment pursuant to Wyoming Statutes 15-1-608(b)(iii) and subsection 10-4-
3C4 of this title. When an illegally established land use or structure is
permitted to continue pursuant to said sections, it shall thereafter be subject
to this chapter as if it were legally nonconforming.
   G.   The burden is on the owner and tenant of the property to comply with
applicable zoning and development regulations. Failure of the city to enforce
zoning and development regulations for any activity, land use, or structure
that is in violation of this title shall not preclude the city from later
enforcing applicable ordinances and regulations.
   H.   The city planner, or designee, is authorized to render a decision as to
whether a nonconforming lot, structure, or use was lawfully established and
whether any legal nonconforming status remains or has been lost pursuant to
section
10-13-2 of this chapter. The city planner may refer such question to the
planning, zoning and adjustment board for a decision, at his/her discretion.
Decisions rendered by the city planner are appealable to the planning, zoning
and adjustment board pursuant to section
10-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
10-13-2: LEGAL NONCONFORMING STATUS:
Once the legal nonconforming status of a lot, structure, or land use is lost it
shall not be reestablished. Except as may otherwise be permitted pursuant to
this chapter, loss of a legal nonconforming status occurs:
   A.   When the nonconformity is voluntarily eliminated by the owner, such as
when a legal nonconforming use is replaced with a permitted use or conditional
use, or when a nonconforming lot is merged with an adjacent lot and applicable
lot size requirements are met.
   B.   When a legal nonconforming use is discontinued or otherwise
nonoperational for a period of three hundred sixty five (365) days, or an
extension period is established pursuant to subsection 10-13-5A of this
chapter.
   C.   When a legal nonconforming structure, as defined in section
10-13-4 of this chapter, is demolished, destroyed, removed, or damaged to the
extent that replacement cost would exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the
assessed value of the structure immediately prior to such event, except as
provided for in subsection 10-13-4C of this chapter.
   D.   When a legal nonconforming use is replaced with a less intensive
nonconforming use as permitted by section
10-13-6 of this chapter. In such case, the former nonconforming use is replaced
with the new nonconforming use and cannot be reestablished.
   E.   When a legal nonconforming use is replaced by an illegal use, in which
case the legal nonconforming status is lost and the subsequent use, being
illegal, shall be discontinued. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
10-13-3: LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS:
Lots or parcels that were legally created, but which do not presently conform
to the applicable lot size, width, or other dimensional lot standards of this
code are determined to be legal nonconforming lots.
   A.   Any otherwise permitted structure may be constructed on a legal
nonconforming lot if the structure and use of the structure will comply with
all other provisions of this code, such as applicable setbacks, buffers,
access, and parking requirements; provided, the property owner may request a
special exemption or variance for any such provision that is not met.
   B.   Lots may become legally nonconforming as the result of the adoption or
changes to the zoning ordinance, but the city shall not grant permits that
would create a nonconforming lot with the following exception: Lots dedicated
for public utility facilities shall be exempt from the lot size requirements of
this title.
   C.   Legal nonconforming lots shall only be altered or reconfigured in a
manner that achieves, or is closer to achieving, the lot size and dimensional
requirements of this code. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
10-13-4: LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A legally permitted existing structure that is nonconforming only by reason of
not meeting current setback, height, lot coverage, or other dimensional or
architectural standards of this title is classified as a "legal nonconforming
structure". For legal nonconforming structures that also contain a legal
nonconforming use, section
10-13-5 of this chapter shall apply rather than this section.
   A.   Legal nonconforming structures may be remodeled, repaired, and enlarged
by up to fifty percent (50%), provided that any enlargement meets the current
development standards of this title, no new dwelling units are created, the use
of the structure is a permitted use, and in the building official's judgment
the work does not significantly increase any life or safety hazards. If
additional dwelling units are desired, enlargement exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the existing structure, or the building official has a life or safety
concern, the property owner may submit an application for review by the
planning, zoning and adjustment board under section
10-13-6 of this chapter. In determining the percentage of any enlargement,
calculations shall be based on the gross square footage of the structure either
at the time this provision was adopted or the time the structure became legally
nonconforming, whichever occurred most recently.
   B.   When the enlargement of a legal nonconforming structure does not meet
the development standards of this title, relief may be requested in the form of
a special exemption or zoning variance.
   C.   When a legal nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by
accidental fire, explosion or other casualty, act of God, the public enemy, or
intentional acts other than those caused directly or indirectly by the owner,
the structure may be restored to its legal nonconforming condition; provided, a
building permit for restoration of the legal nonconforming structure must be
obtained within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the damage and kept
active until the project is completed. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
10-13-5: LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES:
Any land use that was lawfully established, but which would now be prohibited
at that location under zoning law, is classified as a legal nonconforming use;
provided it has not lost that status pursuant to section
10-13-2 of this chapter. A legal nonconforming use of land or structure(s) may
be continued as long as the use remains otherwise lawful, as provided herein.
   A.   A legal nonconforming use that is damaged or destroyed by accidental
fire, explosion or other casualty, act of God, the public enemy, or criminal
acts other than those caused directly or indirectly by the owner, may be
restored or reconstructed. Such restoration or reconstruction shall be
completed within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the date of damage or
destruction and shall either duplicate, or be less nonconforming than, the
original. The nonconforming use shall not be increased in size or intensity
unless authorized pursuant to section
10-13-6 of this chapter.
The planning, zoning and adjustment board may extend the time frame for
restoration or reconstruction beyond the three hundred sixty five (365) day
deadline, provided the owner or authorized agent can document that the
reestablishment or reconstruction has been delayed due to pending insurance or
court settlement directly related to the damage or destruction. The extension
request must be submitted prior to the three hundred sixty five (365) day
deadline.
   B.   A legal nonconforming use may be expanded throughout any existing
building in which it is located. A legal nonconforming use may not be expanded
or otherwise modified to occupy any area outside such existing structure(s)
except as may be authorized by the planning, zoning and adjustment board in
accordance with section
10-13-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Any legal nonconforming use of land located outside of a building shall
not be expanded in area except in accordance with section
10-13-6 of this chapter; provided, legal nonconforming mining operations may
expand to the extent of their current Wyoming DEQ land quality division mining
permit without such review.
   D.   No legal nonconforming use shall be transferred from one property to
another. Expansion onto adjacent lands may be considered under section
10-13-6 of this chapter.
   E.   A legal nonconforming use may be replaced with a less intensive
nonconforming use when authorized pursuant to section
10-13-6 of this chapter. For purposes of regulating and defining what
constitutes a change in land use, "land use" means each individual use listed
in the zoning ordinance. When the use is not listed, "land use" shall mean the
specific activity being conducted.
   F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict normal repair
and maintenance activities of a structure containing a legal nonconforming use,
provided:
      1.   The value of work and materials in any twelve (12) month period does
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the assessed value of the structure
prior to such work; and
      2.   The required maintenance and repair activities are not for the
purpose of increasing the area or scope of the use.
Work exceeding these limitations may be considered pursuant to section
10-13-6 of this chapter.
   G.   Voluntary replacement of a structure containing a legal nonconforming
use may be considered pursuant to section
10-13-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
10-13-6: EXPANSIONS AND CHANGES:
   A.   The planning, zoning and adjustment board shall consider applications
for: the enlargement or expansion of a legal nonconforming use within a lot;
expansion of a nonconforming use onto adjacent lands; the change of a legal
nonconforming use to a different, less intensive nonconforming use; repair and
maintenance of a legal nonconforming use exceeding the limitations of
subsection 10-13-5F of this chapter; voluntary replacement of a structure
containing a nonconforming use; and the expansion of a legal nonconforming
structure by more than fifty percent (50%). The board may grant the relief
requested if they find the following:
      1.   In the case of a nonconforming use, that the use was lawful at the
time of its inception;
      2.   That the significance of any hardship to the applicant from denial
of the request is more compelling than, and reasonably outweighs, the benefit
the public would receive from denial of the request;
      3.   That the proposal is compatible with the character of the
neighborhood to the extent that it does not jeopardize the future development
or use of the surrounding area in compliance with this title and the master
plan;
      4.   That the project will otherwise comply with all applicable
development standards and codes, such as parking and landscaping, unless a
special exemption or zoning variance is granted for such;
      5.   That the proposal will not otherwise be significantly detrimental to
the public health, safety, or welfare.
   B.   The board may impose conditions on any approval granted in accordance
with this section as necessary to mitigate potential adverse impacts to
neighboring properties, public facilities, and natural systems.
   C.   The application shall be reviewed by the planning, zoning and
adjustment board at a public hearing that has been advertised at least ten (10)
days in advance. Notice of the public hearing shall be by publication in the
local newspaper and by USPS first class mail to all property owners within one
hundred forty feet (140') of the subject property. The notice shall include the
date, time, and location of the public hearing, along with a brief description
of the proposal. (Ord. 2014-07, 6-17-2014)
CHAPTER 14
CONDITIONAL USES, SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS, AND AIRPORT OVERLAY SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Conditional Uses
10-14-2: Special Exemptions
10-14-3: Airport Overlay Special Use Permits
10-14-1: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and
criteria for the review of conditional uses, as identified in the land use
table(s). Conditional uses have been determined to have such characteristics
that a discretionary, site-specific review by the Planning and Zoning Board is
necessary to evaluate whether the particular use, as proposed, is compatible,
or can be made compatible, with neighboring land uses and other uses permitted
in the zoning district. Conditional uses may not be appropriate at all
locations within a zoning district.
   B.   Application Required: Any person desiring to establish a conditional
use shall complete a conditional use application, which application shall be
filed with the Community Development Department on a form prescribed by the
City Planner. Notwithstanding the content of the application form, the Planning
and Zoning Board may require additional information as necessary to obtain a
complete description of the project and identify potential impacts. No person
shall begin development or operation of a conditional use without first
applying for and obtaining a conditional use permit, as outlined herein. An
application fee, as specified pursuant to section
10-1-6 of this title shall accompany the application. Consultation with the
City Planner regarding the preparation of the application is recommended.
   C.   Notice And Public Hearing: The Planning and Zoning Board is the
decision-making body for conditional use permits. The board shall conduct a
public hearing to obtain information pertaining to the request and the
appropriateness of the conditional use permit. Notice of the hearing is
required as follows:
      1.   Notice of the public hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing by publication in the City's official newspaper and by
USPS first class mail to the owners of all properties within one hundred forty
feet (140') of the subject property. The notices must identify the date, time,
location, and purpose of the public hearing. The property owner list shall be
based on the ownership data from the Park County Map Server Program (or
equivalent) on the day of application.
      2.   The person sending the notices by mail shall complete an affidavit
of mailing which identifies the document, the property owners to which it was
sent, and the date mailed.
      3.   The City Planner is granted authority to require or perform optional
notice to inform other property owners, lessees, utility providers, or others
that may be affected by the conditional use, of the public hearing. Optional
notice is not subject to the ten (10) day requirement, may take any form, and
is completely discretionary. Optional notice, or lack thereof, shall not be
grounds for appeal.
   D.   Standards Of Review: The board has authority to approve, impose
conditions on, or deny conditional use applications. The board shall base its
determination upon the following considerations. Negative impacts shall be
justification to impose conditions on or deny the application.
      1.   Is the site large enough to accommodate the proposed use and meet
all of the dimensional standards and development regulations of the zoning
district in which the project is located?
      2.   Is the use, at the scale or density proposed, compatible with all
other uses in the immediate area and with permitted uses that may be
established in the area?
      3.   Does the proposed use involve activities, processes, materials,
equipment, hours of operation, or any other operational characteristics that
would be materially detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare
by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, dust, glare,
odors, hazards, or similar impacts?
      4.   Does the proposal include provisions for necessary and desired
public utilities and facilities such as potable water, fire hydrants, sewer,
electrical power, streets, stormwater facilities, and sidewalks/pathways?
      5.   Will the proposed use create excessive additional costs for public
facilities and services that would be materially detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community?
      6.   Will the proposed use result in the destruction, loss or damage of a
natural, scenic or historic feature considered to be of significant importance?
      7.   Is the proposed use consistent with the applicable provisions of the
Cody Master Plan?
   E.   Conditioning Authority: The board is authorized to impose conditions on
the proposed use as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
title and to mitigate or avoid negative impacts to neighboring properties or
the general public health, safety and welfare of the community. Examples of
such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Limiting the size, height, location, or scale of the project or any
component thereof.
      2.   Limiting the hours of operation of the use, or any component
thereof;
      3.   Requiring sound-reduction methods;
      4.   Requiring screening of loading areas, storage areas, and other
unsightly features;
      5.   Requiring dust control or surfacing improvements;
      6.   Limiting the duration of the conditional use permit to give
opportunity for future review as the surrounding area becomes more developed;
      7.   Requiring the provision of on-site or off-site public facilities or
services to serve the use.
   F.   Outstanding Violations: The board may withhold or delay issuance of a
conditional use permit if there is an outstanding zoning violation that exists
on the subject property, until the violation is remedied.
   G.   Filing Of Permit: If the conditional use is authorized by the board,
the City shall prepare a conditional use permit in a recordable format. The
permit document is to include the date the conditional use was approved by the
board; a description of what was approved; any conditions, limitations and
restrictions imposed on such conditional use; and, the "time limitations and
expiration" language found below. The permit shall be signed by the Chair of
the Planning and Zoning Board and recorded with the Park County Clerk and
Recorder's Office within fifteen (15) days, or as otherwise specified by the
board. Recording cost is at the applicant's expense.
   H.   Time Limitations And Expiration:
      1.   Unless specified otherwise by the board, development of a permitted
conditional use shall commence within two (2) years of the granting of the
conditional use permit, or the authorization shall expire. If the conditional
use is associated with a building, commencing development shall be in the form
of obtaining a building permit and starting construction on the project. If no
building is associated with the conditional use, the conditional use activity
shall commence within the specified deadline.
      2.   If a conditional use has been discontinued for one (1) year or more,
the conditional use permit shall automatically become null and void and the
activity shall not be reestablished except in accordance with the provisions
and procedures of this title.
   I.   Transfers: Conditional use permits are an entitlement to the specific
property for which the approval was granted and upon property sale the
entitlement, if not otherwise revoked or expired pursuant to this section,
transfers to the new owner(s) without further application or approval,
provided, however, the new owner(s) shall be bound by the same time limits and
conditions of approval as the original permit holder(s). A conditional use
permit is not transferable from one (1) property to another.
   J.   Modifications: A request to modify, expand, or otherwise change an
approved conditional use permit in a manner that is not in substantial
conformance with the approved site plan and permit shall be processed as a new
application.
   K.   Revocation, Suspension Or Modification By Board:
      1.   A conditional use permit may be revoked, suspended, or modified by
the board for cause upon notice to the permit holder and public hearing, for
either a breach or violation of any condition of approval or limitation of the
permit; or, if the conditional use is operated in a manner so as to create a
public nuisance as defined and regulated by this Code.
      2.   If the board desires to revoke, suspend, or modify a conditional use
permit, either on its own action or after a formal complaint, the board shall
notify the permit holder of its intention and provide the permit holder with
the opportunity to contest the revocation, suspension, or modification in the
context of a public hearing.
      3.   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the property owner
by certified, return receipt mail, at least fourteen (14) days before the
public hearing. Notice shall also be provided to neighbors and the public in
the same manner set forth for application of a conditional use permit.
      4.   The board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law if they
decide to revoke, suspend, or modify the conditional use permit. If the board
does not decide to take such action, no findings of fact and conclusions of law
shall be made. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-14-2: SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS:
Pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 15-1-608, the Planning and Zoning Board,
in their capacity as the Board of Adjustment, is authorized to hear and decide
special exemptions from the terms of this title, as specified herein. It is the
intent of these special exemption provisions to provide necessary flexibility
in this chapter without requiring applicants to provide proof of hardship.
Special exemptions may be entirely appropriate but not at every location or
without conditions being imposed by reason of special problems the use
presents. The Planning and Zoning Board may grant those special exceptions that
are reasonable and harmless deviations from this title as determined by the
following standards and procedures:
   A.   Application Procedures:
      1.   Optional Pre-Application Conference With Planning And Zoning Board:
The pre-application conference is optional and is scheduled at the applicant's
request. The conference allows the applicant to obtain information regarding
the special exception process and to identify likely concerns regarding the
proposal. No application fee is required and the Planning and Zoning Board
takes no formal action or decision concerning the proposal.
      2.   Filing Of Applications:
         a.   Application Contents: The application for a special exemption
shall include the following information:
            (1)   The proposed use or project;
            (2)   A plot plan showing the major details of the proposal such as
location of buildings and structures, parking areas, means of vehicular access,
signs, landscaping, fencing and screening, easements, utilities and pedestrian
areas;
            (3)   A time schedule for development, if applicable;
            (4)   Such other information as the board shall by rules of
practice require; and
            (5)   Any other information the applicant believes will support the
request.
         b.   Filing Period: Applications shall be filed at least twenty one
(21) days prior to the anticipated date of public hearing.
      3.   Payment Of Application Fees: At the time the application for a
special exemption is submitted to the City, the application fee, as set by
resolution of the City Council, shall be paid by the applicant.
      4.   Notice Of Public Hearing:
         a.   Public Hearing: The board shall conduct a public hearing to
obtain information pertaining to the request and the appropriateness of the
special exemption. Proper notice of the hearing is prerequisite to conducting
the public hearing.
         b.   After receipt of a complete application, the City Planner shall
cause the applicant to provide notice of the public hearing. Notice of a public
hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing by
publication in the City's official newspaper and by USPS first class mail to
the owners of all properties within one hundred forty feet (140') of the
subject property. The notices must identify the date, time, location, and
purpose of the public hearing. The property owner list shall be based on the
ownership data from the Park County Map Server Program (or equivalent) on the
day of application.
         c.   The person sending the notices by mail shall complete an
affidavit of mailing which identifies the document, the property owners to
which it was sent, and the date mailed.
         d.   The City Planner is granted authority to require or perform
optional notice to inform other property owners, lessees, utility providers, or
others that may be affected by the exemption, of the public hearing. Optional
notice is not subject to the ten (10) day requirement, may take any form, and
is completely discretionary. Optional notice, or lack thereof, shall not be
grounds for appeal.
   B.   Applicability: Applicants may request, and the Planning and Zoning
Board may consider, special exemptions from certain numerical specifications
and for uses that are similar to permitted uses as specified below:
      1.   Exemption From Numerical Specifications: The following types of
numerical standards may be waived or modified by special exemption:
         a.   Hour of business operation limits in D-1 District;
         b.   Any of the dimensional standards of the zoning districts, except
those establishing density, minimum lot area, and number of main buildings on a
lot (exceptions to those standards requires a variance). Examples of
dimensional standards are setbacks, height limits, lot coverage, and dwelling
size requirements;
         c.   Supplemental development standards identified as eligible for
special exemption;
         d.   Parking standards of chapter 16 of this title;
         e.   Sign standards;
         f.   Other numerical specifications not specifically listed above,
provided approval of the special exemption would not be tantamount to rezoning
the subject property, or conflict with the classification method of the
supplemental development standards.
      2.   Exemption For Use Similar To Permitted Uses: Special exemptions may
be granted to allow uses not listed in this title when the Planning and Zoning
Board determines that such use is similar to a permitted use within the zoning
district of the subject property. The determination on similarity shall be made
in consideration of the size, intensity, noise, traffic, burden on
infrastructure, and purposes of the use in question.
      3.   Relation To Rezoning, Planned Unit Development And Variances: The
Planning and Zoning Board shall not approve a special exemption application
when the application would be more properly considered as a rezoning, planned
unit development, or variance application.
   C.   Planning And Zoning Board Decision:
      1.   Public Hearing Procedures: The Chairperson of the Planning and
Zoning Board shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with the board
hearing rules, if any have been adopted. In addition, City staff shall have any
opportunity to present the application and any staff reports and
recommendations to the board. The applicant and those favoring the application
shall follow and be allowed to speak and present any information to the board.
Opponents shall then be allowed to speak and present information to the board.
The board shall have the opportunity to question any speaker or ask any speaker
to answer or respond to questions posed by other speakers.
      2.   Approval Standards: No special exemption shall be approved unless
the Planning and Zoning Board finds:
         a.   The special exemption will not produce an undesirable change in
the character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties;
         b.   The special exemption is designed to be compatible with adjacent
land uses and the area or neighborhood;
         c.   The special exemption is the minimum deviation from the
specifications of this title necessary and adequate for the proposed activity,
structure or use;
         d.   The benefit sought by the applicant cannot be achieved by some
other method, feasible for the applicant to pursue other than a special
exemption;
         e.   Adequate services and infrastructure are or will be available to
serve the proposed activity, structure or use; and
         f.   The special exemption is consistent with the goals, policies and
future land use map of the master plan.
      3.   Conditions: In approving a special exemption, the Planning and
Zoning Board may impose any reasonable conditions or modifications pertaining
to operational or physical features of the proposal to ensure conformance with
the approval standards of subsection C2 of this section. The board is further
authorized to set time limits for renewal or expiration of special exemptions
and to require financial guarantees, such as a performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit, to ensure completion of required improvements.
      4.   Time Limit For Decision: The Planning and Zoning Board shall make a
decision within thirty (30) days of the public hearing. This time limit may be
extended with the consent of the applicant.
      5.   Record Of Decision: The Planning and Zoning Board decision shall be
set forth in the board minutes, specifying the name of the applicant, the
property address or legal description, the exact nature of the special
exemption, and any added conditions, modifications, requirements or
limitations.
      6.   Terms Of Approval Or Special Approval; Limits On Modification Of Use
Or Structure: No activity, use or structure allowed by a special exemption may
be modified, increased in intensity or extent, structurally enlarged, or
expanded in land area, unless:
         a.   Such is specifically allowed by terms of the approval; or
         b.   The Planning and Zoning Board so amends the exemption following
the procedures applicable to new applications for special exemptions.
      7.   Duration: Duration shall be one (1) of the following:
         a.   In the event the Planning and Zoning Board limits the duration of
the special exemption, the exemption shall not run with the land and renewal
shall be required at the time specified in the board decision.
         b.   In the event the Planning and Zoning Board does not limit the
duration of special exemption, the exemption shall run with the land and the
current property owner shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of
approval. Said exemption shall be recorded in the Office of the Park County
Clerk at the expense of the applicant within ten (10) days of the granting of
the special exemption, or as otherwise specified by the board.
      8.   Expiration: If activities allowed by special exemption have not been
established within one (1) year of the approval or have ceased to occur for at
least one (1) year after having been established, the exemption shall expire
and not resume unless an application is filed and approved in accordance with
the procedures for review of new special exemptions.
      9.   Revocation For Noncompliance: The Planning and Zoning Board shall
have continuing jurisdiction over all special exemptions and may revoke, modify
or suspend the approval of the special exemption, after a public hearing and
notice given in the same manner as for new applications, under the following
conditions:
         a.   The exemption was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, or the
public hearing had inadequate notice;
         b.   The exemption has been exercised contrary to the conditions of
approval; or
         c.   The activity, structure or use permitted by the exemption has
been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare,
or as to constitute a nuisance.
      10.   Other Legal Remedies: In cases of noncompliance with the conditions
of approval for special exemptions, the City may elect any other remedy
provided by law for violations of this chapter. In cases warranting immediate
abatement, the City may pursue such other legal remedies without delay and it
shall not be necessary for the Planning and Zoning Board to have first revoked
the exemption. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-14-3: AIRPORT OVERLAY SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Within the Airport Overlay Zone, the Governing Body is empowered to grant
Airport Overlay special use permits (hereinafter special use permit) for
specific uses as designated in the affected land use classifications.
The purpose of a special use permit shall be to assure that the maximum degree
of land use compatibility shall be attained in the Airport Overlay Zone, to
minimize noise impacts of aircraft, and to provide for the protection of public
safety and welfare.
   A.   Approval Required Prior To Development: Any person proposing to develop
a special use in the Airport Overlay shall apply for and obtain approval for a
special use permit prior to beginning development.
   B.   Application: The application for a special use permit shall be filed
upon the prescribed form with the City Planner, or designee, who shall review
it for completeness, and the form shall include:
      1.   The name and address of the owner and applicant.
      2.   A legal description and address for site identification.
      3.   A statement of the precise nature of the proposed use.
      4.   A site plan showing the relationship of the proposed development to
existing streets, structures, open spaces, height and use of each structure,
including proposed structures, parking areas and landscaping.
   C.   Fee: A fee for the filing and processing of applications for all
permits required by this section shall be paid at the time an application is
submitted. The amount of the fee shall be set forth by the Governing Body, and
may be amended or changed by resolution by the Governing Body.
   D.   Review Procedures Generally: The Yellowstone Regional Airport Board
shall have an opportunity to review and make a formal recommendation on
proposed special use permits. The Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall
then review the application and supporting material. Within ten (10) days after
the action of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board, the recommendation
shall be transmitted to the Governing Body. Within thirty (30) days following
receipt of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board recommendations, the
Governing Body shall approve or disapprove the special use permit request by a
majority vote of the Governing Body.
   E.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning,
Zoning and Adjustment Board shall schedule a public hearing and provide
adequate notice as follows:
      1.   Notice To Neighboring Properties: The applicant shall notify by
certified mail, return receipt required, all property owners within one hundred
forty feet (140') of the perimeter of the subject property (excluding streets
and rights-of-way) of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. The applicant shall submit a list of the notified property owners, a
copy of the notification letter, and mail receipts to the City Planner, or
designee, for verification of notification. The return receipts (green cards)
shall include the City address for direct return of the receipts to the City
Planner, or designee (e.g., City Planner, City of Cody, P.O. Box 2200, Cody, WY
82414). The notice shall be in a standard form prescribed by the City Planner,
or designee. The notice shall contain a brief description of the application
and proposed use, the address or a description of the location, the applicant's
name, and the date, time and place of the hearing. The notice shall include a
space where the property owner shall be allowed to state whether he or she
objects or does not object to the proposed special use permit, and space to
explain their objection or lack thereof. The notice shall also describe the
other methods by which the recipient may provide input prior to the public
hearing, such as by e-mail, or by correspondence delivered to the City Planner,
or designee.
      2.   Published Legal Notice: The applicant shall, at his expense, cause a
legal notice to be published in the City's official newspaper at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing in a standard form prescribed by the City Planner, or
designee.
      3.   Decision Of Planning, Zoning And Adjustment Board: Following the
public hearing, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board shall recommend to
the Governing Body denial of the special use permit, approval of the special
use permit, or approval with conditions.
      4.   Action Of Governing Body: After the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment
Board has conducted the public hearing and made its recommendation, the
application shall go to the Governing Body at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. The Governing Body shall consider the application, along with the
recommendation of the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board, and shall take
action to approve, approve with conditions or reject the application. At the
meeting where the Governing Body considers the application, the Governing Body
may hear and consider other comments and input from the staff and public.
      5.   Approval; Recording: If the Governing Body approves the special use
permit, the Governing Body shall prepare a recordable document stating that the
Governing Body approves the special use permit, the date the special use permit
was approved, and stating any conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed
on such permit. That document shall be signed by the Mayor, and recorded with
the Park County Clerk and Recorder's Office in the real estate records.
   F.   Nature Of Review: When considering an application for a special use
permit, the Planning, Zoning and Adjustment Board and Governing Body shall
consider the applicable standards, including the airport obstruction
regulations, and may impose specific conditions precedent to establishing the
use. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Limitations upon the proposed use.
      2.   Stipulation as to the exact location of the proposed use as a means
of minimizing noise impacts and aviation obstructions.
      3.   Requirement that structural features and vegetation be restricted in
height.
      4.   Reduction of site density.
      5.   Compliance with approved engineering plans and specifications.
      6.   Requirement for minimum open space.
      7.   Stipulation that certain uses will be prohibited, specifically:
         a.   Aboveground storage of flammable materials.
         b.   Smoke or steam pollution sources and open burning.
         c.   Radio/transmitting sources which might interfere with aircraft
radio/navigation equipment.
         d.   Any use which would tend to initiate or increase bird population.
         e.   Aboveground power lines, windmills, towers.
         f.   Places of public assembly or with high residential densities
shall be discouraged.
   G.   Burden Of Proof Rests With Applicant: In all cases, the applicant must
demonstrate compatibility with aviation use and that potential conflicts or
negative impacts will be mitigated.
   H.   Effectiveness Of Special Use Permit:
      1.   A special use permit approval shall cease effectiveness if the use
is not completely developed within two (2) years of the date of approval unless
the applicant or owner requests, and the Governing Body provides for, a longer
period of effectiveness, based on a finding that the use is a phased
development requiring a longer period of development, not to exceed six (6)
years, with said phases and time deadlines clearly spelled out in the
application.
      2.   The Governing Body may extend the original approval for one (1)
additional year. No later than forty five (45) days prior to the termination of
the initial approval period, the City Planner, or designee, shall inform the
applicant and owner in writing by mail of the termination date. If the
applicant or owner has not submitted to the City Planner, or designee, a
written request for extension of the approval period by the termination date,
effectiveness of the special use permit shall be invalid, and further
development of the project shall immediately cease.
The Governing Body may approve the request for extension if it finds that
substantial progress has been made toward completion of the development and
that said progress is in compliance with applicable regulations and standards,
and any condition that is a part of the special use approval. The Governing
Body shall deny the extension request if it finds that substantial progress has
not been made on the project.
   I.   Amendment: A special use permit may be amended in the same manner as
required for the approval of the permit.
   J.   Duration Of Approval: A special use permit shall run with the land;
compliance with the conditions of such permit is the responsibility of the
current owner of the property, whether that is the original owner or a
successor. The use may continue indefinitely, regardless of ownership;
provided, that the use or operation is consistent with the permit and
conditions of the permit.
   K.   Reciprocal Requirements: When a zone (i.e., Zone D-3) allows all uses
permitted in another zone (i.e., Zone D-2), all Airport Overlay restrictions
shall remain applicable in both zones. (Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 15
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Intent And Purpose
10-15-2: Construction Of Language And Definitions
10-15-3: Regulations And Standards
10-15-4: Interpretation Provisions
10-15-5: Administrative Procedures
10-15-6: General Provisions
10-15-7: Reserved
10-15-8: Sign Districts
10-15-9: Commercial Sign Districts
10-15-10: Illegal, Nonconforming And Abandoned Signs
10-15-11: Removal Of Signs
10-15-12: Review And Appeal Authority
10-15-13: Penalties
10-15-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of this sign chapter (hereinafter referred
to as "this chapter") to regulate the size, number, illumination, movement of,
maintenance of and locations of signs and other advertising symbols, markings
or devices; to allow the business and residential community equal and fair
opportunity to advertise and promote activities, products and services without
discrimination; to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the
public; to encourage aesthetic creativity while preserving and enhancing
historic places and preventing the proliferation of unsightly advertising.
(Ord. 2011-02, 6-7-2011)
10-15-2: CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Construction Of Language: The following rules of construction shall
apply to this chapter:
      1.   The particular shall control the general.
      2.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
      3.   The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      5.   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
      6.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"maintained for" or "occupied for".
      7.   The word "person" includes any person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      8.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and, or, or either...or", the conjunction shall
be interpreted as follows:
         a.   "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
         b.   "Or" indicates that at least one of the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
         c.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      9.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified
examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
   B.   Definitions:
    A-FRAME SIGN: Any sign placed directly on the ground and connected, at the
top or side, to form an "A" or other similar shape. No A-frame sign shall be
larger than two feet by four feet (2' x 4'). See section
7-2-7 of this code for additional regulations on A-frame signs.
   ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which advertises a business, entity, establishment or
organization which is no longer in operation, or a service, activity or product
that is no longer available where the sign is displayed; or an off premises
sign which is vacant of copy or which advertises a business, entity,
establishment, organization, product or service which no longer exists or is no
longer provided, except as otherwise provided in this code. A sign which
advertises or promotes a business, entity, establishment, partnership,
individual or organization (hereinafter the business) which has ceased
operations or is no longer providing products or services to the public for
nine (9) months or more shall be deemed to be abandoned. Staff may grant an
extension of up to two (2) months upon a showing by the property or owner that
the business has resumed or will resume operations within that period of time.
An abandoned sign will also include any billboard sign for which there is no
current and valid lease agreement between the property owner and the billboard
owner, and where a property owner has not otherwise consented to the
positioning of the billboard.
   ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any balloon, flag, pennant, propeller, oscillating,
rotating, pulsating light or other contrivance except a sign, used to attract
attention for the purpose of promoting the sale of products or services.
   ADVERTISING SIGN: Any sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
good, product, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered.
   ADVERTISING STATUARY: Any imitation or representation of a person or thing
which is sculpted, modeled or cast in any solid or plastic substance, material,
or fabric and used for commercial purposes.
   ALTERATION: Any change of size, shape, illumination, position, location,
construction or supporting structure, to cause to change or make different
without changing into something else or permanently losing its former
characteristics.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that changes its message or background in a manner
or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or
may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate
movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression
of frames which give the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the
illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or
contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs.
   AREA OF SIGN: Sign area is the entire surface area of a sign including
nonstructural trim. The supports, uprights or structures on which any sign is
mounted shall not be included in determining sign area. Sign area for cutout
letters or displays shall include the total cumulative area within the
periphery of the collective cutout letters or display which can be enclosed
within a rectangle or series of attached rectangles. If a sign consists of a
symbol or statuary, the entire surface area of the symbol or statuary which can
be enclosed within a rectangle shall be determined as the sign area.
   ATTACHED SIGN: An on premises sign that is attached to a building wall or
other surface. Awning signs, canopy signs, window signs, projecting signs, and
wall signs are all considered attached signage.
   AWNING SIGN: On premises attached sign displayed to or incorporated into the
surface of an architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported
by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering or nonrigid
materials, and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent
or retractable.
   BALLOON: An inflatable device which does not exceed ten inches (10") in
diameter, and is sealed to contain air or gas, and is anchored to the ground, a
vehicle, structure or any other fixed object used for the purpose of
advertising or drawing attention to a business, activity, commodity, service,
sale or product.
   BANNER: A strip of cloth, plastic or similar material with copy and/or
graphics produced in a professional manner and intended to be hung or suspended
without a rigid enclosing framework, and affixed to a building or railing which
is located outdoors. Banners shall be displayed pursuant to section
10-15-9 of this chapter.
   BEACON OR FLASHING SIGNS: Signs which feature flashing or rotating lights,
strobes, or strands of lights.
   BILLBOARD: A board or panel used for the display of posters, printed or
painted advertising matter, either illuminated or nonilluminated, which directs
attention to goods, merchandise, entertainment or services offered elsewhere
than the premises where the sign is located.
   BULLETIN BOARD: A board or frame containing a material which facilitates the
addition or removal of announcements, bulletins, displays, information, or
advertising.
   BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession,
commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where
such a sign is located or to which it is attached.
   CANOPY SIGN: A structure, either detached from or attached to and extending
from the enclosed portion of a building, and used principally to provide
shelter in connection with activities conducted in the principal building. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, fuel stations, banks and
pharmacies.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS (MANUAL): A sign on which copy or sign panels may be
changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters or
changeable pictorial panels.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary sign allowed for a limited
period of time that identifies a development under construction as well as
design, construction and marketing information for a development.
   CONVENIENCE SIGN: Any sign which conveys information such as "restrooms",
"no parking", "entrance", "exit" and the like, and is designed to be viewed on
site or adjacent to the site by pedestrians and/or motorists.
   COPY: The wording or message on a sign surface either in permanent or
removable letter or panel form.
   DANGEROUS OR DEFECTIVE SIGN: A sign which is not maintained and/or which is
not safe.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an
electronic image and/or video, which may or may not include text. Such signs
include any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a
sign message or messages or uses electronic means to change the sign message.
Electronic message boards include, but are not limited to, signs also known as
electronic reader boards, electronic message center signs, tripanel message
systems and commercial electronic variable message signs (CEVMS).
   EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED: A sign that features artificial illumination from a
light source which provides light directly onto the sign face, or portions of
the sign face, or its background, which light is then reflected back to the
viewer.
   FLAGS: Flags or insignia of any nation, state, county, city, religious,
civic or educational institution, except flags used in connection with a
commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
   FLUSH MOUNTED WALL SIGN: A sign attached to, painted on or erected against
the wall of a building or structure which extends no more than twelve inches
(12") from the wall surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface
is parallel to the face of the building.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: An on premises sign, identifying the principal use
conducted on the lot where the sign is located, that is placed on or anchored
in the ground with one (1) or more supports and that is not part of a building
or other structure. Can also be referred to as a ground, monument, pole, or
pylon sign.
   FRONTAGE: See section
10-2-1 of this title.
   GRADE: See section
10-2-1 of this title.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: A sign used in conjunction with a home occupation as
defined in section
10-2-1 of this title.
   HOSPITAL: An institution where sick or injured are given medical or surgical
care.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A permanent sign announcing the name of a subdivision,
group housing project, church, school, park, planned shopping center, planned
industrial center or public area.
   ILLEGAL SIGN: Any sign failing to conform to the provisions and requirements
of this chapter.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either
by lights in the sign or directed towards the sign.
   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has light cast on its surface
from an exterior source including electric lights or luminous tubes.
   INFLATABLE SIGNS: An inflatable sign is a ground mounted or tethered sign
that is manufactured of plastic, cloth, canvas, or other light fabric and
inflated, with air, or other gas. Inflatable signs shall include those which
are sealed, and those through which air or gas is continuously blown by a fan,
blower, or other device. Inflatable signs do not include balloons.
   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign that features artificial illumination
from a light source located behind the sign face and which transmits light
through the sign face or portions of the sign face to the viewer, also known as
backlit illumination. Exposed neon tubing and similar lighting shall not be
considered an internally illuminated sign. A light from a source concealed or
contained within the sign, and which becomes visible through a translucent
surface.
   JOINT DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign used by three (3) or more businesses to
identify all the tenants within a particular development.
   LOT: See section
10-2-1 of this title.
   MAINTAIN: To permit a sign, structure or any part of each to continue or to
repair or refurbish a sign, structure or any part of either.
   MARQUEE SIGN: Signage placed over the entrance to a hotel or theater stating
either the name of the establishment or, in the case of theaters, the play or
movie and the artist(s) appearing at that venue.
   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM: A coordinated system of signing intended to produce
consistent, uniform and equitable placement of signs at a shopping center or
building containing multiple businesses (containing 2 or more), i.e., multiple
use facility, mall/shopping centers.
   MONUMENT SIGN: Any sign supported by its own base and not by a pole or other
support structure, not exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height.
   MULTIPLE USE FACILITY: A commercial or industrial park, office complex,
shopping mall or other facility which serves two (2) or more businesses.
   NEON SIGN: An illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon or
phosphors which are bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was lawfully erected prior to the
effective date hereof or is located in newly annexed territory which does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign or billboard which is used or intended for use to
advertise, identify, direct or attract the attention of the public to a
business, institution, product, organization, event or location offered or
existing other than upon the same premises where the sign or billboard is
displayed.
   ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign displaying information pertaining only to a
business, industry, activity, or profession located on the premises where the
sign is displayed, and pertaining only to the name of the business, type of
product sold, manufactured, or assembled, and/or service, activity, or
entertainment offered on said premises, including business identification or
occupancy signs.
   PANEL CHANGE OUT: Removing and/or replacing the advertising or copy area
panel(s) of a sign without replacing or modifying the sign structure.
   PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED SIGN: A permanent sign that directs pedestrian traffic
without reference to or including the name of a product sold or service
performed on the lot.
   PENNANT: Any series of small flaglike or streamerlike pieces of cloth,
plastic or paper, or similar material attached in a row to any staff, cord or
building, at only one or two (2) edges, the remainder hanging loosely.
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign that is attached or mounted to a building, post,
frame, pole, mast with bolts, concrete footings or foundations, or such similar
devices.
   POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or
national election or referendum.
   PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, including, but not limited to, signs with attached wheels,
A-frame signs, signs attached or painted on vehicles parked and visible from
the street.
   PRIMARY PUBLIC ENTRANCE: An entrance to a business which is open to the
public during its normal and customary hours of operation and the entrance used
as the primary ingress and egress to the business by the public.
   PROJECTING SIGN: An on premises attached sign, end mounted or otherwise
attached to an exterior wall of a building and which projects not more than
three feet (3') from the wall to which it is attached.
   PROJECTING STRUCTURE: The physical structure by which a projecting sign is
affixed or mounted to a building.
   PUBLIC SIGNS: Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order,
rule or regulation.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: An on premises sign for the purpose of advertising the
sale or lease, or the completion of the sale or lease, of real estate when
erected or displayed on the property so advertised and removed within fourteen
(14) days of sale or lease. No building permit required for individual lot
signs.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign, any part of which is located on or attached to a roof
or on top of a parapet wall.
   SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated
outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images.
The term "sign" includes, but is not limited to, every projecting sign, ground
sign, pole sign, window sign, vehicle sign, awning, canopy, marquee, changeable
copy sign, illuminated sign, flashing sign, animated sign, temporary sign,
portable sign, pennant, banner, streamer, or any other attention getting device
or other display whether affixed to a building or separate from a building. For
the purpose of removal, "sign" shall also include all sign structures.
   SIGN HEIGHT: The height of an on premises freestanding sign shall be
measured from the road to which the sign is oriented or average grade of the
site where the sign is located; whichever is higher, to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign, the sign face, sign structure, and any other
appurtenance. Any change in a site's grade specifically designed to increase a
sign's height shall be included as part of the sign's height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1506.gif]
 
    SINGLE FACED SIGN: Any sign consisting of or having only one (1) inscribed,
printed, or marked face, which is designed and constructed to be visible from
only one (1) side.
   SNIPE SIGN: Any sign made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood
and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise
attached to trees, poles, fences or other objects, and the advertising matter
appearing thereon is not applicable to the premises upon which said sign is
located.
   SPECIAL EVENT: A sign advertising only the name, time and place of any bona
fide fair, carnival, festival, bazaar, rodeo or similar event, when conducted
by a public agency, civic, nonprofit or charitable cause. Special events signs
shall not be displayed more than thirty (30) days consecutively. Special event
signs will need a permit.
   SPONSOR SIGNS: A sign placed on the property of a city, county, school
district, or nonprofit organization, and said sponsor sign represents a company
or organization which has financially contributed to said entity. A sponsor
sign to be placed on property owned by the City of Cody must be approved by the
City Council.
   STREET: See section
10-2-1 of this title.
   STREET NUMBERS: Numbers placed on a building for the purpose of identifying
the address or location. Premises identification shall meet the requirements of
the City's building code.
   SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT SIGNS: This off site sign may contain advertising in
connection with the name of the subdivision, development firm, building
contractor, real estate sales firm, and may refer to materials, appliances,
supplies and building trades used in construction of dwellings, or services
provided by the developer. The sign shall be removed six (6) months after the
last lot is constructed upon. See table in section
10-15-9 of this chapter for size requirements and restrictions.
   SUSPENDED SIGN: An on premises attached sign that is suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface or arm, such as a canopy or marquee,
and is supported by such surface.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: An impermanent sign for advertising or displaying, which is
visible for a limited period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180)
days in any twelve (12) month period (examples of temporary signs include, but
are not limited to, banners and inflatables). Off premises, temporary A-frame
signs are limited to a period of time not to exceed seven (7) days.
   V-SHAPED SIGN: A sign that is attached to the building with an angle of
thirty degrees (30°) or greater between the two (2) faces. Its areas shall be
computed by adding the areas of the two (2) faces together. If the angle
between the two (2) faces is less than thirty degrees (30°), its area shall be
computed in the same manner as for a double faced sign.
   WALL SIGN: An on premises sign affixed to or painted on the wall of any
building and completely in contact with the building throughout its greatest
dimension, which does not extend beyond the main wall of the building more than
fifteen inches (15") except in accordance with these regulations. A painted
work of art or mural is not considered a wall sign. A window sign is considered
a wall sign.
   WALL MURAL: A work of art, such as a painting applied directly to a wall,
fence, pavement, or similar surface that is purely decorative in nature and
content, and does not include advertising by picture or verbal message.
   WINDOW SIGNS: An on premises wall sign that is permanently etched into,
attached to, or painted on the outside of a window and is legible from outside
the window. (Ord. 2011-03, 6-7-2011; amd. Ord. 2011-26, 11-15-2011)
10-15-3: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Applicability: The following regulations apply to all signing and/or to
the specific type of sign hereinafter indicated:
      1.   Any sign support which has been abandoned and no longer contains a
sign must be removed in accordance with section
10-15-10 of this chapter.
      2.   In all instances, any sign erected within the city must comply with
the provisions of the building code.
      3.   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural material condition at all times, including the repair and
replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning or other acts
required for the maintenance of said sign, as determined by the planning,
zoning and adjustment board. If the sign does not comply with adequate safety
standards, the city shall require its removal in accordance with sections
10-15-10 and
10-15-11 of this chapter.
      4.   No persons shall maintain or allow to be maintained on any premises
owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in a dangerous or defective
condition.
   B.   General Standards: The following standards apply to all signs unless
specifically exempted in other parts of this chapter:
      1.   Unique Shapes: Curvilinear, circular, and other unique shapes that
incorporate graphics are encouraged.
      2.   On Premises Sign Area Measurement Provisions: The measurement of the
area of signs shall be determined as follows:
         a.   Measurement Of Internally Illuminated Signs And Signs Consisting
Of A Permanent Structure With Removable Panels: The area of internally
illuminated signs and signs consisting of a permanent structure with panels
designed to be removed and/or replaced for periodic maintenance or change of
tenant(s) shall be computed as the smallest rectangle that will encompass the
extreme limits of the illuminated or changeable panels and structure less than
three inches (3") wide, regardless of sign shape and whether or not open spaces
exist. Any cutouts or extensions shall be included in the area of the sign. In
the case of separate signs sharing a common structure, the open spaces between
the panels shall not be counted as sign area.
         b.   Area Of Multifaced Signs: Signs constructed back to back, with
faces in approximately parallel planes (such as both sides of a single panel),
shall count as only one sign both in number and area. All other signs having
multiple faces, including cylinders, shall have all surfaces included in the
calculations for sign area. If a sign is V-shaped, with an angle of thirty
degrees (30°) or greater between the two (2) faces, its areas shall be computed
by adding the areas of the two (2) faces together. If the angle between the two
(2) faces is less than thirty degrees (30°), its area shall be computed in the
same manner as for a double faced sign.
         c.   Area Of Multi-Tenant Signs, Changeable Copy Signs, Or Electronic
Message Boards: The face and frame of a portion of a sign that includes the
names of individual tenants or an area for changeable or electronic copy shall
count toward the total area of the sign.
         d.   Measurement Of All Other Signs: Sign area for all other signs
shall consist of the smallest rectangle or sum of contiguous rectangles which
completely encompasses the sign message, including letters, words, and graphic
elements. This method of measurement shall also apply to words and graphic
elements painted onto windows, awnings and canopies.
      3.   Off Premises Signs:
         a.   Conformance: Any wall, projecting or freestanding sign allowed
under this chapter may be used to advertise off premises businesses or products
as a substitute for a sign on the same site where the business is located. Off
premises sign plan review applications shall require written consent from the
property owner(s) of the off premises site. Off premises signs must conform to
the regulations that apply to the premises where the sign is located.
         b.   Temporary A-Frame Signs:
            (1)   Organizations and businesses (profit or nonprofit) may place
temporary A-frame signs off premises under the following regulations:
   (A) Must complete application and obtain permit from the city of Cody. No
fees shall be charged for application and permitting process for temporary A-
frame signs.
   (B) Each organization and/or business may receive one permit per year and
each permit will be valid for seven (7) consecutive days.
   (C) No more than five (5) permits will be issued for the same seven (7) day
period. Permits will be issued on a first come, first served basis.
   (D) No applicant is allowed to place more than six (6) temporary A-frame
signs within the city.
   (E) All temporary A-frame signs must conform to the definition of A-frame
signs as defined within this chapter.
   (F) Each applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that each temporary A-
frame sign is securely grounded so as to avoid signs being blown by wind to any
other location not authorized by the permit, in addition, applicant must
monitor each sign on a daily basis during the seven (7) day permit period to
ensure the signs are in compliance with the application approved.
   (G) The city of Cody shall reserve the right to remove any and all signs
which are not in the location approved by the permit process or any sign that
has become a safety hazard to traffic and/or pedestrians.
   (H) All signs must be placed in preapproved locations as follows:
(i) Public Property: No signs shall be placed within the public right of way
except for as otherwise allowed by this code.
(ii) Private Property: No signs shall be placed on private property without the
express written consent of the property owner, and such written consent is
presented to the city of Cody with the application.
      4.   Attached, Projecting And Marquee Signs: The following rules and
regulations shall apply to attached, projecting and marquee signs:
         a.   The area of an attached sign where the sign consists of letters,
numerals or symbols painted on or affixed to a wall shall be the entire area
within a continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the message
delineated by the letters, numerals or symbols.
         b.   The area of an attached or suspended sign where the letters,
numerals or symbols are on a sign surface which is hung or affixed to a
structure shall be the total area of the hung or affixed surfaces. If a sign
has two (2) or more display faces, the area of all faces and all noncontiguous
surfaces is included in determining sign area.
         c.   The background area of a sign shall not be included in the sign
area only when such background is an integral part of the building.
      5.   Measurement Of Allowable Sign Area For Uses With More Than One
Street Frontage: Signs may be located on any side of the building involved, but
the total sign area of all signs may not exceed the total cumulative allowable
square footage for all street frontages.
      6.   Location: The following rules and standards shall apply in
establishing the location of signs within the city of Cody:
         a.   No portion of a sign, except exempted signs, shall be located
within the city or state right of way or sight distance triangles except as
permitted through the application process which must have approval by both the
city of Cody governing body and the Wyoming department of transportation. Signs
placed on city streets other than state highways must submit an application to
the city of Cody. Persons wishing to place a sign which encroaches upon a state
highway must complete an application and obtain approval from the state of
Wyoming highway department. Those forms can be picked up in the planning
department at city hall or at the Wyoming department of transportation. Hand
carried signs will be allowed within the right of way as long as it is not a
hazard to the community.
Signs are considered structures and must observe setback requirements for each
zoning district as delineated in the city zoning code.
         b.   No sign shall be located in a manner that impairs ingress and
egress through windows, doors, or other means of entering or exiting from a
structure or building.
         c.   No sign shall be placed as to impede the sight distance and
vision of motorists. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-7-2011)
         d.   No sign, awning or other obstruction shall be suspended from any
building into or over any sidewalk, street or alley, so as to obstruct or
interfere with the pedestrian traffic or vehicle traffic, nor shall any sign,
awning or other obstruction be suspended in or over any portion of the street
beyond the sidewalk. Projecting signs located over public pedestrianways shall
be placed not less than eight feet (8') from the travelway to the bottom of the
sign. The projecting edge of the sign shall be at least two feet (2') back from
any curb line. (Ord. 2011-26, 11-15-2011)
      7.   Illumination: The following rules and standards shall apply in
establishing the type of illumination which may be used for signs within the
city of Cody:
         a.   Submit Plans For Lighting: At the planning department's
discretion, any proposed external, internal, backlit or indirect lighting
application may be required to submit professionally prepared plans depicting
the types of lighting to be used.
         b.   Electrical Wiring: All signs containing electrical wiring shall
be subject to the provisions of the electrical code in place at that time and
electrical plans and specifications shall be submitted to the building official
for review, approval and building permit issuance.
         c.   Flashing Lights: A sign with blinking, chasing, flashing or
moving effects; or a sign displaying intermittent or flashing lights similar to
those used in governmental traffic signals or used by police, fire, ambulance,
or other emergency vehicles are prohibited. Such signs include beacons,
spotlights, searchlights, or reflectors and signs which revolve, or rotate or
swing by mechanical means.
         d.   Exterior Illumination: Exterior illumination shall be allowed,
provided that the following criteria are satisfied: Any externally illuminated
sign shall be shielded so as not to cast direct light onto any residential
district and as not to create a safety hazard.
         e.   Internally Illuminated: Internal illumination may be allowed,
provided that the following criteria are satisfied: The proposed light source
shall not be visible from the exterior of the sign, which shall include the
back, edges, and sides.
         f.   Backlit Or Indirectly Illuminated Signs: Backlit/indirectly
illuminated signs may be allowed, provided that the following criteria are
satisfied: Signs shall be illuminated from a source mounted on the structure
behind the proposed sign and shall not be visible through the sign. Lighting
shall be visible only along the edges of the sign and light shall not extend
more than three inches (3") beyond the sign edges.
      8.   Structural And Safety Considerations: All electrical services for
sign lighting shall be provided with underground or hidden devices or otherwise
in compliance with the international electrical code as is currently adopted by
the city.
      9.   Billboards: Billboards as defined in subsection 10-15-2B of this
chapter shall be allowed only in zoning districts D-3 and E. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-
7-2011)
      10.   Electronic Message Boards And Animated Signs:
         a.   Not more than one electronic message board sign may be permitted
per zoning lot.
         b.   Electronic message boards and animated signs shall not display
off premises commercial advertising.
         c.   Electronic message boards and animated signs are not permitted in
residential sign districts.
         d.   The leading edge of the sign must be a minimum distance of one
hundred feet (100') from an abutting residential zoning district boundary.
         e.   Electronic message boards must utilize an automatic dimmer
control so as to not exceed a maximum luminance of five thousand (5,000) nits
(candelas per square meter) during daylight hours (from sunrise to sunset), and
a maximum luminance of five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meter) from
sunset to sunrise.
         f.   The use of audio speakers is prohibited in association with a
sign.
         g.   Electronic message boards and animated signs shall be permitted
only in the following sign districts: D-2, D-3, and E industrial. In addition,
electronic message boards and animated signs may be permitted in the downtown
business district, but must have special approval by the planning and zoning
board. Approval will be based on consideration of adjacent signage, the size of
the proposed signage, and compliance with applicable sign requirements of the
Wyoming department of transportation. (Ord. 2013-17, 10-15-2013)
10-15-4: INTERPRETATION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provision Intent: The provisions of this chapter are not intended to
abrogate any other ordinance of the city which is more restrictive than the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Uncertainty Of Ordinance Provisions: Whenever the application of this
chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the application shall
be referred to the planning, zoning and adjustment board for a determination
and clarification.
   C.   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-7-
2011)
10-15-5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Reviews And Permits Required:
      1.   Sign Plan Review: It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct,
alter, paint or change the use of any "sign" as defined in this chapter without
first applying for a sign plan review and receiving approval from the City. No
sign plan review shall be approved unless it is found to comply with all
appropriate provisions of this chapter or a special exemption has been
obtained. Signs listed as exempt in this chapter shall not be subject to these
regulations.
      2.   Exception: Routine maintenance, repair and repainting which does not
enlarge or alter a sign, may be performed on a previously approved sign without
submitting a sign plan. A replacement of exact size, dimension and shape of any
sign face shall be exempted provided that it meets all requirements of this
chapter.
      3.   Building Permit: Upon approval of the sign plan review the owner,
owner's representative, or contractor must obtain a building permit prior to
the installation of any sign. Exempt signs as listed in this chapter shall not
require a building permit.
      4.   Electrical Permits: Any sign or portion of a sign that is powered by
or lit with electricity must obtain an electrical permit.
      5.   Wyoming Department Of Transportation Permit: Prior to placing any
sign in the Downtown Architectural District, adjacent to any State highway or
within any State right-of- way, the applicant must submit an application to the
Wyoming Department of Transportation (WYDOT) and must obtain approval from
WYDOT.
   B.   Sign Plan Review Process:
      1.   Application: Sign plan review applications shall be obtained from
the City Planning Department. A completed application shall be submitted to the
Planning Department by the owner or his authorized agent. The application shall
contain, or have attached thereto, the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the owner or other person in control of
the premises upon which the sign or advertising structure is to be constructed,
erected, posted or displayed, the name of the person erecting the sign or
structure; the address and legal description of the premises upon which the
proposed sign or advertising structure is to be located and the frontage of the
lot or building. For V-shaped signs the applicant must provide the degree of
the angle between sign faces.
         b.   A site plan which identifies the location of all exterior signs
existing or proposed for the premises. The plan must include building
elevations with signs depicted. Sign elevations must indicate overall and
letter/figure dimensions, colors, materials, and illumination for each sign.
         c.   Two (2) drawings containing plans and specifications which
indicate the method of construction and anchoring to the building or ground;
the total area of the proposed sign in square feet; the height of the proposed
advertising structure from ground level; and an electrical wiring plan if the
sign is to be supplied with electricity.
      2.   Application Review: Within twenty one (21) days of filing a
completed application the Planning Department shall review the sign review
application. The Planning Department shall determine if the proposed sign and
application are in compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. The Planning
Department shall either approve the application, deny the application due to
noncompliance with this chapter or other City ordinances or regulations which
may apply, or refer the application directly to the Planning, Zoning and
Adjustment Board in situations where the department is uncertain as to the
interpretation or application of this chapter to the proposed sign. Every sign
plan review approved by the Planning Department shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if a building permit is not issued by the Building
Department within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of approval of such
review. Additional time may be permitted with authorization of the Planning
Department.
      3.   Review Approval: If the Planning Department has determined the sign
and application is in compliance with this chapter and other ordinances and
regulations which may apply, the Planning Department shall approve the sign
plan review for the proposed sign and direct the applicant to the Building
Department for building permit review and issuance.
      4.   Review Application Retention: The Planning Department shall retain
one (1) copy of the sign plan review application. The review application and
subsequent approval or denial shall be retained at the Office of the Planning
Department until such time as the sign no longer exists.
      5.   Review Fees: Each application for a sign review shall be accompanied
by a review fee as set forth by section
10-1-6 of this title.
      6.   Appeal From The Decision Of The Planning Department: Upon denial of
a sign plan review by the Planning Department, the applicant may submit a
modified application for reconsideration to the planning department, or file an
appeal to the planning, zoning and adjustment board. An appeal from the
decision of the planning department shall be filed with the planning department
within thirty (30) calendar days of the denial of a sign plan. The appeal shall
contain twelve (12) copies of detailed drawings, drawn to scale, containing
complete plan specifications which indicate the method of construction and
anchoring to the building or ground; the total area of the proposed sign in
square feet; and the height of the proposed advertising structure from ground
level. The appeal must state the reason why the applicant feels the planning
department's decision was in error. The planning, zoning and adjustment board
shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting or as
promptly as practicable at a subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. The
applicant shall be given written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate why the planning
department's decision was in error, and to show that the proposed sign complies
with this chapter. The appeal shall be limited to a determination by the
planning, zoning and adjustment board of whether the planning department erred
in determining that the application did not comply with this chapter. The board
shall render a decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the meeting.
(Ord. 2011-06, 6-7-2011)
10-15-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Exempted Signs: The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter providing that they meet the requirements set forth in this
section:
      1.   Public Right Of Way: All signs erected in a public right of way by a
public agency controlling or directing traffic and information signs shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Official Flags: "Official flags" include flags of the United States
Of America, the state of Wyoming, and other states of the United States,
counties, municipalities, and official flags of foreign nations recognized by
the United States government, provided they are kept in good repair. The
maximum size of any one flag shall be twenty four (24) square feet with the
exception of the United States Of America flag which may be any size. Flagpoles
may not exceed twenty five feet (25') as measured from final grade. Uplighting
of all flags except the flag of the United States Of America is prohibited.
Flagpoles within the airport overlay zone may be subject to additional
regulations, and shall require approval of the manager of Yellowstone Regional
Airport to ensure compliance with FAA and Yellowstone Regional Airport rules
and regulations.
      3.   Other Flags And Pennants: Other flags are flags that are not
"official flags" as defined above. Examples of other flags include flags of
schools, universities, colleges, sports teams, churches, religious groups, and
nonprofit or charitable organizations. The maximum size of a flag or pennant
shall be twenty four (24) square feet.
      4.   Group Signs: Signs grouped together at the entrance(s) to the city
which represent community clubs and organizations (Lions, Rotary, Eagles,
etc.), religious institutions and the like.
      5.   Signs Inside Buildings: Any sign inside a building or inside a
window, except flashing, animated or rotating signs intended to be visible from
outside the building. "Open" and "Closed" signs shall be exempt as described
below.
      6.   Political Signs: Political signs may be displayed so long as they
are removed within ten (10) days after the election to which they refer. Said
signs shall be located entirely on private property.
      7.   Identification, For Sale Or For Rent Signs: Owner identification or
occupant identification signs for residential structures, private warning signs
and for sale or for rent signs, none of which may exceed six (6) square feet on
one face or twelve (12) square feet on two (2) faces.
      8.   Signs On Vehicles: Signs on a truck, bus, car, boat, trailer or
other authorized vehicle and equipment; provided all of the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the
display of signs;
         b.   Signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integrated part
of the vehicle or equipment;
         c.   The vehicle or equipment is in operating condition, currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and
actively used in the daily function of the business to which the signs relate;
         d.   The vehicles or equipment are not used primarily as static
displays, advertising a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the general public;
         e.   Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction projects
and the on premises storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the general
public for rent or lease shall not be subject to this condition.
      9.   Bulletin Boards: Public, charitable and religious institutions may
construct bulletin boards if they are located on the premises of such
institution and comply with the provisions of this chapter and are not more
than sixteen (16) square feet in area.
      10.   Menu Signs At Drive-Through And Drive-In Restaurants: Said signs
shall not be designed to be read from the public right of way or to attract
attention to the site from the right of way.
      11.   Decorative Signs: Decorative signs clearly incidental to, and
commonly or customarily associated with any national, local or religious
holiday, except where a characteristic of the sign is specifically prohibited
in all cases (for example, traffic distractions); limited to a maximum of
thirty (30) square feet and a maximum height of fifteen feet (15'), unless
given approval by the planning and zoning board for additional height.
      12.   Prohibited Activities Signs: Prohibited activities signs located on
a premises posting said premises for warning or other prohibitions on
trespassing, hunting, fishing, swimming or other prohibited activities. Such
signs shall be no greater than three (3) square feet in area and shall be
spaced no closer than fifty feet (50') apart, except as otherwise provided in
other applicable city ordinances. Setback requirements shall not apply to such
signs.
      13.   Open, Closed Hours: Door and window signs that designate hours and
"open" and "closed" shall not exceed four (4) square feet and not more than one
of each is allowed per business entrance.
      14.   Vacancy, No Vacancy: All "vacancy" or "no vacancy" signs are not to
exceed three and one-half (31/2) square feet, and not more than one per
business is allowed.
      15.   Wall Murals: Wall murals that do not contain advertising.
      16.   Building Inscriptions: The inscription of names (or dates) of
buildings, when etched into masonry in one location on any business or
premises. Each letter of an inscription may not exceed twenty four inches (24")
in height and the total engraved area may not occupy more than twenty (20)
square feet of the surface of the building. In addition, buildings designated
by the city council, the state of Wyoming, or the United States as having
historical significance to the community are allowed one historical plaque per
street frontage not to exceed one square foot.
      17.   Public Signs: Signs posted by governmental entities within public
parks, trails and school property including, but not limited to, street and
traffic signs, interpretive signs, identification signs, scoreboards, etc.
      18.   Existing Signs: All signs existing as of the passage date hereof;
provided that such signs are in conformance with previous city municipal code
requirements.
   B.   Prohibited Signs: The following signs shall not be allowed in the city
of Cody:
      1.   Unauthorized Signs: Any sign not specifically authorized in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter is prohibited.
      2.   Mechanical Signs: Mechanical signs, including signs containing
moving, swinging, or rotating parts, unless specifically permissible as part of
the allowable signage enumerated in this chapter.
      3.   Hazardous Signs: Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing
clear view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      4.   Signs On Parked Vehicles: Signs placed on vehicles, a truck, bus,
car, boat, trailer or other authorized vehicle and equipment which are parked
on a public right of way, public property or private property so as to be
visible from a public right of way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a
product or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or
nearby property are not permitted. However, this is not intended to prohibit
signs which meet the conditions and criteria of exempted signs.
      5.   Signs Constituting A Traffic Hazard: No person shall install or
maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any sign which mimics,
simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or
signal, or which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "danger" or any other
words, phrases, symbols, or character in such a manner to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
      6.   Signs On Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes: No sign shall be installed,
relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any
door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape, except those signs as required by other codes or
ordinances.
      7.   Signs In Proximity To Utility Lines: No sign plan shall be approved
for any sign, and no sign shall be constructed or maintained, which has less
horizontal or vertical clearance from authorized communication or energized
electrical power lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state of
Wyoming, the ordinance of the city of Cody, or other applicable rules,
regulations and codes.
      8.   Signs On Public Property: Signs on public property including
streets, medians, islands, parkways, sidewalks, traffic control signposts,
utility poles, and trees. Signs are prohibited on any utility pole, traffic
sign post, traffic signal or any other official traffic control device. No
person except a public officer in performance of a public duty shall affix, by
any means, any form of sign, on any public property or within the public right
of way. (Ord. 2011-07, 6-7-2011)
      9.   Public Property; Permission: Signs will not be located on publicly
owned property unless permission has been granted by the governing body.
The governing body may, at its discretion, designate by resolution, public
property sites where signs advertising or promoting garage sales or yard sales
may be posted. Such resolution may also adopt reasonable rules and regulations
governing the size, dimension, length of time for posting, removal and general
appearance of such signs. Failure to abide by such rules and regulations may
result in a citation and be punished by a fine to be determined by the
municipal court. (Ord. 2012-05, 4-3-2012)
      10.   Roof Signs: Roof signs as defined herein.
      11.   Sound Producing Signs: Signs which produce audible noise or sounds.
      12.   Emitting Signs: Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or
odor.
      13.   Snipe Signs: Snipe signs as defined herein.
      14.   Rotating Signs: Rotating signs or signs utilizing a strobe light(s)
are prohibited. (Ord. 2011-07, 6-7-2011)
10-15-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2011-08, 6-7-2011)
10-15-8: SIGN DISTRICTS:
   A.   Signs Permitted: Except as otherwise provided, signs are permitted in
all zoning districts as accessory uses, in accordance with the provisions
contained in this title. The type of signs permitted within a zone, the number,
placement, area, and use of signs in various zoning districts of the city are
contained in the table, "Specific Regulations By Sign District", of this
section.
   B.   Residential Sign Districts: Residential sign district includes any
parcels located within the incorporated city limits designated AA, A, B, C, F-
1, F-2, T and RR. See table "Specific Regulations By Sign District", of this
section.
   C.   Sign District AA And RR: No sign shall be erected or structurally
altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the
following uses:
      1.   Address numbers shall be placed on a building for the purpose of
identifying the address or location. Premises identification shall meet the
requirements of this code and the international building code.
      2.   All signs shall attach flush with the wall of the building.
   D.   Sign Districts A, B, C, And T: No sign shall be erected or structurally
altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the
following uses:
      1.   All signs allowed in AA or RR;
      2.   Address numbers shall be placed on a building for the purpose of
identifying the address or location. Premises identification shall meet the
requirements of this code and the international building code;
      3.   Group daycare homes (GDCH) and group daycare centers (GDCC) are
subject to the following conditions: All signs must come before the planning
and zoning board for approval.
   E.   Sign Districts F-1 And F-2:
      1.   Signs shall only be located at the entrance into the mobile home
park.
   SPECIFIC REGULATIONS BY SIGN DISTRICT
 
Sign Type Category  Maximum Maximum Area Maximum Area Maximum Height Notes
          Permitted Number  By Zone Lot  Per Face     And Length
Residential Sign Districts:
   AA, RR
  Attached     Residential    1 per       12 sq.
 wall         identification premises    ft.      6 sq. ft.       
               sign
             Nonresidential 1 per       6 sq.    3 sq. ft.      (e)(f)
                              premises    ft.
                                                                   All signs
               Home                                                must be
             occupation/    1 per lot   300 sq.  150 sq.        approved by
               family daycare             in.      in.             planning and
                                                                   zoning board
                                                                   (e)
   A, B, C, And T
  Attached     Residential    1 per       12 sq.
 wall         identification premises    ft.      6 sq. ft. 5 ft.  
               sign
  Attached     Residential    1 per
 wall,        complex        primary     32 sq.   16 sq.    6 ft. (e)
  freestanding identification street      ft.      ft.
                              access
                                                                   All signs
                                                                   within a
                                                                   "residential
 Attached     Home           1 per lot   300 sq.  150 sq.        A zone" must
  wall         occupation                 in.      in.             be approved
                                                                   by planning
                                                                   and zoning
                                                                   board(e)
 Freestanding Construction   2 per       64 sq.   32 sq.    6 ft. (e)
                              premises    ft.      ft.
             Nonresidential 1 per       6 sq.                  (e)
                              premises    ft.
               Group daycare                                       All signs
               home, group                                         must be
  Attached     daycare                    32 sq.   16 sq.          approved by
 wall         centers,       1 per lot   ft.      ft.            planning and
               preschools,                                         zoning board
               and group                                           (e)
               homes
F-1/F-2 Mobile Home/Mobile Home Park
                                          32 sq.
                                          ft. per
                              2 per       entrance 16 sq.
 Freestanding Identification mobile home of       ft.       6 ft. (e)
                              park        mobile
                                          home
                                          park
             Nonresidential 1 per       6 sq.                  (e)
                              premises    ft.
                                                                   All signs
                                                                   must be
 Attached     Home           1 per lot   300 sq.  150 sq.        approved by
  wall         occupation                 in.      in.             planning and
                                                                   zoning board
                                                                   (e)
All Sign Districts:
  Freestanding                                                     Must be
 attached     Sponsor signs                                   approved by
                                                                   city council
                              1 sign per
                              platted
                              subdivision 32 sq.   16 sq.
 Freestanding Real estate    or property ft.      ft.       6 ft.  
                              entrance.
                              Maximum of
                              2
                              1 sign per
                              platted
               Subdivision    subdivision 48 sq.   24 sq.
             signs          or property ft.      ft.       6 ft. (e)(f)(h)
                              entrance.
                              Maximum of
                              2
                                                                   All signage
               Golf course/                                        must be
             recreational                                    approved by
               facilities                                          planning and
                                                                   zoning board
 
Notes:
    (a)    No sign shall be attached to a building at a height above the third
story unless the business which the sign advertises is located above the third
story, in which case the sign may be on the same story as the business.
    (b)    In no event shall a roof sign be permitted.
    (c)    In no case shall the height of a freestanding sign exceed 25 feet.
    (d)    Wall signs shall not extend above the roofline or be secured to the
top of a parapet wall.
    (e)    No internal illumination.
    (f)    Illuminated signs will not be allowed in residential districts
unless authorized by planning, zoning and adjustment board.
    (g)    Additional provision may apply in the zoning districts. See
applicable district provisions.
    (h)    Cannot be placed within a utility easement or right of way.
(Ord. 2011-09, 6-7-2011)
10-15-9: COMMERCIAL SIGN DISTRICTS:
   A.   D-1 Limited Business Sign District:
      1.   D-1 Sign District Defined: D-1 limited business sign district
includes any parcel located within the incorporated city limits that is
designated as a D-1 zone shown on the zoning map.
      2.   Use: No sign shall be erected or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the following uses:
         a.   Any sign allowed in the downtown business sign district is
permitted in the D-1 sign district.
         b.   See the table, "Specific Regulations By Sign District", of this
section.
      3.   Commercial Signs: All commercial signs shall attach flush with the
wall of the building.
      4.   Permitted Temporary/Seasonal Signs:
         a.   A sign displayed on an interim, short term basis. Examples
include special business sales, new business openings, special events, and
limited time sales or offers for goods, products, services, or facilities
located on premises. A temporary sign is differentiated from a permanent sign
in that a permanent sign is attached to a building or structure or affixed in
the ground. A temporary sign is mobile and freestanding. A temporary use shall
not be displayed for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. Any
electrical temporary sign shall comply with all city electrical codes.
      5.   Banners:
         a.   Periodic Display Of Banners And Advertising Flags: Banners and
advertising flags are permitted subject to these regulations:
            (1)   Banners must be displayed as a wall sign or attached to
railings, and must be securely fastened so that it may not be blown down, in
whole or in part. Any other location for display of a banner or advertising
flag must be approved through the planning, zoning and adjustment board.
            (2)   Advertising flags must be securely fastened.
            (3)   Banners and advertising flags must be of professional quality
construction and appearance pursuant to the definition in section
10-15-2 of this chapter.
            (4)   If the banner/advertising flag becomes damaged or detached,
the banner or flag must be removed or repaired within forty eight (48) hours.
            (5)   Banners shall be subject to the time limits for temporary/
seasonal signs described above.
   B.   D-2 General Business Sign District:
      1.   D-2 Sign District Defined: D-2 general business sign district
includes any parcel located within the incorporated city limits that is
designated as a D-2 zone shown on the zoning map, except for signage located
within the downtown business sign district.
      2.   Use: No sign shall be erected or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provide herein, except for one or more of the following uses:
         a.   Signs Allowed: Any sign allowed in the downtown business sign
district and the D-1 sign district is permitted in a D-2 sign district.
         b.   Inflatable Signs: Where allowed, individual businesses may use
inflatable signs. Inflatable signs may be singular or multiple, tethered or
ground mounted provided that the total aggregate square footage does not exceed
one hundred fifty (150) square feet. No individual inflatable sign shall exceed
twenty feet (20') in length. For the purpose of calculating total square
footage of inflatable signs, the calculation shall be based on the length and
width measurement of a cross section through the center of the inflatable sign.
Inflatable signs may not be used for off premises advertising. Businesses
seeking to use inflatable signs must provide design and construction details to
demonstrate compliance with city wind load requirements, how the electricity
will be supplied to the inflatable, and to demonstrate that anchoring
mechanisms will not present a danger to the public. All permits for inflatable
signs will provide a site plan showing existing structures, power poles, trees,
street and pedestrian paths, and all other features which may be impacted by
the inflatable.
            (1)   Tethered Inflatable Sign: The maximum altitude at which a
tethered inflatable sign can be flown is twenty feet (20'), as measured from
the ground immediately beneath the anchor point to the point of connection at
the top of the tethered inflatable sign. No tethered inflatable sign can be
flown or anchored in any manner that presents a safety hazard or otherwise
endangers the public. No minimum setback from property line is required for the
anchor point; however no portion of the tether or the inflatable sign shall be
allowed to encroach onto the right of way of streets and pedestrian pathways,
and on the air space of adjoining public or private property lines.
            (2)   Ground Mounted Inflatable Signs: The maximum height of a
ground anchored inflatable sign shall be twenty feet (20'). The sign shall be
located at least ten feet (10') from all property lines and ten feet (10') from
a driveway or parking area access lane. On a corner lot, no signs shall be
located within the required site triangle. All wires shall be within the
property lines. No minimum setback from property lines is required for the
anchor point; however no portion of the tether or the inflatable sign shall
encroach onto the right of way of streets and pedestrian pathways, and on the
air space of adjoining public or private property lines.
   C.   D-3 Open Business/Light Industrial, D-4 High Tech/Data Processing/Light
Manufacturing, And E Industrial Sign Districts:
      1.   D-3, D-4 And E Sign Districts Defined: D-3 open business/light
industrial, D-4 high tech/data processing/light manufacturing, and E industrial
sign districts include any parcel located within the incorporated city limits
that is designated D-3, D-4, and E zone as shown on the zoning map.
      2.   Use: No sign shall be erected or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the following uses:
         a.   Signs Allowed: Any sign allowed in D-2 general business sign
district is permitted in D-3 open business/light industrial, D-4 high tech/data
processing/light manufacturing, and E industrial sign districts.
         b.   Billboards: Billboards as defined in subsection 10-15-2B of this
chapter are allowed within the corporate limits of the city subject to the
following conditions and requirements being met:
            (1)   Billboards shall not be allowed, except in D-3, and E sign
districts, unless erected by the city for the purpose of directing the public
to and/or identifying the Cody downtown business area.
            (2)   Billboards shall not be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the following intersections: Big Horn Avenue and 16th Street; 17th
Street and Sheridan Avenue; 8th Street and Yellowstone Avenue; Yellowstone and
West Yellowstone Avenues and South Fork Road.
            (3)   All billboard permit applications shall be accompanied by a
legal lease between the property owner and the billboard company. The lease
shall address the removal of the billboard (both the sign itself and the
support structure for the billboard) at the termination of the lease. A copy of
all updates or renewals of the lease must be given to the city for their files.
Billboard permit applications must also be accompanied by a bond suitable in
value to cover the removal of all portions of the sign (the sign itself and the
support structure) at the end of the lease.
            (4)   Illumination of billboards shall be provided by shielded
lights anchored at the bottom of the sign and directed at the face of the sign
without spilling off the sign.
            (5)   See the table, "Specific Regulations By Sign District", of
this section for billboard size requirements.
   D.   Planned Unit Development Sign District:
      1.   Planned unit development sign district includes any parcel located
within the incorporated city limits that is designated as a planned unit
development zone shown on the zoning map, except for signage located within the
downtown business sign district.
      2.   A planned unit development (PUD) sign district is developed as a
single entity under a plan which may provide a variety of land uses, housing
types and densities, and which provides design characteristics in addition to
those ordinarily allowed by right or condition in the zoning district in which
it is located. It is intended that each PUD will be a separate development,
having different design characteristics for the uses and improvements, based
upon a particular site situation. Commercial establishments within planned unit
developments where the underlying zoning is residential shall be permitted
signage as if the lot were in D-2 general business sign district.
      3.   All signage will be approved through the planned unit development
process.
   E.   Downtown Business Sign District: The downtown business sign district is
located one-half (1/2) block north of Sheridan Avenue up to and including the
alley between Sheridan and Rumsey and one-half (1/2) block south of Sheridan
Avenue up to and including the alley between Sheridan and Beck Avenue, and from
the east side of 9th Street (including those lots and buildings on the east
side of 9th Street), to the west side of 16th Street (including those lots and
buildings on the west side of 16th Street).
      1.   Uses: No sign shall be erected or structurally altered, unless
otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the following uses:
         a.   Any sign allowed in D-1 limited business is permitted in the
downtown business sign district.
      2.   Allowable Increase In Area: The planning, zoning and adjustment
board may allow an increase in the sign area up to one hundred percent (100%)
in such instances where there are two (2) separate business entrances not
visible from one location or when the multiple use facility is accessible from
two (2) or more streets. No more than one sign per business may be visible on
any building from any one location. This provision applies to all signs unless
specifically excluded elsewhere in this chapter.
   F.   Hospitals And Urgent Care Clinics Sign District: The hospitals and
urgent care clinics are unique in nature and require separate signage within
the city. There is a need for flexibility for these facilities due to the
services these facilities provide. The intent of this section is to have clear
and visible signage for the health and safety of the community. Regardless of
which zoning district hospitals and urgent care clinics are located, such uses
shall be permitted for the following signs:
      1.   Emergency and trauma center signs shall not require a permit.
      2.   The areas of the facility that face or are next to a residential
neighborhood will not be allowed to have illuminated signage. Areas that are
facing or within a commercial district will be allowed to have illuminated
signage.
      3.   All signage will be approved through the planning, zoning and
adjustment board.
   G.   Churches, Museums, And Libraries Sign Districts: Regardless of the sign
district in which a church, museum, public library or fraternal organization is
located, such uses shall be permitted for the following signs:
      1.   Illuminated signage will be allowed but with conditions as follows:
         a.   The signage can only be illuminated during nighttime functions,
and the lights cannot be direct as to flood on to residential property if the
facility is next to a residential neighborhood.
         b.   All illuminated signs for churches, museums, schools and
fraternal organizations shall be approved by the planning, zoning and
adjustment board. (Ord. 2011-10, 6-7-2011)
   SPECIFIC REGULATIONS BY SIGN DISTRICT
 
          Category  Maximum Maximum Area Maximum Area Maximum    Maximum
Sign Type Permitted Number  Per Face     By Zone Lot  Height And Length  Notes
                                                      Length
Commercial Sign Districts:
   D-1 Limited Business Sign District
                              1 per street  32 sq.                                  (c)(e)(f)
 Freestanding Identification frontage, 1   ft.      50 sq. ft.  10 ft.            (k)
                              maximum
                              Attached: 1
                              per face of
                              storefront, 1
  Attached                    per street    32 sq.                                  (a)(b)(d)
 wall         Business       frontage, not ft.      32 sq. ft.                   (e)(f)(g)
                              to exceed 2                                           (j)(k)
                              signs per
                              establishment
                              maximum
                                                                 Projecting
                                                                 signs
                                                                 shall be
                                                                 not less
                                                                 than 8
                              Maximum 2                          feet from
  Marquee,                    additional                         travelway
  projecting                  hanging       32 sq.               to the
 signs,                     panels per    ft.      32 sq. ft.  bottom of         (e)(f)(g)
  awning,                     projecting                         sign and
  suspended                   sign                               the edge
                                                                 of the
                                                                 sign shall
                                                                 be at
                                                                 least 2
                                                                 feet back
                                                                 from curb
 Freestanding Construction   1 per                 32 sq. ft.  6 ft.             (e)(f)(g)
                              premises
                                                     6 sq. ft.
                                                     for                            Must be
 Real estate  Temporary sign 1 per street  16 sq.   residential 6 ft.             placed on
                              frontage      ft.      lots, 32                       the
                                                     sq. ft. for                    property(i)
                                                     subdivision
  Temporary                                 32 sq.
 signs/       Temporary sign              ft.                                   
  banners
                                                                                    Not allowed
 Inflatable   Temporary sign                                                  within this
                                                                                    district
   D-2 General Business Sign District
 Freestanding Identification              300 sq.  600 sq. ft. 25 ft.            (g)(h)
                                            ft.
 Attached     Business                    150 sq.  300 sq. ft.                   
  wall                                      ft.
                                                                 Projecting
                                                                 signs
                                                                 shall be
                                                                 not less
                                                                 than 8
                                                                 feet from
  Marquee,                                                       travelway
  projecting                                25 sq.               to the             (a)(b)(d)
 signs,                                  ft.      50 sq. ft.  bottom of         (g)(k)
  awning,                                                        sign and
  suspended                                                      the edge
                                                                 of the
                                                                 sign shall
                                                                 be at
                                                                 least 2
                                                                 feet back
                                                                 from curb
  Attached     Residential    Attached: 1
 wall         identification per each              1 sq. ft.   5 ft.              
               sign           dwelling
                              Attached: 2
                              per face of
                              building, 1
  Attached     Residential    per entrance                                          Residential
 wall,        complex        into complex,         32 sq. ft.  18 ft.            development
  freestanding identification not to exceed                                         (h)
                              4 signs per
                              establishment
                              maximum
 Freestanding Construction                32 sq.   64 sq. ft.  10 ft.             
                                            ft.
                                                                                    For 3 or
                                                                                    more
                                                                                    businesses
             Joint                       40 sq.   80 sq. ft.  8 ft.             will have
               directory                    ft.      maximum                        to put
                                                                                    together a
                                                                                    master sign
                                                                                    program
                                                     6 sq. ft.
                                                     for                            Must be
 Real estate  Temporary sign 1 per street  16 sq.   residential 6 ft.             placed on
                              frontage      ft.      lots, 32                       the
                                                     sq. ft. for                    property(i)
                                                     subdivision
             Nonresidential                      6 sq. ft.                     
  Temporary                                 32 sq.
 signs/       Temporary sign              ft.                                   
  banners
                                                                                    See this
  Inflatable/                                                                       section for
 flags        Temporary sign                      150 sq. ft. 20 ft.            specific
                                                                                    regulations
                                                                                    (h)
   D-3 Open Business/Light Industrial, D-4 High Tech/Data Processing/Light Manufacturing, And E
Industrial Sign Districts
 Freestanding Identification              300 sq.  600 sq. ft. 25 ft.            (h)
                                            ft.
 Attached     Business                    150 sq.  300 sq. ft.                   
  wall                                      ft.
  Marquee,                                                       25 ft.
  projecting                                25 sq.               clear 8            (a)(b)(d)
 signs,                                  ft.      50 sq. ft.  ft. above         (g)(k)
  awning,                                                        grade
  suspended
                                                                                    For 3 or
                              2 per                                                 more
                              project,                                              businesses
             Joint          group of      40 sq.   80 sq. ft.  8 ft.             will have
               directory      businesses,   ft.                                     to put
                              or shopping                                           together a
                              center                                                master sign
                                                                                    program
                                                                                    Spacing
                                                                                    shall be at
                                                                                    least 1,000
                                                                 25 ft. in          ft. apart
                                                                 height is          from any
                                                                 maximum,           other
                                                                 the bottom 60 ft.  billboard
             Billboards                  300 sq.  600 sq. ft. may not be in      on the same
                                            ft.                  less than  length  side of the
                                                                 10 ft.     maximum street.
                                                                 from the           Billboards
                                                                 ground             will not be
                                                                                    allowed in
                                                                                    a D-
                                                                                    4 zoning
                                                                                    district(h)
  Temporary                                 32 sq.
 signs/       Temporary sign              ft.                                   
  banners
                                                     6 sq. ft.
                                                     for                            Must be
 Real estate  Temporary sign 1 per street  16 sq.   residential 6 ft.             placed on
                              frontage      ft.      lots, 32                       the
                                                     sq. ft. for                    property(i)
                                                     subdivision
                                                                                    See this
  Inflatable/                                                                       section for
 flags        Temporary sign                      150 sq. ft. 20 ft.            specific
                                                                                    regulations
                                                                                    (h)
 Freestanding Construction                32 sq.   64 sq. ft.  10 ft.             
                                            ft.
PUD Planned Unit Development Sign District
   All signs in a planned unit development will be done through the planned unit development
process.
                              2 per zone             96 sq. ft.
 Freestanding Temporary      lot or        48 sq.   maximum for 6 ft.              
               construction   subdivision   ft.      2 street
                                                     frontages
Downtown Business Sign District
 Freestanding Identification 1 per         240 sq.  480 sq. ft. 25 ft.            (g)
                              premises      ft.
                              Attached: 1
                              per face of
                              storefront, 1 1.5 x
  Attached                    per street    the      1.5 x the                      (a)(b)(d)
 wall         Business       frontage, not linear   linear feet                  (g)(j)(k)
                              to exceed 2   feet of  of frontage
                              signs per     frontage
                              establishment
                              maximum
                                                                 Projecting
                                                                 signs
                                                                 shall be
                                                                 not less           (a)(b)(d)
                                                                 than 8             (g) may
                              Maximum 2                          feet from          include a
  Marquee,                    additional                         travelway          maximum of
  projecting                  hanging       25 sq.               to the             2
 signs,                     panels per    ft.      50 sq. ft.  bottom of         additional
  awning,                     projecting                         sign and           suspended
  suspended                   sign                               the edge           signs per
                                                                 of the             projecting
                                                                 sign shall         sign
                                                                 be at
                                                                 least 2
                                                                 feet back
                                                                 from curb
                                            32 sq.
 Banners      Temporary sign              ft. per                               
                                            sign
                                            face
 Construction Temporary sign 1 per                 32 sq. ft.  6 ft.              
  signs                       premises               maximum
                                                     6 sq. ft.
                                                     for                            Must be
 Real estate  Temporary sign 1 per street  16 sq.   residential 6 ft.             placed on
                              frontage      ft.      lots, 32                       the
                                                     sq. ft. for                    property(i)
                                                     subdivision
                                                                                    Not allowed
 Inflatable   Temporary sign                                                  within this
                                                                                    district
E Zoning District
 Freestanding Identification              550 sq.  700 sq. ft. 25 ft.            (h)
                                            ft.
 Attached     Business                    150 sq.  300 sq. ft.                   
  wall                                      ft.
  Marquee,                                                       25 ft.
  projecting                                25 sq.               clear 8            (a)(b)(d)
 signs,                                  ft.      50 sq. ft.  ft. above         (g)(k)
  awning,                                                        grade
  suspended
                                                                                    For 3 or
                              2 per                                                 more
                              project,                                              businesses
             Joint          group of      40 sq.   80 sq. ft.  8 ft.             will have
               directory      businesses,   ft.                                     to put
                              or shopping                                           together a
                              center                                                master sign
                                                                                    program
  Temporary                                 32 sq.
 signs/       Temporary sign              ft.                                   
  banners
                                                                                    See this
  Inflatable/                                                                       section for
 flags        Temporary sign                      150 sq. ft. 20 ft.            specific
                                                                                    regulations
                                                                                    (h)
                                                                                    Spacing
                                                                                    shall be at
                                                                                    least 1,000
                                                                 25 ft. in          ft. apart
                                                                 height is          from any
                                                                 maximum            other
                                                                 the bottom 60 ft.  billboard
             Billboards                  300 sq.  600 sq. ft. may not be in      on the same
                                            ft.                  less than  length  side of the
                                                                 10 ft.     maximum street.
                                                                 from the           Billboards
                                                                 ground             will not be
                                                                                    allowed in
                                                                                    a D-
                                                                                    4 zoning
                                                                                    district(h)
 Freestanding Construction                32 sq.   64 sq. ft.  10 ft.             
                                            ft.
                                                     6 sq. ft.
                                                     for                            Must be
 Real estate  Temporary sign 1 per street  16 sq.   residential 6 ft.             placed on
                              frontage      ft.      lots, 32                       the
                                                     sq. ft. for                    property(i)
                                                     subdivision
Hospital-Urgent Care Clinics
                                                                                    All signage
                                                                                    must be
  Attached                                                                          approved
 wall         Identification                                                  through
                                                                                    planning
                                                                                    and zoning
                                                                                    board
                                                                                    All signage
                                                                                    must be
  Freestanding                                                                      approved
 (monument)   Identification                                                  through
                                                                                    planning
                                                                                    and zoning
                                                                                    board
                                                                                    All signage
  Marquee,                                                                          must be
  projecting                                                                        approved
 signs,                                                                      through
  awning,                                                                           planning
  suspended                                                                         and zoning
                                                                                    board
Churches, Museums, And Libraries
                                                                                    All signage
                                                                                    must be
  Attached                                                                          approved
 wall         Identification                                                  through
                                                                                    planning
                                                                                    and zoning
                                                                                    board
                                                                                    All signage
                                                                                    must be
  Freestanding                                                                      approved
 (monument)   Identification                                                  through
                                                                                    planning
                                                                                    and zoning
                                                                                    board
                                                                                    All signage
                                                                                    must be
                                                                                    approved
 Bulletin                                                                    through
                                                                                    planning
                                                                                    and zoning
                                                                                    board
All Zones
                                                                                    Must be
 Freestanding Sponsor signs  No limit      No limit No limit    No limit          approved by
  attached                                                                          city
                                                                                    council
                              1 per platted
 Freestanding Real estate    subdivision   16 sq.   32 sq. ft.  6 ft.             (f)(e)(g)
                              or property   ft.                                     (i)
                              entrance
 
Notes:
    (a)    No sign shall be attached to a building at a height above the third
story unless the business which the sign advertises is located above the third
story, in which case the sign may be on the same story as the business.
    (b)    In no event shall a roof sign be permitted.
    (c)    In no case shall the height of a freestanding sign exceed 25 feet.
    (d)    Wall signs shall not extend above the roofline or be secured to the
top of a parapet wall.
    (e)    No internal illumination.
    (f)    Illuminated signs will not be allowed in residential districts
unless authorized by planning, zoning and adjustment board.
    (g)    All signs must be permitted by WYDOT except all city side streets.
    (h)    Signs located within the airport overlay zone will need to meet with
the airport board for height restrictions.
    (i)    Cannot be placed within a utility easement or right of way.
    (j)    Multiple tenant buildings. The total permitted attached sign area
shall be allocated to tenants based on the building frontage of each individual
tenant.
    (k)    Additional provision may apply in the zoning districts. See
applicable district provisions.
    (l)    An on premises freestanding sign is permitted only at a primary
entrance, with a minimum separation of 200 feet between any 2 permitted on
premises signs on the lot.
(Ord. 2011-10, 6-7-2011; amd. Ord. 2011-26, 11-15-2011)
10-15-10: ILLEGAL, NONCONFORMING AND ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   General: In order to achieve the general purpose and objectives of this
chapter as specified in section
10-15-1 of this chapter, it is necessary to provide for the removal of signs
which are illegal, nonconforming and abandoned. The following subsections
detail the method of correction and/or disposition required.
   B.   Illegal Signs; Disposition: Any illegal sign shall be removed from the
premises upon which it is located within thirty (30) days of delivery of a
written notice of violation, and shall not be installed on the premises or
elsewhere in the city until a sign plan review has been approved and a building
permit is issued. The written notice shall be delivered:
      1.   In person to either the property owner or occupant of the property
where the sign is located; or
      2.   By certified mail, return receipt requested to either the owner or
occupant of the property where the sign is located; or
      3.   By leaving a copy of the notice with an individual over the age of
eighteen (18) at the property where the sign is located, or at the residence or
regular place of business of the owner or person in possession of the premises.
      4.   If property is unoccupied and the owner cannot with reasonable
diligence be ascertained or located, then the planning department shall cause a
copy of the notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks, and shall further cause a
copy of the aforesaid notice to be posted on the property.
The written notice shall contain the physical address or legal description of
the property where the sign is located; a description of the violation or
violations, including reference to the applicable sections of this chapter; and
shall state that failure to remove or correct the sign or signs within thirty
(30) days may result in removal of the sign or signs by the city at the expense
of the property owner and/or occupant, and may also result in a citation to
municipal court and a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   C.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Preexisting Signs: Signs already in existence and displayed prior to
July 1, 2011, and which do not conform to the regulations prescribed herein may
be allowed to remain so long as they are maintained and repaired pursuant to
subsection 10-15-3A3 of this chapter. Such signs may be modified, repaired and
maintained so long as modifications, repairs or maintenance do not increase the
degree of nonconformance.
      2.   Repair: When fifty percent (50%) or more of a nonconforming sign is
repaired, repainted, replaced or altered such repairs shall be made to conform
to the requirements of this chapter at the time of such alteration or repair,
and the property owner or person displaying such sign shall apply for a sign
permit.
      3.   Replacement: A permit to replace a sign shall not be required if a
preexisting sign (as defined herein) suffers substantial damage which requires
the complete replacement of the sign, and such damage is due to an act of God,
or other unforeseeable acts not the fault of the property owner or the person
displaying the sign.
   D.   Abandoned Signs; Disposition: Abandoned signs shall be removed by the
owner of the premises on which the sign is located. Upon failure of the owner
to remove an abandoned sign, the planning department or building official shall
proceed as described in section
10-15-11 of this chapter.
   E.   Dangerous Or Defective Signs; Disposition: Any dangerous or defective
sign shall be repaired or removed by the owner of the premises or the owner of
the sign. Upon failure of the owners to repair or remove a dangerous or
defective sign, the planning department or building official shall proceed as
described in section
10-15-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-11, 6-7-2011)
10-15-11: REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Sign Removal: Any illegal, nonconforming, abandoned, dangerous or
defective sign which is not removed from the premises by the sign owner, user,
or property owner shall be subject to removal by the city in accordance with
the provisions and procedures detailed in this section. Any person who fails to
comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Removal By The City:
         a.   Upon failure of the sign owner, user, or property owner to comply
with a written notice to remove a sign, the planning department or building
official is hereby authorized to cause such illegal, nonconforming, abandoned,
dangerous, or materially, electrically or structurally defective sign to be
removed.
         b.   Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to
commence the date the notice is delivered or if by publication, then from the
date of last publication.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the city
administrator may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign
without notice.
      3.   Disposal Of Signs; Costs:
         a.   Any sign removed by the city pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any
manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of the removal of the sign by
the city shall be considered a debt owed to the city by the owner of the sign
and the owner of the premises, and may be recovered in an appropriate court
action by the city. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental
expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal.
         b.   If it shall be necessary for the city to remove a sign pursuant
to the provisions hereof, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any
material derived in the aforesaid removal, the city may sell the same at
private or public sale at the best price obtainable and shall keep an
accounting of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to
offset the costs of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner
and shall be the responsibility of the sign owner or property owner. Should the
proceeds exceed the costs, the excess shall be paid to the owner of the
premises from which the sign is removed, or to the owner of said sign, whenever
claim therefor is established.
      4.   Failure To Remove: Failure to remove any illegal, nonconforming,
abandoned, dangerous or defective sign and subsequent failure by the planning
department or building official to give notice to the business, user or
property owner of the provisions of this section, shall not be deemed or
constitute a waiver of any violations of this chapter, nor shall such an action
be deemed to constitute a determination that any such sign is legal, in
conformity with this chapter, or to be given any special status. (Ord. 2011-12,
6-7-2011)
10-15-12: REVIEW AND APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Interpretation Of Sign Regulations: When it is required that an
interpretation be given to the standards and regulations specified in this
chapter, said interpretation shall be made by the planning, zoning and
adjustment board, and shall remain final unless appealed to and overruled by
the city council.
   B.   Deviation, Waiver, Or Vary From The Sign Chapter: When an applicant
wants to deviate or vary from the standards contained in this chapter, the
applicant shall apply for a special exemption pursuant to section
10-14-2 of this title. (Ord. 2011-13, 6-7-2011)
10-15-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Unlawful: The violation of or failure to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or the erection, use or display of any sign not
in compliance with all the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be
declared to be a misdemeanor, punishable in the city of Cody municipal court by
a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with
any and all terms and conditions that may be attached to the granting of any
sign permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or failure to abide by
the terms and provisions of this code, shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of the permit by the city planner or building official. (Ord. 2011-
14, 6-7-2011)
CHAPTER 16
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
10-16-1: Intent
10-16-2: Applicability
10-16-3: Parking Facilities Required
10-16-4: Plan Review
10-16-5: Location And Zoning Requirements
10-16-6: Joint Parking Facilities, Multiple Or Mixed Uses
10-16-7: Off Site Parking
10-16-8: Parking Lot Design And Construction Standards
10-16-9: Number Of Spaces Required
10-16-10: Dimensional Standards For Off Street Parking
10-16-11: Off Street Loading Facilities
10-16-12: Availability Of Required Parking
10-16-13: Variances
10-16-1: INTENT:
This chapter is intended to regulate the design, construction, use, and
maintenance of public and private off street parking facilities, so as to
provide for the parking needs in the community in an efficient, coordinated,
and safe manner. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-2: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter apply to all off street parking within the
city, whether required or voluntarily provided, except as follows:
Within the downtown parking district, the use of buildings and land shall be
exempt from providing up to one hundred (100) off street parking spaces
otherwise required by this chapter. Uses in the downtown parking district that
exceed this one hundred (100) space threshold shall provide off street parking
in the amount required in excess of one hundred (100) spaces.
All construction requirements of this chapter, including dimensional standards
and drainage control, remain applicable to off street parking constructed in
the downtown parking district after adoption of this chapter.
The downtown parking district includes all land within the downtown
architectural district described in section
9-2-2 of this code. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-3: PARKING FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Off street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with this chapter
for any building or use hereafter established, enlarged, increased in capacity,
replaced, or reconstructed as follows:
   A.   For new buildings and uses, off street parking facilities shall be
provided as required by this chapter based on the proposed use and capacity of
the building.
   B.   Any building or use that is hereafter enlarged, or increased in
capacity through physical expansion or conversion of an area to a use with an
increased parking demand (e.g., conversion of storage to commercial floor
space, addition of dwelling units, utilization of vacant land for business
purposes), shall provide parking as required for the increase in area or
capacity.
   C.   Any building or use that is replaced or reconstructed in an amount
greater than seventy five percent (75%) of the area or assessed value of the
building, within any five (5) year time period, shall provide parking for the
entire building in accordance with the requirements of this chapter for new
buildings and uses. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-4: PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Plan Submittal: Before the granting of a development or building permit
for any building or use requiring parking pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant shall present satisfactory plans to the community development
department showing how all parking and loading facilities will be provided as
required by this chapter. A determination that the parking plan meets the
requirements of this title and other city ordinances shall be obtained before
issuance of a building permit for the project. If site plan review by the
planning, zoning and adjustment board (planning and zoning board) is required,
this determination is to be made by the planning and zoning board in
conjunction with the site plan review. For projects not requiring planning and
zoning board site plan review, administrative approval of the parking plan by
the city engineer and city planner, or their designee, is sufficient, provided
no variance or special exemption to the parking standards is requested.
Parking facilities that are to be reconstructed or reconfigured independent of
any building permit or other development approval shall be subject to the
dimensional and construction standards of this chapter unless the planning and
zoning board determines that physical conditions peculiar to the site prevent
otherwise. New parking facilities independent of any other development approval
shall likewise require plan review. Plans for reconstructed, reconfigured or
new parking facilities shall be submitted for review as described in the
previous paragraph.
   B.   Plan Contents: The parking plan shall be drawn to a standard
dimensional scale and show all parking facilities, adjacent streets, driveway
locations and widths, surfacing material(s), and as applicable, internal
traffic circulation, ADA parking and loading details, proposed drainage,
parking lot lighting locations and fixture details, entrance gates, fencing or
screening methods, wheel stops/curbing, loading docks/bays, and other features
proposed or necessary to address site specific safety issues.
   C.   Plan Compliance: Parking improvements are to be installed and completed
as shown on the approved plans prior to occupancy of the building, structure or
use served by the parking facilities; provided, a performance bond in the
amount of the remaining value of construction shall be provided to postpone
installation of pavement or concrete work for up to one hundred fifty (150)
days when cold weather precludes such work. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-5: LOCATION AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Except as specified in section
10-16-7 of this chapter, required off street parking facilities shall be on the
same property as the building or use they serve, and the zoning of the parking
facilities shall either be in the same zoning district, a zoning district that
also permits the use served, or a zone that permits public parking facilities
(e.g., parking for a commercial use is not permitted in areas zoned
residential, parking for multi-family development is not permitted in areas
zoned single-family residential, parking for an industrial use is not permitted
in an area zoned residential or neighborhood commercial, etc.). (Ord. 2013-04,
3-5-2013)
10-16-6: JOINT PARKING FACILITIES, MULTIPLE OR MIXED USES:
In the case of joint parking facilities that will serve multiple or mixed uses,
the number of off street parking spaces required shall be the sum of the
requirements for the individual uses computed separately, unless the planning
and zoning board authorizes otherwise based on reliable data, such as a parking
demand study prepared by a qualified parking consultant or engineer that
justifies a reduced number. Site specific characteristics, such as offset peak
parking times/days, are to be considered when determining whether a reduction
in the number of spaces is justified for joint parking facilities. (Ord. 2013-
04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-7: OFF SITE PARKING:
The planning and zoning board may authorize parking facilities located on
neighboring private property to qualify as required off street parking under
the following conditions:
   A.   The parking spaces are not required for another building, structure or
use, unless joint parking is allowed pursuant to section
10-16-6 of this chapter;
   B.   The nearest point of the parking lot is within the following distances,
as measured along the pedestrian's path of travel, from the building served:
      1.   One hundred feet (100') for accessory apartments, single- family
dwellings, and two-family dwellings;
      2.   Two hundred feet (200') for multiple-family dwellings, hotels,
motels, and lodging facilities;
      3.   Three hundred feet (300') for hospitals, medical offices, homes for
the aged, and clubs/fraternal orders; and
      4.   Five hundred feet (500') for uses not otherwise specified above.
   C.   A legally binding long term agreement, typically a minimum of ten (10)
years, for the off site parking, in a form and with conditions acceptable to
the city planner, city attorney and planning and zoning board, is entered into
between the affected property owner(s) and recorded in the office of the county
recorder. An agreement shall be required regardless of whether the neighboring
property is owned by a different or same property owner as the use requiring
the parking.
   D.   If the off site parking is no longer available for any reason,
including, but not limited to, expiration or termination of the parking
agreement, then the certificate of occupancy may be revoked pursuant to section
10-16-12 of this chapter, and the property owner shall be subject to such other
penalties as provided in this title. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-8: PARKING LOT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
Off street parking facilities shall be designed and constructed to the
following standards:
   A.   Ingress, Egress, Internal Circulation: The parking facilities must have
adequate ingress, egress, and internal circulation and shall provide the number
of off street spaces required under section
10-16-9 of this chapter, as determined by the reviewing official specified by
subsection 10-16-4A of this chapter.
   B.   Outside Rights Of Way And Sight Triangles: All off street parking
spaces must be entirely outside of the public street right of way and required
sight distance triangles.
   C.   ADA Requirements: As required by the international building code,
handicap accessible (ADA) parking space(s), loading areas, and travelways from
the ADA space to the building, shall be provided in accordance with adopted ADA
standards. Required ADA parking spaces count toward the number of spaces
required by section
10-16-9 of this chapter.
   D.   Entrances/Exits: The city engineer shall determine and specify the
locations, widths, and designs of all approaches to and from all city streets.
The parking lot designer and city engineer shall consider and apply appropriate
access management techniques consistent with professional engineering
practices, such as those found in the "Access Management Manual" (2003 or
current edition, transportation research board), to preserve street capacity,
minimize safety issues, and minimize future costs to the city. The access
management requirements of the city engineer shall be incorporated in the
parking lot/access design; provided, any appeal to such requirements from the
applicant may be presented to the planning, zoning, and adjustment board for a
ruling. For access to state highways, access management techniques shall be
determined through consultation and permitting with WYDOT prior to city
approval of the parking plan. (See also WYDOT "Access Manual", 2005 or current
edition.)
   E.   Lighting: Parking areas for civic, commercial, and industrial uses that
will be utilized outside of daylight hours shall be provided with illumination.
All parking lot lighting shall be designed and installed such that illumination
will be directed away from any neighboring residential properties and shall be
directed downward by utilizing full cutoff or fully shielded fixtures.
   F.   Vertical Clearance: Parking spaces and aisles shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven feet (7').
   G.   Tandem Configuration: Single-family residential (attached or detached),
two-family residential (duplex), and family daycare home uses may utilize a
tandem (one vehicle directly behind the other) parking configuration and have
both spaces count toward the required number, so long as both tandem spaces are
designated to serve the same dwelling unit. Tandem parking space configuration
shall not be permitted for off street parking required of any other type of
use.
   H.   Parking Lots With Five Or More Spaces: Parking lots containing five (5)
or more required spaces shall be designed and constructed to the following
minimum standards:
      1.   Surfacing: Parking spaces, drives, and aisles shall be constructed
of either concrete, asphalt concrete pavement, recycled asphalt, asphalt
millings, compacted gravel meeting WYDOT "grading GR" or "grading W"
specifications, or other functionally comparable materials approved by the
planning and zoning board. Base material in a depth suitable for the traffic
anticipated to utilize the facility, including emergency vehicles, shall also
be provided. ADA spaces must be concrete or asphalt concrete pavement.
      2.   Entrance: Commercial development, industrial/light industrial
development, and multi-family developments that are accessed directly from a
state highway or street classified as an arterial or major collector shall have
a paved entrance/exit extending from the curb cut (face of curb, or edge of the
roadway pavement in areas without curbing), to a point at least twenty five
feet (25') from the public street, measured along the direction of travel.
      3.   Back Out Prohibited: Off street parking for commercial, industrial,
civic, and multiple-family development shall be designed so as to make it
unnecessary for a vehicle to back out into an arterial or collector street.
Backing into alleys is acceptable.
      4.   Painted Parking Stalls: Hard surfaced parking areas shall use paint,
curbing, or similar improvements to delineate car stalls. Painted parking lot
stripes and directional markings must be white or yellow.
      5.   Wheel Stop Parking Stalls: Parking areas of gravel or similar
material shall use wheel stops/parking stops to delineate car stalls, and
signage as necessary for the direction of traffic. The wheel stops/parking
stops may be premanufactured stops (typically made of concrete, rubber, or
composite material), six inch (6") tall treated wood timbers, or other
functionally comparable items approved by the planning and zoning board.
      6.   Sidewalk Encroachment: Wheel stops or parking stops shall be
provided next to sidewalks and pedestrian aisles when necessary to prevent
vehicle overhang from reducing the sidewalk or pedestrian aisle to less than
four feet (4') in width. When determining possible encroachment into the
sidewalk or pedestrian aisle, an overhang of 2.0 feet is to be assumed for
ninety degree (90°) parking, 1.7 feet for sixty degree (60°) parking, 1.6 feet
for forty five degree (45°) parking, and 1.0 foot for thirty degree (30°)
parking. The wheel stops/parking stops may be premanufactured stops, six inch
(6") tall treated wood timbers, or other functionally comparable items approved
by the planning and zoning board.
      7.   Access Gates: Primary access gates located next to an arterial or
collector street shall be set back sufficiently from the public street to allow
an appropriate design vehicle to completely pull off the street before having
to stop to open or close the gate.
      8.   Screening: Parking areas situated within twenty feet (20') of a
neighboring residence shall provide a "visual screen" as defined in this title,
or functionally equivalent vegetative screen, as necessary to prevent headlight
glare disturbance to the occupants of the neighboring residence.
      9.   Access To Rear Parking Area: When off street parking is provided to
the rear of a building, and a driveway or lane alongside the building provides
access to the rear parking area, such driveway shall be a minimum of twelve
feet (12') wide and a minimum four foot (4') wide walkway must be installed
adjoining the building.
      10.   Dead End Parking Aisles: Dead end one-way parking aisles shall not
be permitted. Additional backup area or turnaround area shall be provided at
the end of two-way dead end parking aisles. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-9: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
The minimum number of parking spaces required for a use shall be according to
table 1 of this section, unless the planning and zoning board authorizes
otherwise based on reliable data, such as parking data from a highly comparable
facility or a parking demand study prepared by a qualified parking consultant
or engineer, which justifies use of a different parking ratio.
Calculations based on the following figures that result in a fraction of one-
half (1/2) or greater are to be rounded up, and fractional results of less than
one-half (1/2) may be rounded down. Area per square foot (sq. ft.) refers to
square foot of gross floor area, unless noted otherwise.
   TABLE 1
   MINIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
 
Category Minimum Spaces Required
Civic and public assembly:                    
 Hospitals                                  4.9 spaces per bed
  Public assembly, including, but not
 limited to, auditoriums, churches, and      
  theaters:
    Fixed seats                          0.3 space per seat
                                             11.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of
                                             gross floor area, or 1 space per
    Without fixed seats                  45 sq. ft. of all assembly area(s)
                                             occupied concurrently, whichever
                                             is less
  Schools (the planning and zoning board may
 authorize public schools to count           
  available on street parking toward the
  following requirements):
    Elementary schools                   0.2 space per student
    Middle schools                       0.2 space per student
    High schools                         0.5 space per student
Commercial/office/service:                    
 Auto parts sales                           1 space per 200 sq. ft.
 Banks, credit unions, financial            1 space per 300 sq. ft.
  institutions
                                             17.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.; or
 Bar or lounge, with or without eating      0.3 space per fixed seat where
  facilities                                 seating is fixed. Indoor and
                                             outdoor seating areas are counted
 Convenience store, without gas pumps       5.7 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                             3.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.; or
 Daycare center                             0.2 space per child, whichever is
                                             less
 Discount store, freestanding               1 space per 200 sq. ft.
 Drugstore/pharmacy                         5.4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
 Furniture, carpet, tile, home furnishing   2.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
  showrooms/stores
 Gas station:                                
    With convenience store               0.75 space per fueling position,
                                             in addition to fueling spaces
    Without convenience store or service 1 per on site employee
  station
 Laundromat                                 0.5 space per washing machine,
                                             plus 1 per employee
 Medical and dental offices                 1 space per 250 sq. ft.
 Office supply store                        1.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
 Professional offices, general              4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
 Restaurant, fast food:                      
                                             15.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft., or
    With drive-through                   0.6 spaces per fixed seat where
                                             seating is fixed. Indoor and
                                             outdoor seating areas are counted
                                             12.7 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
    Without drive-through                Indoor and outdoor seating areas
                                             are counted
                                             14.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.; or
 Restaurant, sit down                       0.5 space per fixed seat where
                                             seating is fixed. Indoor and
                                             outdoor seating areas are counted
  Retail establishments; including
 appliance, clothing, hardware, housewares, 1 space per 300 sq. ft.
  specialty items, sporting goods, and other
  retail establishments not otherwise listed
                                             4.1 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. for
                                             <30,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable
                                             area
 Shopping centers                            
                                             4.7 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. for
                                             30,000+ sq. ft. of gross leasable
                                             area
 Supermarkets, up to 5,000 sq. ft. in size  3.33 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
 Supermarkets, larger than 5,000 sq. ft.    5.8 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                             4 spaces per service bay, except
 Vehicle repair and maintenance services    vehicle repair/maintenance
                                             accessory to vehicle sales is 3
                                             spaces per service bay
 Vehicle sales (new or used)                1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office
                                             and indoor sales area
Industrial:                                   
 Light industry, general (not               1.1 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
  manufacturing)
 Manufacturing                              1.3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                             1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. for
 Warehousing                                warehouses. Ministorage/self-
                                             storage has no parking required
Residential and lodging:                      
                                             1.4 spaces for a 1 bedroom unit
  Accessory apartments, guesthouses, and bed  
 and breakfast inns (in addition to the     2 spaces per 2 bedroom unit
  spaces for the main dwelling)               
                                             2.25 spaces for a 3+ bedroom unit
 Congregate care facility                   0.5 space per dwelling unit
                                             1.1 spaces per rentable room or
                                             sleeping unit, plus 1 space per
                                             hotel/motel vehicle (e.g.,
                                             shuttle), and 0.75 space per
  Hotels, motels, and other lodging          employee on the maximum shift.
 facilities not otherwise listed            Parking for any conference/banquet
                                             room is to be calculated
                                             separately at a ratio of 1 space
                                             per 150 sq. ft. Any full service
                                             restaurant is to be calculated as
                                             a restaurant
                                             1.4 spaces per 1 bedroom unit
  Multiple-family dwellings (3 or more units  
 in same building)                          2 spaces per 2 bedroom unit
                                              
                                             2.25 spaces per 3+ bedroom unit
 Residential care facility/assisted living  0.5 space per bed, plus 1 per day
                                             shift employee
  Single-family attached (e.g., townhouse),
 single-family detached, and two-family     2 spaces per dwelling unit
  dwellings
 
(Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-10: DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Parking Stall Dimensions: A standard angled or perpendicular parking
space on a paved or concrete surface shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9')
in width by twenty feet (20') in length. A standard angled or perpendicular
parking space on a gravel or similar surface shall measure a minimum of ten
feet (10') in width by twenty feet (20') in length. The minimum length may be
reduced to eighteen feet (18') when an additional space of two feet (2') is
provided for the front overhang of vehicles (e.g., overhanging a curb,
sidewalk, wheel stop, landscaped area or combination thereof). Any front
overhang of a vehicle may not reduce the clear width of an adjacent sidewalk or
ADA accessible route to less than four feet (4') in width. The minimum
dimensions for an off street parallel parking space shall be nine feet (9')
wide by twenty two feet (22') long.
Parking lots serving a high turnover of short duration users, such as
convenience stores, grocery stores, and hardware stores should consider use of
ten foot (10') wide stalls.
Covered parking stalls (i.e., carports) are to exclude the width of any support
poles/columns from the parking stall width, and all support poles/columns must
be at least two feet (2') from the back of the stall.
   B.   Standards For Parking Rows And Aisles: Parking lot rows and aisles
shall meet the following minimum dimensional requirements, as set forth in
table 2 of this section. Refer to subsection A of this section for which
minimum stall width and length is applicable to the parking lot.
   TABLE 2
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
                                               Front
        Stall    Stall                         Overhang In   Curb      Minimum
Parking Width In Length In Row Depth Offset In Feet,         Length In Aisle
Angle   Feet     Feet      In Feet   Feet1     Measured      Feet      Width
                                               Perpendicular
                                               To Curb
0 degrees (parallel) 9.0  22.0 9.0  None n/a  22.0 12 feet one- way, 24 feet
                                                   two-way
                     9.0  18   16.8 29.1 1.0  18.0
30 degrees                20   17.8 30.8 None      12 feet one- way, 24 feet
                     10.0 18   17.1 30.6 1.0  20.0 two-way
                          20   18.7 32.3 None
                     9.0  18   19.1 19.1 1.6  12.7
45 degrees                20   20.5 20.5 None      13 feet one- way, 24 feet
                     10.0 18   19.8 19.8 1.6  14.1 two-way
                          20   21.2 21.2 None
                     9.0  18   20.1 11.6 1.7  10.4
60 degrees                20   21.8 12.6 None      18 feet one- way, 24 feet
                     10.0 18   20.6 11.9 1.7  11.5 two-way
                          20   22.3 12.9 None
                     9.0  18   18.0 None 2.0  9.0
90 degrees                20   20.0 None None      24 feet
                     10.0 18   18.0 None 2.0  10.0
                          20   20.0 None None
 
Note:
   1.   Sight distance requirements may increase needed offset.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1508.gif]
 
(Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-11: OFF STREET LOADING FACILITIES:
Outside of the downtown parking district, buildings or structures used for
commercial, industrial, institutional, or warehouse purposes that regularly
receive or distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and
maintain off street loading spaces or docks in sufficient size and number to
fill the anticipated needs of the use.
Loading facilities shall be designed to the following standards when located
outside of the downtown parking district:
   A.   Minimum Loading Space: A minimum of one off street loading space or
dock shall be provided for each fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of
building, or portion thereof.
   B.   Projection Into Public Street: No part of a truck or van using the
loading space or dock may project into a public street.
   C.   Forward Motion: New loading facilities that will be accessed from an
arterial or major collector street must be designed so that vehicles enter and
exit the site in a forward motion. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-12: AVAILABILITY OF REQUIRED PARKING:
Off street parking facilities required by this chapter shall remain available
and dedicated for parking purposes so long as the building, structure or use
for which they are provided exists, unless an equivalent number of substitute
off street parking spaces is approved by the city, provided, and thereafter
maintained as specified by this chapter.
In the event any off street parking facilities required in connection with any
building, structure or use are at any time altered, modified, eliminated, or
otherwise changed in a manner that they are not available and dedicated for
parking purposes to the extent required, the planning, zoning and adjustment
board shall direct the building official to revoke and cancel the certificate
of occupancy for such building, structure or use after holding a hearing. At
least ten (10) days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall be mailed to the owner or other person occupying the same as
shown on the records of the city clerk. Provided, that if it appears that the
failure to maintain such required parking was reasonably beyond the control of
the person required to maintain the same, no certificate of occupancy shall be
revoked until such person shall have had ninety (90) days to reestablish the
minimum required parking. In the event any certificate of occupancy is revoked,
the premises covered thereby shall not be occupied or used for any purpose
until a new certificate of occupancy has been issued. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
10-16-13: VARIANCES:
Variances to the requirements of this chapter are to be considered under the
special exemption process of section
10-14-2, "Special Exemptions", of this title. (Ord. 2013-04, 3-5-2013)
CHAPTER 17
ENTRY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-17-1: Purpose
10-17-2: Overlay District
10-17-3: District Boundaries
10-17-4: Applicability
10-17-5: Landscaping
10-17-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Entry Corridor Overlay District is to promote attractive
development and redevelopment along the main commercial corridors of the City.
The implementation of this overlay zone will help make the community more
attractive and livable; improve and maintain property values; enhance the
appeal of the City to residents, tourists and other visitors; and promote
increased economic activity. (Ord. 2015-04, 6-2-2015)
10-17-2: OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The Entry Corridor Overlay District is an overlay district, in that the
standards set forth herein are in addition to those of the underlying zoning
district. (Ord. 2015-04, 6-2-2015)
10-17-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The Entry Corridor Overlay District includes those properties identified as
such on the official zoning district map of the City of Cody. Furthermore, any
development or redevelopment project that is partially within the Entry
Corridor Overlay District shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter
as if it were fully located within the district. (Ord. 2015-04, 6-2-2015; amd.
Ord. 2017-02, 3-7-2017)
10-17-4: APPLICABILITY:
Any redevelopment or new development within the overlay district, whether
conducted within a building or outdoors (e.g., vehicle display), shall be
subject to the full provisions of this chapter; with the following exceptions:
   A.   Residential buildings with less than four (4) dwelling units shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Replacement of a building, or portion thereof, due to its destruction
from accidental fire, explosion or other casualty, act of God, the public
enemy, or intentional acts other than those caused directly or indirectly by
the owner shall be exempt; provided a building permit for such replacement is
obtained within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the destructive event.
This exception applies only to the extent and size of the previously existing
building.
   C.   Redevelopment of less than ten percent (10%) of a building, and new
development that increases building size or outdoor use area by less than ten
percent (10%), need not comply with the requirements of this chapter. The
percentage shall be calculated from the date of adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Redevelopment of ten (10) to seventy five percent (75%) of a building,
and new development that increases building size or outdoor use area by ten
(10) to seventy five percent (75%), need only provide landscaping according to
the requirements of section
10-17-5 of this chapter in proportion to the percent of redevelopment/
development. The percentage shall be calculated from the date of adoption of
this chapter. (Note: Redevelopment of more than 75 percent of a building, and
new development that increases building size or outdoor use area by more than
75 percent shall fully comply with the landscaping requirement of section
10-17-5 of this chapter.)
For purposes of this chapter, "redevelopment" shall mean the following:
      1.   Construction or remodeling for the purpose of conducting a new
classification of land use on a property that contains a pre-existing use; or,
      2.   Removal of an existing structure, or structural portion thereof, and
replacement with new construction.
Redevelopment is to be measured in units of area (e.g., square feet).
"New development" shall include new construction, additions, or expansions of
structures or uses. (Ord. 2015-04, 6-2-2015)
10-17-5: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping Requirements: Landscaping shall be provided within the
entry corridor overlay district in the following manner:
      1.   A minimum of five percent (5%) of the subject property shall be
landscaped, except as noted below. For purposes of calculating the size of the
subject property, any undevelopable land (e.g., hillside) shall not be
included. Existing landscaping that is healthy and otherwise meets the
standards of this chapter may be counted toward this requirement.
      2.   The required landscaping shall be primarily located in the front of
the property and should typically be along the street frontage, in landscaped
islands, and next to the building.
      3.   Landscaping materials shall be of sufficient size, number, and
variety to give a three-dimensional presence (height, width, and depth) to the
landscaped area(s).
      4.   Suitable landscaping materials include trees, shrubs, ground cover,
flowers, ornamental grasses, decorative rock, landscape boulders, water
features, works of art, and other similar materials approved by the planning
and zoning board.
      5.   Trees shall be of good quality and measure in size a minimum of one
and one-half inch (11/2") caliper (tree diameter, measured 6 inches above
ground) if deciduous, and a minimum of four feet (4') in height if evergreen.
Tree seedlings and whips may supplement larger trees, but alone shall not be
considered sufficient where trees are used to comply with subsection A3 of this
section.
      6.   All vegetation is to be climate and location appropriate, such that
it will grow and thrive where planted.
      7.   All landscape plants shall be provided with a method of irrigation.
      8.   Up to one-fourth (1/4) of the required landscaping may be located in
the public street right of way when the street is improved with curb, gutter
and sidewalk and not identified for future widening on any WYDOT or city
transportation improvement plan. Any landscaping within the right of way
further requires an encroachment permit from WYDOT or public works, as
applicable.
      9.   Protection of utility lines in landscape areas shall be accomplished
by complying with the requirements outlined in title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
      10.   If a final certificate of occupancy for the project is desired
prior to completion of the landscaping, the property owner or lessee shall
provide a financial security in such form and amount acceptable to the city to
guarantee installation of all landscaping by a date agreeable to the city,
based on the specific characteristics of the situation. If weather is not a
factor, a typical deadline will be ninety (90) days from the date of occupancy.
If weather precludes installation, the deadline shall not be later than June 15
of the next growing season.
   B.   Maintenance Required: All landscaping required by this chapter or
previously approved site plans is to be maintained in a healthy, weed free,
manner. Dead and severely diseased vegetation shall be replaced with similar
types of healthy living plants, or as otherwise authorized by the planning and
zoning board so that the intent of the landscaping plan is met.
   C.   Plans: Landscape plans shall be submitted to the city for all
landscaping required pursuant to this section. The plans shall be drawn to
scale and depict the type, number, sizes and approximate locations of all
landscaping materials. Review and approval of landscaping plans shall be by the
planning and zoning board. Landscaping plan review is to be conducted in
conjunction with required site plan or landscape and architectural review, when
such review is required. If no other review is required, the landscape plan
review may be conducted independently by the board. The planning and zoning
board has authority to approve, deny, or require modifications to landscaping
plans, based upon the standards of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-04, 6-2-2015)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Intent And Purpose
11-1-2: Subdivision Required
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this title to promote orderly and systematic
development of lands to the advantage of the subdivider, future property owners
and the general population of the city. It shall establish guidelines and
minimum standards to assist the subdivider and promote the development of a
safe and healthy living environment. (Ord. 89-12)
11-1-2: SUBDIVISION REQUIRED:
   A.   A subdivision will be required when the division of any parcel of land,
other than a "whole legal subdivision", as defined in section
11-1-3 of this chapter, into two (2) or more pieces for the purpose of sale is
desired.
   B.   A subdivision will be required when the division of any parcel of land
being a whole legal subdivision, into three (3) or more pieces, for the purpose
of sale is desired.
   C.   The division of a whole legal subdivision into two (2) pieces will not
require a subdivision, but will require a certificate of survey to be filed in
the county clerk's office for record of such division.
   D.   No tract of land that is not a whole legal subdivision may be divided
in any manner unless and until the requirements of this title have been
complied with. (Ord. 89-12)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily designed to serve as secondary vehicular
access to the back or side of lots which have principal access on a platted
street.
AREA: Shall be the total square footage of land within a lot of a subdivision.
BLOCK: A tract of land divided into lots bounded by streets and/or alleys.
BOND: Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral,
property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the
governing body.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: Modification of the size or alignment of adjacent
parcels through relocation of their common boundary where an additional parcel
is not created, and where the existing parcel which is being reduced in size is
not reduced below the minimum lot size established by the zone which applies to
the property, nor is any zone violation caused by moving the boundary.
CITY: The city of Cody.
COMMISSION: The city of Cody planning and zoning commission.
CONCEPTUAL PLAN: A sketch or drawing showing the location of the proposed
subdivision, any zoning changes required, explanation of why the subdivision is
to be done, and the proposed use of the subdivided lands.
COUNCIL: The city council for the city of Cody.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet and having one appropriate terminal
for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
EASEMENT: Any strip of land created by the subdivider for public or private
utilities, drainage, sanitation or other specific uses having limitations, the
title of which shall remain in the name of the property owner.
FLAG LOT: Any lot which has less than fifty feet (50') of fee simple frontage
on a public right of way, unless part of a planned unit development. Flag lots
shall not be allowed in the development of subdivisions and minor subdivisions.
FLOODPLAIN: That area along a stream, river, or other natural waterway that is
subject to potential flooding and extreme water table fluctuation on a seasonal
basis.
FRONT LOT: That side of a lot abutting on a street and ordinarily regarded as
the front of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the front shall be the same
as the adjacent interior lot fronts.
IMPROVEMENTS: Shall be any street paving or resurfacing, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, water lines, water service lines, sewer lines, sewer service lines,
storm drains, streetlights, flood control and drainage facilities, utility
lines, landscaping and other related matters normally associated with the
development of raw lands into building sites.
LOT: A piece or parcel of land, or assemblage of contiguous parcels of land, as
established by survey, plat or deed, occupied by a single principal building or
principal use and accessory building, or uses thereto, having limited fixed
boundaries, an assigned number, letter or other name through which it may be
identified, together with such open spaces as are required by city ordinances
and having frontage on a dedicated public or private street.
LOT TYPES:
  Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A
lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if
the total central angle of that portion of the curve abutting the lot is
greater than seventy five degrees (75°).
  Double Frontage Lot: Any lot other than a corner lot which has frontage on
more than one dedicated public street.
  Interior Lot: Any lot with only one frontage on a street.
MASTER PLANS: Shall be any plans for the orderly future development of lands,
streets, water, sewer, storm sewer and all other utilities for public use that
have been approved by the Cody city council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision that the planning, zoning and adjustment
board has determined shall facilitate isolated in-fill development within
municipal boundaries and either: a) revises the plat affecting not more than
five (5) lots previously created by said plat; or b) creates five (5) or fewer
lots without requiring the creation of any new streets or the extension of
water and sewer utilities or any new public improvements. The intent of this
chapter in defining minor subdivisions as a specific category is to facilitate
isolated in-fill within the municipal boundaries. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall rest upon finding by the city of Cody planning, zoning and
adjustment board, as demonstrated by the applicant for a minor subdivision,
that the intent of city regulations is achieved.
MONUMENTS: Any permanent concrete, metal or government survey marker used to
establish definite lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot
corners, boundary line corners, and all points of change in street alignment.
OPEN SPACES: An open space to the sky which may be on the same lot with a
building. The area may include, along with natural environmental features,
swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities that the
commission and council deem permissive. Streets, alleys and utility easements
shall not be included.
PARKS: Any lot, group of lots, or tract, within the subdivision, dedicated to
the city by the subdivider for public use to meet the open space requirement of
the final plat.
PLAT: A map or layout of a proposed subdivision indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.
  Final Plat: The final map or drawing, described in these regulations, upon
which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is shown and presented to the
commission and council for approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted
to the county clerk for recording.
  Preliminary Plat: The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision lots and
utilities to be submitted to the commission and council for approval.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special
use. The usage of the term "right of way" for land platting purposes shall mean
that every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way
and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights
of way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, shade trees, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency,
shall be dedicated to public use by the developer on the plat on which such
right of way is established.
STREET: Shall be a way of vehicular travel, dedicated for public use by the
subdivider, developed to the dimensions and standards as established within the
city master street plan. Streets shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering practices with the minimum cross section being as shown on the city
of Cody standard construction detail sheet.
STREET TYPES:
  Arterial Streets: Major two (2) or four (4) lane travelways designed for the
continuous flow of a large quantity of vehicles. The typical section shall be
as shown in the master street plan.
  Collector Streets: Major travelways other than arterial streets designed to
gather or collect traffic from residential areas. The typical section shall be
as shown on the master street plan.
  Marginal Streets: Minimal flow residential travelways usually terminating
with a cul-de-sac. Development of marginal streets by a subdivider will be
actively opposed but may be permitted under extreme conditions. The typical
section shall be as shown in the master street plan.
  Residential Streets: Travelways designed to carry the traffic and meet the
parking needs of residential areas. The typical section shall be as shown in
the master street plan.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or
corporation participating as an owner, in the planning, platting, development,
promotions, sale or lease of a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land, as described in
section
11-1-2 of this chapter.
UTILITIES: Services or products provided to a landowner by the city or a
company for the benefit of the landowner, such as natural gas, treated or raw
water, sanitary and storm sewer, telephone, cable television, etc.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing located on the plat or plan which sets forth by
dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities to better
locate and orient the proposed subdivision.
WHOLE LEGAL SUBDIVISION: Shall be defined as being any one of the following
parcels of land:
A. Any numbered fractional lot or nominal forty (40) acre aliquot part of a
section of land as described under the original government survey or the
government resurvey in accordance with the United States sectionalized land
system;
B. Any numbered homestead entry survey;
C. Any numbered mineral survey. (Ord. 89-12; amd. Ord. 98-1; Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-
2004; Ord. 2015-03, 5-5-2015)
CHAPTER 2
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Plat Approval
11-2-2: Control Over Platting
11-2-3: Jurisdiction
11-2-4: Enforcement; Violation And Penalties
11-2-1: PLAT APPROVAL:
No final plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the commission or the
council unless it conforms to the provisions of this title or variances granted
under this title. (Ord. 89-12)
11-2-2: CONTROL OVER PLATTING:
   A.   Approval Required: All plats of subdivisions of land requiring approval
of the council shall be filed and recorded only after having been recommended
for approval by the commission, with such recommendation entered in writing on
the plat and signed by the chairperson of the commission, and after having been
approved by the council, with such approval entered in writing on the plat by
being signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk.
   B.   Improvements: No building shall be erected on any lot in any
subdivision, nor shall a building permit be issued by the city for a building
until all improvements reasonably expected and required by the city, such as
streets, curb and gutter, sidewalk, sewer service, water service, etc., have
been installed, approved and accepted by the city for the lot upon which the
building is to be constructed. (Ord. 89-12)
11-2-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   Applicability: This chapter applies to all land located within the
corporate limits of the city and all land located within one mile of the
boundaries of the city, the subdivision of which requires approval of the
council. This approval shall also be required on the placement of all
improvements as well as the layout of the proposed lots.
   B.   Outside Of Corporate Limits: The following standards shall be applied
by the city in determining whether to approve or disapprove plats of
subdivisions located within one mile of the corporate limits of the city:
      1.   Property that meets the requirements for annexation pursuant to
state law will not be approved for subdivision without being annexed into the
city.
      2.   Subdivision of land which is not contiguous to the city but meets
the other requirements for annexation pursuant to state law will not be
approved for subdivision if it appears that intervening property owners are
willing to join and cooperate in an annexation upon reasonable terms.
      3.   Proposed development within one mile of the boundaries of the city
shall otherwise conform to all of the subdivision requirements of the city, and
the city shall further require a written enforceable and recordable agreement
that all of the property within the area of such subdivision will be
voluntarily annexed to the city upon request by the city when it becomes
contiguous to the corporate limits of the city, and the improvements required
by the city shall further be installed at the expense of the landowners of the
subdivision and in accordance with city specifications at the time of
annexation or when requested by the city. A statement outlining the above
requirements shall be placed upon the proposed final plat.
      4.   Such agreement shall further provide that all construction within
the area of such subdivision shall conform with all ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city and be subject to inspection by the city, all as if it
were located within the corporate limits of the city.
      5.   All such developments within one mile of the boundaries of the city
shall conform to the master plans, projected zoning expectations, and shall,
upon request, participate as if it were located within the corporate limits of
the city in all public health and safety measures of the city, such as, but not
limited to, mosquito control, inspection of underground tanks for the storage
of petroleum and other hydrocarbon products, disposal of dead animals, disposal
of sewage and garbage, and other such regulations. (Ord. 89-12)
11-2-4: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the city to enforce these regulations and to
bring to the attention of the city attorney any violation or lack of compliance
herewith.
      2.   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision, shall transfer or sell any such parcel before the plat of
which subdivision has been approved by the commission and the council, in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and been filed with the
county clerk and recorded.
      3.   The subdivision of any lot, parcel or tract of land, by the use of a
metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with
the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All such
described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in
this chapter.
      4.   No building permit shall be issued by the city for the construction
of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of this title.
   B.   Violation And Penalties: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
joint venture which fails to comply with, or violates, any of these regulations
shall be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per day for each day the violation continues.
   C.   Civil Enforcement: Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by
law or in equity to prevent violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, and these
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. (Ord. 89-12)
CHAPTER 3
PLAT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Conceptual Plan
11-3-2: Preliminary Plat
11-3-3: Final Plat
11-3-1: CONCEPTUAL PLAN:
In order to properly evaluate a prospective area for subdividing, a conceptual
plan may be prepared to a scale not less than one inch equals five hundred feet
(1" = 500'), extending at least one-fourth (1/4) mile surrounding the proposed
subdivision, and displaying existing streets and highways, natural drainage
courses, and any other major natural or manmade features of the area. In
addition, existing and proposed major use areas for residential, commercial,
industrial and public purposes shall be displayed on the plan. It shall also
reflect any proposed zoning changes to be requested by the subdivider. This
plan shall be presented to the commission prior to submission of the
preliminary plat. Minor subdivisions, as defined in section
11-1-3 of this title, shall be exempt from the conceptual plat requirements.
(Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
11-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Required: After the subdivider has evaluated the economic feasibility
and has decided upon a design for the proposed subdivision, he shall prepare a
preliminary plat and the required supplemental materials for presentation to
and recommendation for approval of the commission.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this preliminary plat is to check the proposed
subdivision against the city design standards, improvement requirements and to
ensure that the proposed subdivision can and will conform to the city zoning
ordinances and city master plans.
   C.   Supplemental Material Presented With Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Proof Of Ownership: The subdivider will be required to submit to the
commission a certificate of ownership prepared by a licensed title insurance
firm or the county clerk showing that he is indeed the owner of the lands to be
subdivided.
      2.   Easements And Rights Of Way: Copies of all legally acquired and
recorded easements and rights of way across the proposed subdivision must be
supplied to the commission.
      3.   Variance Requests: The requests, in writing, for any variances to
the zoning or subdivision regulations.
      4.   Application For Zoning Change: Written application for a zoning
change if required for the development of the subdivision.
      5.   Additional Information: Such additional preliminary information as
may be required by the commission in order to adequately describe proposed
utility systems, including water line design, surface improvements, or other
construction projects contemplated within the area of the subdivision.
   D.   Procedure: The preliminary plat shall be processed as follows:
      1.   Twelve (12) copies of the preliminary plat and one copy of the
required supplemental materials shall be presented by the subdivider to the
city engineer or building inspector not later than two (2) weeks prior to the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. At the time this material
is presented, the subdivider shall be placed upon the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting. The two (2) week time period is required to allow
for a proper review by city staff members.
      2.   The subdivider and/or his representative will be required to be in
attendance at the meetings of the commission and the council for which the
proposed plat will be discussed. Failure of the subdivider or his
representative to be in attendance will be grounds for the immediate tabling of
the preliminary plat until the next regularly scheduled meeting.
      3.   If the plat is conditionally approved or disapproved, reasons for
such decision shall be given to the subdivider, in writing, along with
recommendations for changes that would grant the plat approval.
      4.   If a preliminary plat is recommended for conditional approval or
disapproval by the commission, the subdivider may request, in writing, further
review and a hearing before the council.
      5.   If additional time is required by the commission for proper review
of the plat, the subdivider shall be notified in writing of the extension of
the review period, which shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
      6.   If the recommendation of the commission to the council is for
approval of the plat, the recommendation for approval shall be valid for a
period of not more than one year from the date of the commission's
recommendation. A six (6) month extension may be granted on the basis of
unforeseen circumstances.
   E.   Preparation: The preliminary plat shall be prepared as follows:
      1.   The design shall show the subdivider's actual plan for development
and therefore shall be a true representation of the subdivision which
eventually may be recorded.
      2.   The drawing shall be made to a scale of not less than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). It may be on one or two (2) sheets of a
reproducible medium with outer dimensions not more than twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36") and meeting the requirements of the county clerk
for filing.
   F.   Information: The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not conflict with
any existing recorded subdivision within the county.
      2.   Location and boundaries of the subdivision as a part of some large
subdivision or tract of land, tied to an official government survey.
      3.   Names and addresses of the subdivider, the designer of the
subdivision, and the engineer or surveyor (who shall be licensed by the Wyoming
state board of registration for professional engineers and professional land
surveyors).
      4.   Date of preparation, scale, and north arrow (designated as true
north).
      5.   Exact bearing and distance dimensions of the exterior boundaries of
the subdivision closing to an order of accuracy better than one to five
thousand (1:5,000) along with the total acreage of the subdivision.
      6.   All lands which the subdivider proposes to subdivide and all lands
immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision within two hundred feet
(200'), along with the names of all adjacent and adjoining record landowners
within said two hundred feet (200').
      7.   Location and principal dimensions of all proposed streets (including
their names and typical cross sections), alleys, easements, lot lines and areas
to be reserved or dedicated for parks, schools or other public uses. Street
dimension shall be in accordance with the city master street plan. Street names
shall not conflict with any existing street names within or around the city.
      8.   Contour lines will be required at an interval between two feet (2')
and ten feet (10') for terrain with a slope less than thirty percent (30%), and
ten feet (10') intervals for terrain with a slope greater than thirty percent
(30%).
      9.   Designation of areas subject to flooding due to a 100-year storm.
      10.   Site data, including lot designations and approximate lot size.
      11.   Proposed sites, if any, for multi-family residential use, business
areas, industrial areas, churches and other nonpublic uses, exclusive of
single-family residential areas.
      12.   Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision.
      13.   Names of any adjacent subdivisions.
      14.   Location, size, grade, type of material and approximate depth of
bury, where applicable, of existing utilities within and adjacent to the
subdivision.
      15.   Approximate location, size, grade, and type of material of all
proposed utilities within and adjacent to the subdivision, which shall be in
conformance with the city master plans.
      16.   A plan for surface runoff drainage which shall be connected to the
existing city storm sewer system, where applicable, and in conformance with the
city stormwater management policy, as amended. Minor subdivisions shall be
exempt from this requirement. This does not exempt commercial subdivision
developments submitted under the minor subdivision regulations from the site
plan requirements for compliance with the stormwater management policy. (Ord.
89-12; amd. Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
11-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Procedure: After approval of the preliminary plat by the council and
within one year of that approval, the subdivider shall present the final plat
and all supplemental materials required according to these regulations, to the
commission after it has been processed according to the following requirements:
(Ord. 89-12)
      1.   Not more than one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the
council, twelve (12) copies of the proposed final plat shall be presented to
the commission for approval and recommendation to the council. The copies of
the plat and one copy of the supplemental materials shall be presented to the
city engineer not less than two (2) weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the commission. This two (2) week period is required to allow for
proper review by the city staff. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
      2.   Design of the final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary
plat and shall include all changes specified thereon. The commission will
review the final plat and its attached supplemental materials and make a
recommendation of approval, conditional approval or disapproval to the council.
(Ord. 89-12)
      3.   The subdivider and/or his representative shall be required to be in
attendance at the meetings of the commission and the council for which the
proposed plat will be discussed. Failure of the subdivider or his
representative to be in attendance shall result in the immediate tabling of the
final plat until the next regularly scheduled meetings. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-
2004)
      4.   When taking action on a proposed plat, the written comments of the
utility companies will be reviewed and considered along with comments from any
other outside agencies and interested parties. Upon completion of the review,
the commission will recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
the plat to the council.
      5.   If approval or conditional approval is recommended by the
commission, the subdivider may present the plat and supplemental materials to
the council. Ten (10) copies and the originals of the final plat and
supplemental materials shall be delivered to the city engineer or building
inspector not less than two (2) weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the council. This two (2) week period is required to allow for
proper review by the council.
      6.   If the final plat is conditionally approved or disapproved by the
commission, reasons for such action shall be given to the subdivider, in
writing, along with recommendations that would grant the plat approval.
      7.   After the final plat is approved by the council, it shall be
recorded in the office of the county clerk not less than one hundred (100) days
after the date of approval by the council, or the approval shall be considered
null and void, unless written application for an extension of time is made to
and granted by the council. The ruling for an extension of time shall be made
during a regularly scheduled council meeting. (Ord. 89-12)
   B.   Supplemental Materials Presented With Final Plat:
      1.   Water Rights: The subdivider shall provide with the final plat a
statement from the state engineer's office stating if there are any
adjudicated, unadjudicated or pending applications for surface water rights
within the proposed subdivision. If there are any surface water rights attached
to the subdivision lands, the subdivider must either:
         a.   Submit for review and approval an irrigation system that shall be
constructed as part of the subdivision to utilize those water rights; or
         b.   Submit proof that: 1) all Cody Canal fees associated with acreage
removal or consolidation have been paid and that all fees that would be levied
on all lots in the subdivision have been paid for a period of ten (10) years
from the date of final plat application; and 2) the subdivider has entered into
an agreement with a Wyoming licensed engineer or Wyoming licensed land surveyor
guaranteeing that all documentation required by the state engineer's office to
transfer the water rights to the city and to change the use from irrigation to
municipal shall be submitted to the state engineer's office within one year
from the date of final plat application.
         c.   In the event that the water rights transfer and use change
contemplated in subsection B1b of this section is not completed within ten (10)
years, the city shall assume responsibility for paying any subsequent Cody
Canal fees. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
      2.   Utility Company Statements: Original letters or agreements from all
concerned utility companies (telephone, cable TV, gas, electrical, irrigation
districts, Wyoming highway department, water, sewer, etc.), commenting on the
proposed plat shall accompany the final plat. These statements shall clearly
define how the utilities will be installed, who will be responsible for each
phase of their installation, etc.
      3.   Plans And Specifications For Improvements: Three (3) complete sets
of approved plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed.
These plans shall carry the stamp, seal or signature of every federal, state
and local agency or company that will be affected by said development and which
should have reviewed said plans and specifications. These plans and
specifications shall also carry the signature, stamp and registration number of
the design engineer.
      4.   Covenants: If townhouses, condominiums or other comparable
development is anticipated, the final plat shall be accompanied by covenants to
run with the land and the necessary documents for the creation of a homeowners'
association, prepared in accordance with the requirements of the city,
containing adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of those
portions of the subdivision which are to be of common use or ownership, and
specifically providing that no provision thereof may be modified, changed,
added or deleted without first having been approved by the city, and such
documents shall be submitted for recording at the same time as the final plat.
      5.   Ownership Evidence: Satisfactory evidence of ownership of the lands
proposed for the subdivision must accompany the proposed plat.
   C.   Final Plat Preparation: The final plat shall be prepared as follows and
contain the following information:
      1.   Conform To Preliminary Plat: The final plat shall conform to the
layout of the approved preliminary plat, except that the final plat may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which is proposed
for immediate recording.
      2.   Scale: The drawing shall be made to a scale of not less than one
inch equaling one hundred feet (1" = 100'), on a reproducible medium, with
waterproof black ink, on one or two (2) sheets having an overall dimension of
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and meeting the
requirements of the county clerk for filing. Good draftsmanship will be
required to ensure that all information is accurate and legible.
      3.   Information Required: The final plat shall contain the following
information:
         a.   The proposed name of the subdivision;
         b.   Scale, north arrow and date of preparation;
         c.   Legal description of the property to be subdivided;
         d.   Primary control points, or description and "ties" to control
points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat
shall be referred (bearing base shall be labeled as such);
         e.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements
and other rights of way, and property lines of lots and other sites, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs or chords
and central angles of all curves;
         f.   Curve data for all property lines and changes in street alignment
showing the central angle, radius and arc length of the curve (the use of
spiral curves for new construction will not be permitted);
         g.   Right of way widths for each street, alley or other rights of
way;
         h.   Names or numbers for each street, which shall not duplicate the
name or number of an existing street unless connection of the proposed street
is to an existing street, shall be shown. All new streets shall be in
conformance with the master street plan;
         i.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements;
         j.   Number to identify each block and all lots;
         k.   Location and description of all monuments and property corners;
         l.   Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights of way and any
other sites for public use;
         m.   Certificate of surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy of
the survey and the plat (order of accuracy greater than 1 to 5,000);
         n.   Certificate for recommendation of approval by the commission,
certificate of approval by the council;
         o.   The plat shall contain a vicinity map of a scale not more than
one inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500'). Said map shall extend at least
one fourth (1/4) of a mile in all directions beyond the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision. Such map shall show existing streets, highways, natural
drainage courses and any other information as may be needed to properly locate
the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 89-12)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Character Of Land
11-4-2: Streets, Alleys And Easements
11-4-1: CHARACTER OF LAND:
   A.   Unsuitable Land: Land which the commission finds to be unsuitable for
subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes,
rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or
other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and
general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision or its
surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods
are formulated by the developer and approved by the commission, upon
recommendation of the city engineer, to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses which shall
not involve such a danger.
   B.   Preservation Of Features: Outside natural and cultural features such as
scenic spots, watercourses and historic sites and buildings shall be preserved
whenever possible.
   C.   Boarding Railroad Right Of Way: Where a residential subdivision borders
a railroad right of way, a parallel street or buffer zone shall be established.
(Ord. 89-12)
11-4-2: STREETS, ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS:
   A.   Alignment: All proposed streets, alleys and easements shall align
horizontally and vertically with existing streets, alleys and easements
adjacent to or lying near the subdivision.
   B.   Conform To Master Street Plan: All streets shall conform to the city
master street plan for size and approximate alignment.
   C.   Jogs Prohibited: Street jogs shall be prohibited unless, because of
very unusual conditions, the commission and council determine that the offset
is justified.
   D.   Topography: Streets shall have a logical relationship to the
topography.
   E.   Intersections: Intersections shall be at or near right angles whenever
possible.
   F.   Local Streets: Local streets will be designed to discourage through
traffic.
   G.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted, providing they are no
longer than five hundred feet (500'), including the area at the end of said
cul-de-sac; and further providing, that the property line to property line
diameter of the cul-de-sac be at least one hundred feet (100'). Design
specifications for curb, gutter, sidewalk and distance from property line to
sidewalk shall be in accordance with the typical section of a "residential
street", as defined by the master street plan. Surface drainage shall be
towards the intersecting streets whenever possible, but may be out of the cul-
de-sac through a drainage easement as a last alternative.
   H.   Dead End Streets, Alleys: Dead end streets and alleys (with the
exception of cul-de-sacs) shall be prohibited, unless they are designed to
connect with future streets or alleys on adjacent lands that have not been
platted. If a dead end street or alley is allowed, for the above reasons, a
temporary turnaround shall be constructed for public use until the street or
alley is extended.
   I.   Half Streets: Half streets will be prohibited. Half alleys will be
strongly discouraged. When a proposed half street is adjacent to another
property, it will be the developer's responsibility to reach an agreement with
the adjacent landowner, acquire the required lands from the adjacent landowner
to provide the land required to construct the full width street. No plat will
be approved until a full width street right of way has been platted. When the
full width for an alley cannot or will not be provided by the developer, he may
be required to meet special requirements established by the commission
depending upon the special conditions associated with the proposed development.
   J.   Reverse Curves: Reverse curves on arterial and collector streets shall
be joined by a tangent at least two hundred feet (200') in length, residential
and marginal streets and alleys shall have at least one hundred feet (100') of
tangent length between reverse curves.
   K.   Widths And Grades: Street, alley and easement/right of way widths and
grades shall be as follows:
 
 Minimum Right Of Way Width Minimum Grade Maximum Grade
Arterial street                           100 feet 0.3 percent 7.0 percent
Collector street                          80 feet  0.3 percent 7.0 percent
Residential street                        60 feet  0.3 percent 7.0 percent
Marginal street                           46 feet  0.3 percent 10.0 percent
Alleys (see subsection P of this section)          0.3 percent 10.0 percent
Easements                                 20 feet  0.3 percent 10.0 percent
Pedestrianways and crosswalks             10 feet              10.0 percent
 
Pedestrianways and crosswalks may have a maximum grade more than ten percent
(10%) if steps of an acceptable design are to be constructed.
   L.   Vertical Curve Length: The minimum length of vertical curves shall be
as follows:
 
Arterial, collector and     15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of
residential streets         grade
Marginal streets and alleys 71/2 times the algebraic difference in the rate of
                            grade
 
   M.   Visibility: Clear visibility, measured along the centerline of the
street shall be as follows:
 
Arterial street    300 feet
Collector street   200 feet
Residential street 200 feet
Marginal street    100 feet
 
   N.   Curvature Radius: The minimum radius of curvature on the centerline of
a street shall be as follows:
 
Arterial street    300 feet
Collector street   300 feet
Residential street 200 feet
Marginal street    100 feet
 
These are absolute minimums, greater dimensions will be encouraged in the
interest of public safety.
   O.   Streets With Interior Angles: At any street intersection with an
interior angle less than seventy degrees (70°), the property line shall be
rounded with an arc of a minimum radius of ten feet (10') and curbs shall be
rounded with an arc having a minimum radius of ten feet (10'), plus the
distance from the back of the curb to property line as established by the
tangents to the intersection. For street intersections with an interior angle
greater than seventy degrees (70°), the curb shall be rounded by a radius of
nine and one-half feet (91/2'). (Ord. 89-12)
   P.   Alleys: Alleys shall be required in all subdivisions with the minimum
width being twenty feet (20'), unless extreme conditions preclude the
feasibility of alleys. A variance of up to four feet (4') may be granted by the
commission and council in a residential development if setbacks are provided
for utility boxes, garbage cans, etc. Alleys shall be constructed with a
minimum of six inches (6") of crushed aggregate base course for the finished
surface. The specification for the gradation of the crushed aggregate base
course may be obtained from the city engineer.
   Q.   Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk, Paved Streets: Curb, gutter, sidewalk and paved
streets shall be required in all proposed subdivisions unless waived in
accordance with criteria set out in subsection 11-5-2B of this title by the
planning, zoning and board, and the city council. All waivers of curb, gutter
and sidewalks shall require acknowledgment by the developer on the final plat
that future improvement districts for the development of curb, gutter and
sidewalks shall be supported by future owners of the lots and be so noted on
the final plat. The developer shall be responsible for demonstrating to the
city that the grades and location of the proposed improvements shall be
compatible with all future development in the area. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
   R.   Street Cross Section: The minimum typical street cross section for each
type of street shall be as shown on the master street plan. Details of the city
standards for typical paving, curb, gutter, sidewalk, alley aprons and valley
gutter sections may be obtained from the city engineer.
   S.   Valley Gutters: The use of valley gutters in areas where storm sewer
facilities exist or are proposed will be discouraged. (Ord. 89-12)
   T.   Drainage: The area to be subdivided shall be designed to provide proper
and sufficient drainage. Runoff and storm sewer systems shall be designed to
adequately drain the subdivision and adjacent area that will drain into the
subdivision. All stormwater systems shall be designed to achieve zero increase
in runoff and shall be in compliance with the city stormwater management
policy, as amended. They shall be designed and constructed to allow runoff and
stormwater to flow by gravity from the subdivision to an adequate outlet. When
an existing storm sewer trunk line is available, the proposed system shall be
designed to connect to it. When an existing storm sewer trunk line is not
available, a drainage plan must be developed that is acceptable to the city.
Minor subdivisions shall be exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-
2004)
   U.   Lot Requirements: All lots within a proposed subdivision will meet the
following requirements:
      1.   Lots shall be sized to meet the requirements of the appropriate
zoning.
      2.   Every lot shall abut upon or have access to an approved street or an
approved cul-de-sac.
      3.   Side lot lines shall be at approximate right angles to the street
line on which the lot faces.
      4.   Strip lots established with the intent of restricting access to
streets or alleys will be prohibited.
   V.   Blocks: Blocks shall be at least three hundred feet (300') long,
normally, not to exceed six hundred sixty feet (660') long. All blocks shall
normally be of sufficient width to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of
approximately equal width and an alley. (Ord. 89-12)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENTS AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Development And Improvement
11-5-2: Invalid Portions And Variances
11-5-1: DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT:
Any proposed subdivision that is within the corporate limits of the city or
within one mile of the boundaries of the city, or which has been proposed for
annexation into the city, shall be developed with the following improvements,
in accordance with city standards and this chapter, at the subdivider's
expense.
   A.   Improvements Required; Submittal Requirements:
      1.   The improvements required shall be the same as those stated in
subsection 11-2-2B of this title.
      2.   To ensure that all improvements are in place and have been properly
installed, the following must be submitted to the city:
         a.   A statement from a Wyoming registered civil engineer that all
improvements are in place and were constructed according to the approved plans
and specifications;
         b.   A statement from a Wyoming registered surveyor that all property
corners and monumentation is correct and in place as depicted on the final
plat;
         c.   A complete set of reproducible as constructed plans;
         d.   A copy of the daily construction diary kept during construction
of improvements;
         e.   Copies of all tests run on construction materials and their
placement during construction of the improvements;
         f.   Depending upon the complexity and size of the proposed
development and any other special conditions that may arise, a photographic log
of the project may also be required;
         g.   A statement from the subdivider guaranteeing the improvements for
a period of one year from the date of acceptance by the city. Acceptance of the
improvements will not be given by the city until all of the supplemental
materials required above have been submitted to and accepted by the city.
   B.   Survey Monuments And Property Corners:
      1.   Exterior Boundary; Streets: Permanent survey monuments shall be set
at all corners on the exterior boundary of the subdivision and at all
intersections and changes of alignment of the centerline of all streets.
      2.   Lot Corners: Permanent survey markers shall be set at all lot
corners, angle points and changes in alignment of all lot, tract or parcel
lines within the subdivision. (Ord. 89-12)
      3.   Monumentation Of Corners:
         a.   Monuments set for the monumentation of all exterior subdivision
corners shall be either an eighteen inch (18") long, two inch (2") diameter
galvanized iron pipe set firmly in concrete with a brass screw set within the
pipe in concrete to mark the exact location of the point, or a standard brass
cap firmly set in concrete and properly stamped, including the surveyor's
registration number.
         b.   Monuments set for the monumentation of all exterior subdivision
corners shall be a standard brass cap firmly set in concrete and properly
stamped, including the surveyor's registration number. Meander lines or
irregular boundaries consisting of many short courses and distances may be
monumented with a five-eighths inch by twenty four inch (5/8" x 24") rebar and
cap if approved by the city public works department prior to setting corners.
Monument construction shall comply with and be as shown on the city standard
street construction detail sheet.
         c.   Permanent survey markers for the monumentation of all lot
corners, rights of way, easements, and any other points shown on the
subdivision plat, used to reference property lines, shall be properly stamped
two inch (2") minimum diameter caps firmly set on a five-eighths inch by twenty
four inch (5/8" x 24") rebar. The stamped cap shall contain an adequate
description of the corner and identification of the surveyor.
         d.   Monuments for the monumentation of street centerline
intersections or changes to street alignment shall be a standard brass cap
firmly set in concrete flush with the finished roadway surface and properly
stamped, including the surveyor's registration number, or a three and one-half
inch (31/2") standard brass tablet set in a square concrete collar and stamped
as said above. Monument construction shall comply with and be as shown on the
city standard street construction detail sheet. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
   C.   Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks: Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be
constructed along both sides of any proposed streets. If these improvements
will not be abutting to existing similar improvements on the adjacent lands, it
will be the developer's responsibility to prove that his proposed improvements
will be compatible with the same improvements when they are placed on the
adjacent lands. Examples: grades and depth of piping, drainage direction,
street alignment, etc.
   D.   Street Design, Construction: Streets shall be designed and constructed
according to accepted engineering practices and construction standards with the
minimum cross section being the city standard.
   E.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at all
intersections.
   F.   Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer shall be constructed according to city
approved specifications and city construction standards, and shall connect to
the city system. It shall also be approved by all appropriate state and/or
federal agencies. Each lot within the proposed subdivision shall be connected
to a minimum eight inch (8") diameter sewer main by a minimum four inch (4")
diameter sewer service line. The service lines shall be extended from the sewer
main to the property line according to city standards. The use of individual
septic systems will not be permitted when a sanitary sewer main is available.
If, in the city's opinion, a larger sewer main is necessary to allow for future
development of adjacent areas, an agreement may be entered into between the
developer and the city whereby the city may help finance the oversized main. It
will be the developer's responsibility to ensure that the piping system for the
proposed subdivision is connected to the city system.
   G.   Storm Sewer: Storm sewer shall be constructed according to city
approved specifications, separate from the sanitary sewer. When reasonably
possible the storm sewer shall be connected to the existing storm sewer system.
   H.   Water Mains: All water mains will be designed and constructed according
to city approved specifications and the city standards. The system will connect
each lot within the proposed subdivision to a minimum six inch (6") diameter
main by the use of a minimum three-fourths inch (3/4") copper service line. The
service lines shall be extended from the main to the property line according to
city standards. These mains will be connected to the city system. All water
mains will be designed in accordance with the city plan, state and federal
regulations, and designed to provide adequate flow and pressure under all
conditions, including major fire conditions. If, in the city's opinion, larger
mains are necessary to allow for the future development of adjacent areas, an
agreement may be entered into between the developer and the city whereby the
city may help finance the oversized main. It will be the developer's
responsibility to ensure that the water piping system for the proposed
subdivision is connected to the city system. The development of private or
community wells for potable water will not be allowed within the corporate
limits of the city.
   I.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed at intervals not to
exceed five hundred feet (500') between hydrants and provided with standard
hose connections as specified by the fire department.
   J.   Open Drains, Irrigation Ditches: All open drains and irrigation ditches
shall be buried or, if possible, eliminated.
   K.   Utilities: All utilities (electrical service, natural gas, telephone,
cable TV, etc.) shall be installed underground, whenever possible, in the
streets, alleys or utility easements shown on the final plat. All buried
utilities will be placed before the finished surface is placed on the streets
or alleys. Written agreements between the subdivider and each utility company,
copies of which will be presented to the city with the construction
specifications, shall be drawn up stating who will install the utilities and
how the costs for their installation shall be covered. In the event an area is
annexed and proposed for subdivision which already has an adequate electrical
distribution system, the subdivider will bear all costs that may be accrued to
alter the system to make it compatible with the city system. It will be the
developer's responsibility to ensure that all utilities necessary or reasonably
expected are placed within the proposed subdivision.
   L.   Other Improvements: Any other improvements, such as bridges, culverts,
etc., not specifically mentioned herein but found necessary by the city due to
conditions found on the site shall be constructed.
   M.   Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be installed according to the
standards and requirements established by the city electrical commissioner, the
cost of which will be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 89-12)
   N.   Public Use Areas: There shall be conveyed to the city an area or areas
of land or the cash equivalent thereof, on the basis of one acre per fifty (50)
prospective dwelling units, to provide for parks, fire stations, recreational
areas and other public uses. This requirement shall be in addition to lands
dedicated for streets and alleys. Prospective commercial development densities
shall be determined by developers with approval from the planning and zoning
board. Minor subdivisions shall be exempt from this requirement. The dedication
of land or cash in lieu of land shall be at the sole discretion of the city
council, with recommendation from the planning and zoning board and the parks
and recreation department. If subsequent rezoning or resubdivision would result
in a higher number of prospective dwelling units, additional land or cash
equivalent shall be conveyed to the city. If the city council elects to require
cash in lieu of land, the amount thereof shall be the fair market value of the
land. If the city and the subdivider cannot agree on that value, each shall
designate an appraiser and the two (2) appraisers so selected shall arrive at a
recommended market value, which shall be binding upon the parties. This open
space requirement shall be waived if the proposed subdivision is located in an
area that has been previously subdivided and the above requirement was
satisfied at that time. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-6-2004)
   O.   Applicability: These regulations and requirements shall apply to all
property annexed into the corporate limits of the city, except annexations
initiated by resolutions of the council, and further shall apply to subdivision
of property already within the corporate limits of the city. Every party
petitioning for annexation shall specifically request that all city services,
including electrical service, be provided by the city to the area proposed for
annexation. No city services shall be extended outside the corporate limits of
the city.
   P.   Certificate Of Engineer; As Constructed Plans: The subdivider shall
retain a Wyoming registered engineer to inspect the construction of all new
improvements or alterations to existing facilities. The engineer shall provide
the city with copies of all daily construction logs and materials testing
results. Upon completion of the proposed improvements, the engineer shall
furnish the city a reproducible set of as constructed plans and specifications
and a certificate signed by him, containing his registration number, certifying
that all improvements have been constructed according to the as constructed
materials.
   Q.   Order Of Accuracy: If annexation of a proposed subdivision is necessary
as stated earlier in these regulations, a closed description with an order of
accuracy greater than one to five thousand (1:5,000) must accompany the
subdivision request. (Ord. 89-12)
11-5-2: INVALID PORTIONS AND VARIANCES:
   A.   Invalid Portions: If for any reason any part, section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this title or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title.
   B.   Variances: If during the approval process of a proposed subdivision it
can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this title will
result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider due to unusual topography or
other similar land conditions, or where the subdivider can show that variances
will make a greater contribution to the intent and purpose of this title, the
commission and council may, upon written request and proper justification,
grant a variance to this title so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured; provided, that any such variance will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title.
   C.   Conflicts: If conflicts arise between this title and any other section
of the city codes, the more restrictive regulation will govern the situation.
(Ord. 89-12)
CHAPTER 6
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND LOT CONSOLIDATIONS
ARTICLE A.  BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Application Required
11-6A-2: Boundary Line Adjustment Requirements
11-6A-3: Boundary Line Adjustment Approval/Recording
11-6A-1: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
Boundary line adjustments, as defined in section
11-1-3 of this title, shall require application to and review by the city, as
set forth herein.
Application for a boundary line adjustment shall be made on a form provided by
the city, which form shall include the name and address of the applicant and
property owner(s), the existing legal descriptions of the properties involved,
and the reason for the boundary line adjustment. A draft of the deed(s) that
will be used to effectuate the property transfer(s) and a draft record of
survey must accompany the application. The application must be accompanied by
the payment of an application fee as set by the city council. (Ord. 2015-03, 5-
5-2015)
11-6A-2: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Property Survey: Boundary line adjustments require a property survey
prepared by a licensed land surveyor that shows all easements, buildings,
utilities, property encroachments, curb cuts and pertinent right of way
improvements. The property survey shall contain a title of "Boundary Line
Adjustment Record of Survey", and necessary approval blocks and signature
lines, including the surveyor's certificate, the owner's certificate(s) with a
notary block, a certificate for approval by the city planner, and a county
clerk and recorder acceptance. A draft of the record of survey document shall
be submitted with the application. If the property owner is a corporation or
LLC, they shall provide a resolution or other evidence of signatory authority
to execute the documents.
   B.   Boundaries Identified: The boundary line adjustment record of survey
shall identify the exterior boundaries of all properties involved in the
boundary line adjustment, show the new interior property line(s), and clearly
indicate the property being transferred and merged into the receiving parcel.
Legal descriptions of the adjusted parcels shall be provided on the survey, and
survey markers set to delineate the parcel boundaries.
   C.   Binding Covenant: The boundary line adjustment record of survey and the
property conveyance document shall contain a binding covenant that the land
being conveyed is for the sole purpose of conducting a boundary line adjustment
and is not to be sold or transferred as a separate parcel by the grantee, heirs
and assigns. (Ord. 2015-03, 5-5-2015)
11-6A-3: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT APPROVAL/RECORDING:
   A.   Approval Criteria: The city planner shall authorize the boundary line
adjustment application if it meets the requirements of this article.
      1.   The parcels to be adjusted must share a common boundary for more
than a single point, and not otherwise be separated by a public right of way or
alley.
      2.   The adjustment is not for the purpose of evading the development
standards of the zoning or subdivision code.
      3.   The adjustment will not result in a violation of any land use,
subdivision, development, or design standards set forth in this code.
      4.   As applicable, proper easements are established for utility services
and access.
      5.   The adjustment does not attempt to vacate or abandon any easement or
right of way of record.
      6.   All property taxes on the parcels are current (not past due).
      7.   As applicable, the adjustment is consistent with the terms and
conditions of any previously approved development plan that is still in effect.
If the application is denied, the city planner shall issue said decision in
writing, stating the reason(s) therefor. The applicant may file an appeal of
the written decision to the planning, zoning and adjustment board pursuant to
section
10-4-3 of this code, within ten (10) business days of the decision.
   B.   Recording: Within ninety (90) days of the boundary line adjustment
authorization, as evidenced by the signature of the city planner on the survey,
the completed survey and the deed(s) for the property transfer(s) shall be
recorded with the county clerk. After recording, a copy of the recorded survey
and deed(s) shall be provided to the city. If these documents are not recorded
within ninety (90) days, the authorization shall automatically become null and
void.
   C.   Financing: The city boundary line adjustment authorization process does
not include a review of financial interests in the properties. Modifications to
financing such as mortgage releases and loan modifications may be needed to
maintain compliance with lender requirements. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to ensure that any financing companies are notified of the
boundary line adjustment and that their requirements are met. (Ord. 2015-03, 5-
5-2015)
ARTICLE B.  LOT CONSOLIDATIONS
SECTION:
11-6B-1: Purpose
11-6B-2: Application And Review Criteria
11-6B-3: Approval And Recording
11-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The lot consolidation process is for the purpose of combining two (2) or more
parcels of land into a single parcel. Adjacent parcels that have been
consolidated pursuant to this article shall be treated as a single lot for
building code, zoning code, and property transfer purposes.
The lot consolidation process is not to be used in cases where a plat vacation
or plat alteration process is appropriate, such as when easements or rights of
way are to be altered or vacated. (Ord. 2015-03, 5-5-2015)
11-6B-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   Persons desiring to consolidate parcels pursuant to this article shall
submit an application to the city community development department. The
application shall establish whether the following requirements are met:
      1.   The parcels to be consolidated must share a common boundary for more
than a single point, and not otherwise be separated by a public right of way or
alley.
      2.   The parcels must be under identical, common ownership and financing,
if any. The applicant is to supply copies of all current deeds and financing
documents to demonstrate such with the application.
      3.   The consolidation is not for the purpose of evading the development
standards of the zoning or subdivision code.
      4.   The consolidation will not result in a violation of any zoning,
subdivision, development, or design standards set forth in this code.
      5.   As applicable, the consolidation is consistent with the terms and
conditions of any previously approved development plan that is still in effect.
      6.   An accurate legal description must be provided. If the lot
consolidation involves unplatted parcels (e.g., metes and bounds descriptions)
the applicant shall have a surveyor prepare a legal description of the
consolidated parcel. If the parcels are unplatted and the existing legal
descriptions are not fully coordinated (e.g., use different basis of bearings)
a record of survey map shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor to establish
the legal description and property boundary for the consolidated parcel. If the
lots are all platted lots within a legal subdivision, the consolidated legal
description will simply be a list of the lots.
      7.   Property taxes on all parcels must be current (not past due).
      8.   Any outstanding lot assessments from an improvement district or
special taxing district must be paid in full prior to filing the lot
consolidation declaration.
   B.   Lot consolidations that meet all of the above requirements shall be
authorized by the city planner. If the requirements are not met, the
application shall be amended to meet the requirements or be denied. If the
application is denied, the city planner shall issue said decision in writing,
stating the reason(s) therefor. The applicant may file an appeal of the written
decision to the planning, zoning and adjustment board pursuant to section
10-4-3 of this code, within ten (10) business days of the decision. (Ord. 2015-
03, 5-5-2015)
11-6B-3: APPROVAL AND RECORDING:
   A.   When a lot consolidation is authorized in accordance with this article,
the property owner shall execute a lot consolidation declaration and file the
declaration with the county clerk. If the property owner is a corporation or
LLC, they shall provide a resolution or other evidence of signatory authority
to execute the property transfer. The form shall be in substantially the
following format:
   Lot Consolidation Declaration
This declaration is made this    day of (Month, Year), by (Property owner),
hereinafter referred to as "declarant".
Recitals:
1.    Declarant is the owner of that certain real property located within the
City of Cody, Park County, Wyoming, described as follows:
(Legal Descriptions of parcels)
2.    Declarant desires to consolidate the above referenced parcels into a
single consolidated parcel pursuant to City of Cody code.
3.    By executing this document, the declarant hereby consolidates said
parcels into a single consolidated parcel, which consolidated parcel is to be
treated as a single lot or parcel for building code, zoning code, and property
transfer purposes.
4.    Once this form is executed, no portion of the consolidated parcel shall
be individually conveyed or transferred without obtaining subdivision
authorization from the City of Cody pursuant to the subdivision requirements in
the City of Cody ordinances.
5.    The declarant and City of Cody are parties to this declaration, which
declaration is binding on the owner, heirs, and devisees of said property.
Now therefore, the following real property is hereby consolidated into a single
parcel/lot, as described herein.
(Consolidated Legal Description)
(Signature block)
(Notary block)
   B.   Within thirty (30) days of the city authorization of the lot
consolidation, the lot consolidation declaration, and record of survey if any,
shall be recorded with the county clerk, or the authorization shall
automatically become null and void. A copy of the recorded document shall be
provided to the city. (Ord. 2015-03, 5-5-2015)
CHAPTER 7
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Description
11-7-2: Intent
11-7-3: Application And Uses
11-7-4: Special Conditions
11-7-5: Absolute Development Standards
11-7-6: Flexible Development Standards
11-7-7: Water And Sanitary Sewer System Requirements
11-7-8: Miscellaneous Criteria For Review
11-7-9: PUD Application And Review Procedures
11-7-10: Final Plan Review And Approval
11-7-1: DESCRIPTION:
   A.   The planned unit development (PUD) is intended to provide a mechanism
for land development through an overall, unified approach rather than the
traditional lot by lot approach. This option encourages innovative approaches
to land development by means of flexibility in design and land utilization in
order to create an improved living environment, preserve the unique features of
the site, and provide services in a more efficient manner. Unlike standard
zoning classifications, the PUD allows for a variety of types of residential
and/or commercial development and encourages appropriate mixes of residential
product types.
   B.   A PUD is developed as a single entity under a plan which may provide a
variety of land uses, housing types and densities, and which provides design
characteristics in addition to those ordinarily allowed by right or condition
in the zoning district in which it is located. It is intended that each PUD
will be a separate development, having differing design characteristics for the
uses and improvements, based upon a particular site situation. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-2: INTENT:
The intent of the planned unit development in the city is:
   A.   To encourage flexibility, innovation of design, and variety of
development types in order to promote the most suitable use of a site and so
that greater opportunities for housing, recreation, shopping and employment may
extend to all citizens of the city.
   B.   To facilitate efficient provision of streets, utilities and municipal
services.
   C.   To encourage a functional system of pathways appropriate to the scale
of a development.
   D.   To achieve a compatible land use relationship with the surrounding
area.
   E.   To preserve the unique, natural, scenic, historical and cultural
features of the site.
   F.   To develop and preserve usable common areas.
   G.   To beautify and improve the quality of life in the city, and to ensure
compliance with the city subdivision regulations and the city zoning ordinance.
   H.   To encourage a high quality of design.
   I.   To encourage the conservation of energy.
   J.   To promote and encourage affordable housing.
   K.   To avoid construction in unsuitable areas.
   L.   To encourage creativity in design, including flexibility in residential
siting to achieve energy conservation.
   M.   To provide for a mix of land uses where enough land area is present to
design an integrated neighborhood consisting not only of various types and
densities of residences, but to include appropriate neighborhood related
nonresidential uses.
   N.   To protect existing neighborhoods from the harmful encroachment of
newer incompatible development by allowing redevelopment of existing sites or
in-fill of vacant property within developed areas through approval of a design
plan. The design plan could reduce setbacks and other requirements to allow new
residential or commercial development that matches the character of the
surrounding existing neighborhood.
   O.   To encourage patterns of development that decreases automobile travel
and thereby reduces traffic congestion.
   P.   To promote development patterns of residential, commercial and office
uses that will mutually benefit the developer, the neighborhood and the
community as a whole. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-3: APPLICATION AND USES:
   A.   A PUD may be established in any residential or commercial zoning
district. A PUD may be applied to any development having one or more principal
uses or structures on a single parcel of ground or contiguous parcels of
ground. Any use or combination of uses may be allowed in a PUD, provided such
uses are consistent with the city master plan and the intent of this title.
   B.   All PUDs shall consist of a harmonious arrangement of uses, buildings,
parking areas, circulation and common areas. Each PUD shall be designed as an
integrated unit, in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and
convenient development.
   C.   Any PUD shall be considered as a conditional use within the zoning
district in which it is to be located.
   D.   The city council retains final approval authority for all planned unit
developments. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-4: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Single Entity Ownership: The tract of land involved shall be either in
one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of
all the property to be included.
   B.   Title To Joint Use Areas And Facilities: The approved final plan shall
specify the manner of holding title to areas and facilities of joint use.
Normally such areas and facilities shall be retained in title by the developers
of the development or deeded to an organization composed of all owners in the
development.
   C.   Use Of General Building And Development Standards: All PUDs shall be
reviewed with consideration given to the established zoning and subdivision
development regulations of the city. However, these regulations will be only
used as a guide. Approval of PUD shall rest upon a finding by the city, as
proved by the applicant for a PUD, that the intent of city regulations is
achieved.
   D.   Standards Established: The city may establish general design standards,
guidelines and policies, for the purpose of implementing and interpreting the
provisions of the PUD regulations. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-5: ABSOLUTE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
These standards may not be varied for any project being developed and reviewed
pursuant to this section:
   A.   Minimum Site Area: A PUD shall consist of land area of a minimum of one
acre in size; the planning, zoning and adjustment board may permit a smaller
land area with written approval. Minimum individual lot area, width and yard
requirements do not apply in a PUD.
   B.   Common Area: The size of the undeveloped land area to be retained as
common area within the PUD shall be based upon the type of development, age
group targeted within the proposed development, population density of the PUD,
proximity to city parks, golf courses and other similar recreational amenities,
and the anticipated impact of the PUD on city services, such as police, water,
sewer, streets, sanitation, etc. Roadways and parking areas cannot be included
in common area requirements. Refer to appendix 3, landscape and common area
plan, for specific requirements and guidelines. As a general guideline, a
minimum of the following land areas should be retained as usable common area:
 
Common Area Requirements For Planned Unit Developments
Land Use Type Minimum Common Area Requirement
Residential   20 percent
Commercial    15 percent
Industrial    10 percent
 
   C.   Conformance To Master Plan: Projects proposed pursuant to this section
shall demonstrate substantial compliance with the Cody master plan in terms of
furthering or helping achieve and implement the goals, objectives, policies and
recommendations contained therein.
   D.   Conformance With Other Applicable Regulations: Planned unit
developments shall conform to all applicable regulations of the city and
Wyoming state statutes, except as modified by this section. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-6: FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All other development standards (those not specifically listed as absolute
standards), such as street widths, density, structural height, setbacks and
required parking are open and flexible, and are to be established for each
individual PUD based upon the criteria below:
   A.   Front Setbacks: "Front setbacks" are defined as the distance buildings
are located from the facing street. Front setbacks shall reflect the general
character of the neighborhood and standards of the zoning district in which the
PUD is located. Front setbacks should be somewhat varied to avoid regimentation
and monotony. The general purposes of front setbacks for the purpose of this
PUD regulation are:
      1.   Attractive streetscapes that provide a comfortable and pleasing
pedestrian environment;
      2.   Functional common area; and
      3.   Light, air and separation of the structure from the activity of the
street.
   B.   Side And Rear Setbacks:
      1.   Setbacks for side and rear yards are critical factors in terms of
neighborhood compatibility. Setbacks in a PUD should reflect those in the
immediate neighborhood. The primary purposes of side and rear setbacks are:
         a.   Functional common area (primarily in rear yards);
         b.   To provide light, air circulation and privacy;
         c.   To provide separation between buildings that allows for vistas,
the use of shared space and visual or physical linkages to common areas;
         d.   To provide private outdoor space (primarily in rear yards);
decks, patios, balconies, etc; and
         e.   Fire protection.
      2.   While side setbacks may be reduced to zero in some urban settings,
no setback shall be reduced to the extent that rain, snow or snowmelt falls
onto adjacent property. If the spacing between primary buildings is not
equivalent to the spacing that would be required between buildings similarly
developed under traditional zoning on separate parcels, other design features
shall provide light, ventilation and other characteristics equivalent to that
which would have been obtained from the setback standards.
   C.   Zero Lot Line Conditions: Where an individual owns adjoining lots, or
where the owners of adjoining lots make legal written agreement, a zero lot
line concept may be used for multi-unit developments. In all cases, a minimum
of ten feet (10') must be retained between separate structures.
   D.   Density: The density of a PUD may exceed the density allowed by
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located if the density
proposed is appropriate and compatible with the existing neighborhood in terms
of total population and bulk, scale, and massing of structures. Project density
should not result in traffic or any other external impacts that will adversely
impact the surrounding neighborhood or adjacent property. In a PUD, density is
a function of the base standards, the type and mix of units proposed, and the
character of the surrounding neighborhood. Overall density shall be calculated
based upon net land area remaining after required parking and right of way have
been provided.
   E.   Height Of Structures: The structural height proposed should be in scale
with the surrounding neighborhood. Structural heights should be appropriate to
the terrain of the project site and to the type of unit(s) proposed. Generally,
perimeter setbacks should increase with structural height, and taller
structures should be located toward the interior of the site, or elsewhere if
the potential for adverse impacts is lessened.
   F.   Parking: Parking standards for PUDs shall be set on an individual,
project by project basis. The city parking standards shall be a guide in
determining appropriate standards. Parking demand is a function of the
following factors:
      1.   Project location;
      2.   Unit type;
      3.   Size of unit;
      4.   Width and type of street; and
      5.   Target market.
   G.   Public And Private Streets: Standards for private streets may be
reduced from city street standards; provided, that vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle
and resident safeties are not compromised. Street design shall be based upon
the type and density of land use served, and total projected vehicle trips.
Private streets will not be maintained by the city. Public streets must be
built to city standards, except that narrower pavement widths may be allowed.
      1.   PUDs may contain private drives not built to city standards, for
access to the buildings on site. In this instance, all roadways must be
dedicated easements for access of owners, law enforcement, and fire and
emergency vehicles;
      2.   All PUDs with private roadways shall establish an owners'
association and assessment schedule for maintenance fees, which shall be
recorded with the site plan; and
      3.   PUDs with lots sold to individuals shall be encouraged to dedicate
and construct public roads that meet city standards, except that narrower
pavement widths may be allowed. The city will accept dedication of public roads
and maintain these in accordance with city policy for all public roadways.
Public roads are not considered part of a PUD site or required common area.
   H.   Public Sidewalks: All PUDs shall provide public sidewalks as required
by the planning, zoning and adjustment board during the review of the PUD. For
development within existing neighborhoods, sidewalks shall be provided in a
manner that is consistent and compatible with existing surrounding development.
   I.   Architectural Guidelines For Commercial Development:
      1.   All convenience store and fast food uses shall be designed in an
architectural and design character that is appropriate for and compatible with
the PUD and neighboring area;
      2.   The planning, zoning and adjustment board shall regulate use of
standardized corporate identification themes integrated into the architectural
design. Excessive use of such themes may be used as grounds for denial of the
project; and
      3.   The elevation design of the building shall provide design character
and detailing on all sides. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-7: WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Whenever any building sites are created within the city and prior to
the issuance of any building permits, a central water distribution and a
sanitary sewer collection system shall be provided.
   B.   These improvements shall be designed, constructed and installed
according to the standards and criteria as adopted by the city and approved by
the public works department and the Wyoming department of environmental
quality. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-8: MISCELLANEOUS CRITERIA FOR REVIEW:
   A.   Glare And Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off street
parking area, streets, signs or structures shall be arranged so as to deflect
light down and/or away from any adjoining residential area. Lighting standards
used within any residential PUD shall be of a height and design that is
compatible with the adjacent development.
   B.   Surface Water Ponding: Natural ponding areas shall be retained as much
as possible. Runoff retention areas should be, if necessary, enlarged or
modified as directed by the public works department to restrict off site
runoff. All storm drainage or runoff modifications will require a design by a
licensed professional engineer. Drainage computations, design calculations, and
final report must be submitted to the public works department for their review
and approval.
   C.   Common Area: All PUDs shall provide functional common area and
landscaped areas.
   D.   Density: Proposed density shall be appropriate and compatible in terms
of the surrounding neighborhood and the zoning district in which the PUD is
located.
   E.   Variety Of Residential Unit Types: As general criteria, PUDs are
encouraged to provide a mix of appropriate dwelling unit types and sizes, or,
provide a unit which broadens the variety of available housing within the
community, or, offer a unit for which there is a recognized need. Large scale
projects that offer little or no diversity and variety of dwelling unit
offerings may be denied on that basis.
   F.   Historical And Cultural Resources: The PUD process encourages the
preservation of historic and cultural resources. When encountered in the course
of development or redevelopment, such resources should be preserved and
incorporated into the project design to the extent possible, and in a manner
that preserves the integrity and community value of the resource.
   G.   Arrangement And Design: Structures shall be separated and arranged to
provide privacy and to allow opportunities for use of shared common area.
Structures should be oriented to common areas such that common area is shared
among units. The configuration of lots or units within the project shall
provide each lot, unit or building with a building site that is suitable when
considering topography and other natural features. The development shall be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of bulk, scale,
structural mass and character. Additionally, PUDs should enhance the sense of
order, cohesiveness and/or distinctive identity of the neighborhood in which
they are located.
   H.   Access: Safe and adequate access shall be provided to all areas of the
proposed development, either directly or indirectly, by a public right of way,
private vehicular or pedestrianway, or a commonly owned easement. Points of
access shall be located and designed to maximize vehicle and pedestrian safety.
Access which forces relatively large volumes of traffic through lower density
neighborhoods via minor streets shall be avoided. Generally, no direct access
from individual residential lots, units or buildings in the PUD is allowed to
collector or arterial streets. Direct access to arterial or collector streets
from residential lots may be allowed in appropriate in-fill development and
PUDs consisting of small land area that could not provide interior street
circulation. Double frontage lots or buildings are not generally allowed,
except where necessary to limit vehicular access to arterial roads; or to
provide separation of development from through traffic; or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography or other natural features of the site. Double
frontage lots shall have an appropriate landscaped buffer between the unit and
the arterial street.
   I.   Circulation: The circulation system shall be designed to provide access
to areas of the site that need to be accessible to vehicles (parking areas,
garages, etc.). "Automobile free" areas and pedestrian only access areas are
encouraged.
   J.   Emergency Access: Adequate access, approved by the fire department and
fire marshal, to all structures by emergency vehicles shall be provided.
   K.   Streetscapes: All planned unit developments with frontage on a public
street or approved private street shall provide safe, inviting and attractive
streetscapes. Where appropriate, streetscapes shall not be dominated by parked
vehicles and garage entrances. Trash enclosures and dumpsters shall be
landscaped and hidden from direct view.
   L.   Pedestrian System: Walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient
system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units, project facilities and
amenities, and principal off site pedestrian destinations. Provision shall be
made for pedestrian and bicycle travel in accordance with the city pathways
master plan. Linkages to schools, parks, public lands and pathways existing on
adjacent properties shall be provided. (Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-9: PUD APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES:
Approval of a PUD shall consist of three (3) procedural steps:
   A.   Concept Plan Review And Obtaining PUD Designation: This is an
opportunity for applicants to discuss requirements, standards and policies that
apply to the proposed development and to identify major problems so that they
can be resolved before a formal application is made. An initial discussion
shall take place with the applicant, the public works director, and other
appropriate city department representatives regarding the applicant's
conceptual proposal and any requirements, standards or policies that may apply.
The general concept of the proposed PUD, presented as graphic sketch plans,
shall be submitted by the applicant for review. The public works director shall
furnish the applicant with written comments regarding the conference.
Applicants are required to present conceptual plans to the planning, zoning and
adjustment board. The planning, zoning and adjustment board must designate the
proposed subdivision as a PUD before being reviewed under this section.
   B.   Submittal: A description of the proposed PUD must be submitted and
shall contain:
      1.   A written explanation of the objectives to be achieved by the PUD;
      2.   A written statement of the scope of the proposed development to
include:
         a.   Architectural theme;
         b.   Uses of single-family and multi-family dwellings, townhouses,
condominiums, commercial structures, and other proposed uses;
         c.   Approximate size and number of lots;
         d.   Availability of adequate or provision of adequate utilities,
including raw water;
         e.   Availability of adequate or provision of adequate new streets;
and
         f.   Statement of compatibility of proposed PUD with adjacent land
uses;
      3.   A graphic sketch plan describing the land uses to be permitted
within each area;
      4.   A common area landscaping concept graphically illustrating the
location and character of, common area, recreational amenities, pathways and
other proposed site improvements; and
      5.   A proposed phasing plan.
   C.   Preliminary Plan Approval:
      1.   Application: Upon completion of the concept plan review, an
application for preliminary plan review approval may be filed with the public
works department. Submittal of sufficient information to permit review of the
land use relationships, densities, the type, size and location of the principal
design elements of the PUD by the planning, zoning and adjustment board. A PUD
that will be developed in phases must submit either a preliminary plan for all
phases or else submit a plan for the initial phase or phases and submit
development guidelines for all subsequent phases.
For unique circumstances or for proposals containing only one principal use,
the public works director may permit the application for a final plan to be
concurrent with the preliminary plan application.
      2.   Information Required: All information required shall be submitted to
the public works department. All submissions shall include:
         a.   All applicable data required by the subdivision regulations of
the city;
         b.   All applicable information required by appendix 1 (site plans),
appendix 2 (traffic impact analysis), appendix 3 (landscape and common area
plan), appendix 4 (master utility plan), appendix 5 (drainage study and site
detention plan), appendix 6 (common area maintenance plan), and appendix 7 (PUD
design objectives review forms);
         c.   A list of abutting landowners of record and their addresses from
the county assessor's office;
         d.   A description of uses and activities proposed within each area,
including the following:
            (1)   The type, sizes and mixture of dwelling units;
            (2)   The acreage or square footage of each use, including parking,
roadways, easements, rights of way and recreational areas;
            (3)   The number of off street parking spaces;
            (4)   Any other applicable restrictions, such as building setbacks,
structural height limits, access, grades or widths of roads;
            (5)   The overall density for the entire PUD, as well as the ratio
of common area in areas to be developed, stated on a percentage basis,
including the number of square feet;
            (6)   A written statement by a registered professional engineer,
which shall describe the following:
   (A) The proposed method and arrangement for connection to the municipal
water system, and the projected usage and needs;
   (B) The proposed method and arrangement for connecting to the municipal
sewer system, and the projected usage and needs;
   (C) The soil, geological, and groundwater conditions of the site and the
manner in which storm drainage will be handled; and
   (D) The manner in which raw water or irrigation water will be provided;
         e.   If the PUD is to be developed in phases, a description of each
phase and an estimated date of completion for each phase. Any substantial
change or alteration in the design of the PUD or completion schedule will
require the owner to submit an amended plan in compliance with the most current
rules and regulations adopted by the city; and
         f.   The applicant shall provide an estimate of water consumption and
amount of sanitary sewer discharge based on the proposed land use plan.
   D.   Review: The city engineering division will provide recommendations to
the planning, zoning and adjustment board and to the city council as to the
compatibility and suitability of a project based upon the evidence submitted by
the applicant. The design objectives review forms (appendix 7) will be used in
evaluating all PUD applications. The following shall be considered:
      1.   Interrelationship of the proposed PUD to conditions on and off the
property;
      2.   Conformance to the city master plan;
      3.   Traffic and parking impacts;
      4.   Land use;
      5.   Pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress;
      6.   Architectural design and neighborhood compatibility;
      7.   Landscaping and neighborhood compatibility;
      8.   Utilities;
      9.   Site drainage;
      10.   Common area;
      11.   Grading;
      12.   Conformance to the PUD regulations; and
      13.   Other related matters.
   E.   Roads:
      1.   PUDs may contain private drives built to private standards for
access to the buildings on site. In this instance all roadways must be
dedicated easements for access of owners, visitors, law enforcement and fire
and emergency vehicles;
      2.   All PUDs with private roadways shall set up a homeowners'
association and assessment schedule for maintenance fees, to be reviewed by the
public works department and recorded with the final plat;
      3.   PUDs with lots sold to individuals shall be encouraged to dedicate
and must construct public roads that meet city standards. The city will accept
dedication of the roads and maintain these in accordance with city policy for
all public roadways. Roads are not considered part of required common area.
   F.   Hearing: The planning, zoning and adjustment board shall hold a public
hearing on the preliminary plan at a regularly scheduled meeting with
recommendations passed on to the city council. The planning, zoning and
adjustment board shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial.
(Ord. 2001-16)
11-7-10: FINAL PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Application: Upon approval or conditional approval of a preliminary
plan by the planning, zoning and adjustment board, an application for a final
plan approval may be submitted. A final application must be submitted within
one year of preliminary approval.
   B.   Review: The final plan must be in compliance with the approved
preliminary plan and shall be reviewed and approved by the planning, zoning and
adjustment board and city council following existing procedures as established
in the city subdivision regulations. The following shall be considered:
      1.   The final plan does not change the general use or character of the
approved preliminary plan;
      2.   The final plan does not increase the number of residential dwelling
units by more than ten percent (10%) from the preliminary plan;
      3.   The final plan does not decrease the common area provided on the
preliminary plan by more than five percent (5%) from the preliminary plan or
below the minimum common area requirements; and
      4.   The final plan complies with the intent of the city master plan.
   C.   Approval: The planning, zoning and adjustment board shall recommend
approval, disapproval or approval with additional conditions. The proposed PUD
may be approved only if all of the following findings are made:
      1.   The proposed project substantially achieves the stated purposes (as
applicable) of this section, and that it is an appropriate and legitimate
application of the PUD process; and
      2.   The proposed project is in substantial compliance with all
applicable standards and criteria of this section; and
      3.   The proposed project substantially meets the character objectives of
preservation or enhancement of the zoning district and neighborhood in which it
is to be located. Projects which are found to be out of scale and character
with their surroundings will not be approved; and
      4.   Streets and intersections serving the project must be adequate to
the size and scale of the project. The safety of motorists, pedestrians and
cyclists will not be jeopardized; and
      5.   The density and distribution of population resulting from the
project will not overburden schools, parks, utilities, or other public
services; and
      6.   All adverse impacts associated with the proposed project are
effectively mitigated to the extent possible.
   D.   Phasing: Phasing of development and associated public and private
improvements is permitted, subject to an approved phasing schedule. If a PUD is
intended to be developed over time in two (2) or more separate phases,
application for approval of a phased planned unit development shall follow
procedures established for concept plan review as outlined in this title. After
concept plan review is completed, phased PUDs may be proposed in accordance
with one of two (2) procedures:
      1.   Application For Simultaneous Approval Of All Phases Of The PUD:
Where all phases of a PUD are planned in detail, an application for approval of
all phases may be made. In such cases, preliminary plans and all required
supplemental information shall clearly set forth phased development boundaries,
schedules and other details pertaining to the phasing of the project.
Upon approval of the preliminary plan for all phases of the PUD, each phase of
the development may occur in accordance with the review and approval procedures
for final plans as specified in this title.
      2.   Application For Approval Of An Initial Phase Of The PUD With
Subsequent Phases Master Planned: Where the applicant wishes to gain
preliminary and final approval for the initial phase of a PUD, and further
wishes to gain master plan approval for subsequent phases of the PUD,
preliminary and final plan review and approval procedures for the initial phase
shall be followed in accordance with this title. A master plan for the
remaining phases of the development shall be provided for review and approval.
   E.   Minor Adjustments: Minor adjustments to an approved PUD plan may be
made and approved administratively, in writing, by the public works department
at the time a building permit is issued by the building department. Minor
adjustments are those changes which may affect the precise dimension of
buildings and the siting of buildings, but which do not affect the basic
character, use or arrangement of buildings, or the basic design, density or
common area requirements of the development.
   F.   Major Adjustments: Major adjustments are those that substantially alter
the character, use or arrangement of buildings, or the basic design, density or
common area of the development. When, in the opinion of the public works
director, any proposed change or adjustment constitutes a major adjustment, no
building permit shall be issued without a review of an amended PUD by the
planning, zoning and adjustment board and approval by the city council. Major
adjustments from the final plan shall be defined as follows:
      1.   A change in the character of the development;
      2.   An increase of greater than one percent (1%) in the approved number
of dwelling units;
      3.   An increase of greater than two percent (2%) in the improved gross
leasable floor areas of retail, service, office and/or industrial buildings;
      4.   A reduction by greater than two percent (2%) in the approved common
area, but not to be below the minimum common area requirements;
      5.   A change in the location and placement of buildings;
      6.   An increase in the problems relating to traffic circulation and
public utilities;
      7.   Any change in the development that would normally cause the project
to be disqualified under the city subdivision review and approval process.
   G.   Duration Of PUD Approval: Within a maximum of two (2) years following
approval of a PUD, development must commence or the proposed development must
be reviewed for renewal.
   H.   Appendix: The PUD appendix contains the following required information
sections:
      1.   Site plans;
      2.   Traffic impact analysis;
      3.   Landscape and common area plan;
      4.   Master utility plan;
      5.   Drainage study and site detention plan;
      6.   Common area maintenance plan;
      7.   PUD design objectives review forms:
         a.   All development;
         b.   Residential;
         c.   Commercial;
         d.   Industrial. (Ord. 2001-16)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL INFILL SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Applicability
11-8-3: Variances To Typical Subdivision Design Standards
11-8-4: Residential Infill Subdivision Design Standards
11-8-5: Other Requirements
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate subdivision development
standards for the infill and redevelopment of underutilized residential
properties, so as to allow additional housing opportunities on individual lots
in existing neighborhoods. To help minimize development costs and thereby
encourage more affordable housing, this chapter is intended to be utilized as a
template for qualifying developments without the need for complete engineered
plans - relying instead on the standards herein and qualified contractors and
tradesmen to complete the subdivision improvements to acceptable standards.
Therefore, the scope of this chapter is limited to projects that are relatively
straightforward and do not involve construction of any new public streets,
public water lines, or public sewer lines. The maximum size limit for
applicability of this chapter is meant to separate small infill situations from
larger properties that are more appropriately developed with traditional
development patterns and improvements. (Ord. 2017-25, 1-2-2018)
11-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
The residential infill subdivision process is an option in addition to the
traditional subdivision option outlined in chapters 1 through 5 of this title,
and the PUD option outlined in chapter 7 of this title; applicants may choose
one set of requirements, but they are not to be intermingled. This chapter
shall only be applicable to the subdivision of properties that have all of the
following characteristics. Qualifying subdivisions are referred to as
residential infill subdivisions.
   A.   The property is 1.2 acres (52,272 square feet) or less in size (net lot
area);
   B.   The property is at least sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet in size
(net lot area) if located in an R-1, R-2, or R-2MH Zoning District; ten
thousand (10,000) square feet (net) if zoned R-3; and, seven thousand two
hundred (7,200) square feet (net) if zoned R-4.
   C.   The property is located in a residential zoning district and does not
contain any non-conforming commercial or industrial uses;
   D.   The property has frontage on and access directly to/from a paved public
street;
   E.   The property will contain no more than five (5) lots, and no more than
five (5) dwelling units (primary and accessory);
   F.   The access route to any lot in the proposed subdivision is not more
than three hundred fifty feet (350') in length, measured from the public street
right-of-way to the middle of the turnaround;
   G.   All lots will be served with public sewer, public water, and City
electric power;
   H.   No sewer or water lines will be shared between lots - individual sewer
and water service lines must be run to each lot. (Ord. 2017-25, 1-2-2018)
11-8-3: VARIANCES TO TYPICAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise specified herein, the provisions of chapters 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 of this title remain applicable. Variances to the provisions of chapters
1 through 5 of this title are provided as follows. Residential infill
subdivisions that meet the standards of this chapter need not comply with the
following subsections of this title:
11-4-2H, Dead End Streets, Alleys
11-4-2L, Vertical Curve Length
11-4-2P, Alleys
11-4-2Q, Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk, Paved Streets
11-4-2R, Street Cross Section
11-5-1A2 (Except as otherwise specified herein, engineered plans are not
required for private improvements in infill subdivisions.)
11-5-1C, Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks
11-5-1D, Street Design, Construction
11-5-1M, Street Lighting
11-5-1P, Certificate Of Engineer; As Constructed Plans (Ord. 2017-25, 1-2-2018)
11-8-4: RESIDENTIAL INFILL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall apply to residential infill subdivisions.
All applicable required improvements are the responsibility of the subdivider
and shall be installed prior to issuance of a building permit for a dwelling
within the subdivision, or within two (2) years of final plat approval,
whichever occurs first. If the subdivision is to be phased, it must be
disclosed with the subdivision application, and improvements may be phased
accordingly. The layout of all subdivision improvements shall be shown on the
preliminary plat application drawings.
   A.   Access And Frontage Requirements: The following access standards have
been developed in coordination with the Fire Marshal, and pursuant to the Fire
Marshal's authority, when the following standards are met, they supersede any
conflicting and more restrictive standards of appendix D of the International
Fire Code.
      1.   Lot Frontage: All lots shall be provided with frontage on a public
street or private access easement, in accordance with the table in section
10-6-2 of this Code. Provided, when a turnaround is not required, the lot at
the end of the private access easement (the lot furthest from the public
street) need only have frontage on the access easement of the width required by
subsection A3 of this section. The connection of the access easement to the
public right-of-way shall not be deemed as meeting the frontage requirement for
any of the proposed lots - the required frontage shall be provided and measured
where the street or access easement runs along the buildable portion of the lot
(s).
The private access easement may overlay one or more lots in the subdivision, or
be located as a separate tract owned in common by the owners of all lots. The
dedication of the access easement shall include either access for the general
public (public access easement), or, if a private access easement, access for
utility providers, emergency service providers, and other public services in
addition to the lot owners and their invited guests.
      2.   Entrance Requirement: The physical connection of the subdivision
access drive to the public street shall consist of a paved entrance/exit
extending from the curb cut (face of curb, or edge of roadway pavement if no
curb exists), to a point at least twenty five feet (25') from the public
street, measured along the direction of travel. Asphalt thickness shall be at
least three inches (3"), compacted depth.
      3.   Minimum Dimensions: Minimum dimensions of the access easement and
the composition of the access drive shall be in accordance with the following
table. Base course is one and one-fourth inch (11/4") minus with fines. Top
course is five-eighths inch (5/8") minus with fines.
 
Number Of
Dwelling Units
On Easement,   Access Easement Width Of        Driving Surface Turnout
Including Unit Width           Driving Surface Type And Depth  Required?
(s) On Front
Corner Lot(s)
                                               Gravel (6" base
                                               course and 2"
2              17'             12'             crushed top     No
                                               course,
                                               compacted
                                               depths)
                                               Gravel (6" base Only when a
                                               course and 2"   turnaround is
                                               crushed top     required per
3              17'             12'             course,         subsection A8 of
                                               compacted       this section and
                                               depths)         length of access
                                                               drive >150'
                                               Gravel (6" base Only when a
                                               course and 2"   turnaround is
                                               crushed top     required per
4 to 5         23'             18'             course,         subsection A8 of
                                               compacted       this section and
                                               depths)         length of access
                                                               drive >150'
 
      4.   Access Drive: The cross-section design of the access drive shall be
in accordance with the following diagram; provided the reviewing official may
consider modifications to the layout that retain the applicable functions of
access width, parking backup area, snow storage, stormwater control, and any
other necessary considerations. Where room allows, underground utilities are to
be located out from beneath the access drive in a separate utility easement.
When necessary to divert from such alignment due to existing obstructions such
as houses and concrete driveways, the utilities may be located under the access
drive as needed to avoid the obstruction(s), and a combined access and utility
easement shall be provided.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1510.jpg]
 
      5.   Approach To Public Street: In areas that have curb and gutter along
the property frontage, the approach to the public street shall be constructed
to the City's alley standard, with curb, gutter, and ADA-compliant sidewalk.
      6.   Access Drive Connection: If the access drive connects to a major
collector or arterial, the City Engineer may require any existing approach to
be removed and all access to occur from the common access drive.
      7.   Property Frontage: If the property frontage has curb and gutter, but
no sidewalk, the subdivider shall install sidewalk to City standards across the
property frontage. If no curb and gutter exist along the property frontage, the
property owner shall agree on behalf of the owners of the lots to participate
proportionally in any future City project to improve the adjacent street to
City standards, which agreement shall be noted on the plat and any document
transferring ownership of the lots in the subdivision.
      8.   Turnarounds: A turnaround and associated easement shall be provided
at the end of the access drive if any of the following conditions will exist.
The distances are measured from the edge of the public right-of-way.
         a.   The access drive (fire lane) is longer than one hundred fifty
feet (150').
         b.   The middle of the furthest residence will be more than two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the public right-of-way.
         c.   The access drive serves four (4) or more dwelling units,
including front corner lot(s).
         d.   The Fire Marshal or City Engineer determine that due to unique
circumstances, a turnaround is necessary to prevent a significant traffic or
access safety issue.
      9.   Turnaround Construction Options: All required turnarounds shall be
constructed to the minimum dimensions of one of the following turnaround
options. (Lot configuration shown as example only.) Construction specifications
(e.g., materials, compaction, etc.) for the turnaround shall be the same as the
access drive. A turnaround easement (or access easement) must be provided for
the turnaround.
Cul-de-sac option (offset style shown - centered bulb also permitted):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1512.jpg]
 
Boot option:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1514.jpg]
 
Hammerhead option:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1516.jpg]
 
      10.   Turnout: When required as identified in the table in subsection A3
of this section, a turnout shall be provided approximately mid-point along the
access drive by widening the driving surface to a minimum of twenty feet (20')
for a length of thirty feet (30') and tapering the ends of the turnout to the
access drive at no more than a forty five degree (45°) angle. Construction of
the turnout shall be to the same specifications as the access drive. Refer to
the following figure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1518.jpg]
 
   B.   Utility Requirements:
      1.   Utility Service Connections: All lots shall be provided with utility
service connections in accordance with the requirements of the utility
providers and applicable Plumbing and Electrical Codes. At a minimum, domestic
water service, public sewer and City power shall be provided and stubbed to
each lot. Natural gas and telecommunication services are highly recommended.
Raw water (irrigation) shall be provided to each lot if the property retains
its water rights through the subdivision process.
      2.   Shared Services: City power, natural gas, and telecommunications may
utilize shared services to the lots. However, domestic water and public sewer
services shall be provided by individual service lines to each lot, which
services shall be in accordance with the applicable adopted Building/Plumbing
Codes, this Code (see title 8, chapters 2 and 3 of this Code), and Wyoming DEQ
standards.
      3.   Utility Design Guidelines: The following utility standards are
applicable, in addition to any more specific standards of applicable utility
codes and policies.
         a.   The sewer and water services are to be stubbed into each lot to
the point that they extend under the dry utility trench and to the building pad
side of the utility easement.
         b.   Water service line installations must comply with section 8-2-
7 of this Code.
         c.   Minimum depth of a sewer service line is three feet (3'), unless
insulated with rigid foamboard per the requirements of the building official.
         d.   Minimum slope for four inch (4") sewer pipe is one percent (1%),
although a minimum of 1.5 percent is recommended.
         e.   Provide a minimum of twelve inches (12"), measured horizontally
on center, between sewer service lines.
         f.   Water taps in the City main are to be installed no closer than
eighteen inches (18") on center. From the taps, the water service lines are to
be run directly to the edge of the street right-of- way (perpendicular to main)
with a minimum horizontal separation of twelve inches (12") on center. Once
within the development (after the curb stops), the water lines may be bundled
(no separation) if buried a minimum depth of five and one-half feet (51/2'),
otherwise the twelve inch (12") separation must be maintained and minimum depth
is five feet (5'). [Note: Placing at a 51/2-foot depth allows future
replacement at 5 feet without disturbing other water service lines in the
bundle. In either case, you may also want to consider throwing an extra pipe or
two in the trench for future "replacement" needs.]
         g.   Anywhere a domestic water line is within twelve inches (12")
horizontally from a sewer line and either below or less than eighteen inches
(18") vertically above a sewer line, the water line must be sleeved (i.e.,
placed in sealed conduit).
         h.   Cleanouts are required in the sewer service lines at intervals
not to exceed one hundred feet (100') (equal intervals recommended), and at any
change in direction greater than forty five degrees (45°). Any cleanout in a
driving surface must be protected with a minimum five inch (5") thick concrete
collar, measuring at least twelve inches (12") beyond the outside of the pipe.
         i.   All utility services are to be provided with either APWA uniform
color-coded detectable (metallic) warning tape, or a combination of non-
detectable (non-metallic) warning tape and color-coded tracer wire. The warning
tape is to be installed one foot (1') directly above the utility service pipe/
conduit. If separate tracer wire is used, it is to be copper or copper clad
steel, rated for direct bury, measure 12 AWG or larger (smaller number), and be
taped to the side of the pipe/conduit.
         j.   The ends of all utility stubs into the lots shall be marked with
solid lumber (2 x 4 or larger) or PVC pipe, that is painted the corresponding
APWA color for that utility (e.g., green for sewer, blue for domestic water).
      4.   Authorized Template: The utility layout indicated in template of
subsection A4 of this section in cross-section view and below in plan view show
an authorized typical layout for utilities in a residential infill subdivision.
Alternative layouts that otherwise meet applicable codes and provide acceptable
access for the utility providers may be proposed and considered as part of the
subdivision review process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1520.jpg]
 
   C.   Stormwater/Drainage Requirements:
      1.   The area of the access easement shall be graded to manage stormwater
within the subdivision, so that no net increase of runoff or creation of a
concentrated discharge point occurs. The use of swales and/or infiltration
trenches are recommended methods. The stormwater infiltration area is also
intended to serve as snow storage area.
Minimum dimensions of infiltration trenches and swales, which extend the full
length of the access drive are listed in the table below; provided, if the
native soil has a high clay content (e.g., bentonite) or other low-permeability
structure (e.g., hardpan), the applicant will need to coordinate stormwater
management design options with an engineer.
Rock used in the infiltration trenches or to line the swale must be clean and
of a single size so as to provide proper void capacity for the stormwater. A
single size in the range of one and one-half inches (11/2") to three inches
(3") (non-crushed) is recommended.
Coffer dams must be installed along the swales/trenches as needed to prevent
lateral flow of stormwater down the swale/trench - the swales/trenches must
function as infiltration features, not water conveyance features. If
infiltration trenches are used, they must be constructed per the design in the
City's Stormwater Policy Manual.
 
Width of access drive               12 feet   18 feet
Swale option:                                 
 Width of swale (open air)         36 inches 42 inches
 Depth of swale (open air)         6 inches  7 inches
Depth of cobble liner (below swale) 4 inches  5 inches
Infiltration trench option:                   
  Width                             24 inches 24 inches
 Depth                             16 inches 24 inches
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8fc18b3576f22c83b81cf78a1adf27c6fe457247/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1522.jpg]
 
      2.   Any infiltration trench, drywell, or other method of stormwater
retention that utilizes inground retention (effectively anything other than
open swales, ditches, and ponds), must register the infiltration facility as a
type V injection well with the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality,
Groundwater Division (application available at deq.wyoming.gov/wqd/underground-
injection-control). If any inground retention facility is proposed, a copy of
the Wyoming DEQ application must be provided to the City prior to construction
of the facility.
   D.   Signage Requirements: The following signs are to be installed by the
subdivider. The size and mounting methods shall comply with the MUTCD Manual
and/or appendix D of the International Fire Code.
      1.   Address numbers for the dwelling units on the rear lot(s) shall be
posted at the intersection of the private access drive with the public road, in
accordance with the standards of the Building Code (e.g., minimum 4 inch letter
height, on contrasting background).
      2.   Install "No Parking/Fire Lane" sign(s) along the access drive,
located and spaced as approved by the Fire Marshal.
      3.   Any required turnout and turnaround must be signed, "No Parking".
      4.   A "Share the Road" sign is required near the entrance to the
subdivision if the access drive serves four (4) or more dwelling units,
including the front corner lot(s).
   E.   Fencing Requirements: Where the access drive is located adjacent to a
neighboring residentially-zoned property, a minimum six foot (6') tall, solid
fence shall be installed between the access drive and the neighboring property,
except within fifteen feet (15') from the public street right-of-way. This
requirement may be waived or reduced (e.g., partial fence, shorter fence, non-
solid fence) by the reviewing official when the neighboring property owner
requests such modification or waiver in writing. (Ord. 2017-25, 1-2-2018)
11-8-5: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The number and location of all dwelling units, whether primary
dwellings or accessory dwelling units, must be identified in the subdivision
process and noted on the plat.
   B.   Either the lot, or the turnaround serving it, must be within six
hundred feet (600') of a functional fire hydrant, measured as the fire hose
would lay. If a new fire hydrant is required, engineering and installation is
the responsibility of the subdivider and shall be coordinated with Public
Works.
   C.   Maintenance agreements or covenants must be established to set forth
the maintenance responsibilities for the private access drive tract/easement,
including maintenance of the access drive, fence, and stormwater facility. The
agreement must include establishment of a bank account and schedule of payment
by the lot owners. The payment levels must be based on anticipated costs for
regular recommended maintenance and repair activities, such as snow removal,
regrading, weed control, signage, etc. The maintenance agreement/covenant must
be recorded with the plat. The initial minimum payment and schedule shall be
determined with the final plat process.
   D.   Enforcement of "No Parking" (e.g., towing) shall be by the homeowners,
and authority for such included in the maintenance agreement or covenants for
the subdivision.
   E.   All lots shall utilize a cluster mailbox stand, as specified by the
local Post Office, which mailbox and associated concrete pad shall be installed
to USPS specifications by the subdivider.
   F.   Garbage collection will occur on or next to the public street near the
intersection with the access drive. The applicant will need to coordinate
whether a dumpster or roll-outs are to be utilized. If a dumpster is to be
utilized, the location, pad design, and any pedestrian bypass around the
dumpster that may be needed shall be specified after consultation with Public
Works.
   G.   Gates or other features that would obstruct vehicle or pedestrian use
of the access drive are prohibited.
   H.   If the subdivision improvements are not installed prior to recording
the final plat, the final plat shall include a note that states that no
building permit shall be issued for a dwelling until all required subdivision
improvements are completed. (Ord. 2017-25, 1-2-2018)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Words And Phrases Defined
12-1-1: WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
title its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition,
and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and b) adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30,
VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before January 1 for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended, and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of
interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
  1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
  2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM, or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this title when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this title. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2006-12, 9-19-2006)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Applicability; Interpretation
12-2-1: APPLICABILITY; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Lands To Which This Title Applies: This title shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Cody, including
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) if applicable, of the city of Cody.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Park
County And The City Of Cody", dated June 18, 2010, with accompanying flood
insurance rate maps and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this title.
   C.   Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be
required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this title.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or
have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this title and
other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This title is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this title and another ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this title,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater
floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This title does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of
the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 2010-09, 5-18-2010)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
12-3-1: Floodplain Administrator; Permit Procedures; Variances
12-3-1: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; PERMIT PROCEDURES; VARIANCES:
   A.   Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The public works director
is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this title and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national
flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this title.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this title.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. (Ord.
2006-12, 9-19-2006)
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the Wyoming office of homeland security, prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency. (Ord. 2010-09, 5-18-
2010)
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection 12-2-1B, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood
Hazard", of this title, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
section
12-4-1 of this title.
   C.   Permit Procedures: Application for a development permit shall be
presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing
and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection 12-4-1B2, "Nonresidential Construction", of this title;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B1 of this section.
   D.   Factors For Approval Or Denial: Approval or denial of a development
permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions
of this title and the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   E.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   Appeal Board: The appeal board, as established by the community,
shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements
of this title.
      2.   Appeal Of Decision Of Floodplain Administrator: The appeal board
shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this title.
      3.   Appeal To The Courts: Any person or persons aggrieved by the
decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
      4.   Record; Report Of Variances: The floodplain administrator shall
maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances
to the federal emergency management agency upon request.
      5.   Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   New Construction; Substantial Improvements: Variances may be issued
for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of
one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in subsection C2 of this section have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one- half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      7.   Conditions Of Variance: Upon consideration of the factors noted
above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of this chapter.
      8.   Designated Floodways: Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      9.   Repair Of Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the
repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      10.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      11.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided, that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections E1 through E9 of this
section are met; and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2006-12, 9-19-2006)
CHAPTER 4
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
12-4-1: Standards
12-4-2: Floodways
12-4-1: STANDARDS:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection 12-2-1B
of this title; 2) subsection 12-3-1B8 of this title; or 3) subsection C of this
section, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection 12-3-1C1 of this title is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 2006-
12, 9-19-2006)
      3.   Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
within zone A on a community FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a) outside of
a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE
on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this
subsection be elevated so that either: a) the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is at or above the base flood elevation, or b) the manufactured home
chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      4.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days,
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection 12-3-1C of this title,
and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
subsection B3 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
      5.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. (Ord. 2010-09, 5-18-2010)
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with this title.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of subsection 12-2-1C, "Establishment Of Development
Permit", of this title; subsection 12-3-1C, "Permit Procedures", of this title;
and the provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection 12-2-1B or 12-3-1B8 of this title.
      4.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2006-12, 9-19-2006)
12-4-2: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 12-2-1B
of this title, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of section
12-4-1 of this chapter.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2010-09, 5-18-2010)
