7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/301
City of Atlanta
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 28
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 2017-
001 adopted 2/20/17.
HOME RULE CHARTER
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.01. Incorporation.
The residents of the City of Atlanta in Cass County, Texas, with the corporate limits now established and as
hereafter altered, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a municipal body politic and corporate, in
perpetuity under the name of the City of Atlanta, hereinafter referred to as the City, and having such powers,
privileges, rights, duties and immunities as herein provided.
Section 1.02. Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the Council-Manager Government.
Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, the Statutes of
the State and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in elective council, hereinafter referred to as
the Council, which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager,
who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised
in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be
prescribed by ordinance.
Section 1.03. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the City of Atlanta shall be the same as have heretofore been established, as of this date,
which boundaries are more fully set out on an official map recorded in Minute Book 11, Page 264, of the
Minutes of the City of Atlanta, here referred to for more complete description. The boundaries of the City may
be altered by extension or contraction through annexation or detachment of territory by one of the following
methods:
(a) Annexation on Petitions of Owners:
Upon presentation of a petition in writing signed by a majority of the owners of adjacent territory, the
Council after hearing arguments for and against such action, may by ordinance annex such territory into the City.
Hearing on such a petition must take place not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of
filing.
(b) Annexation by Action of the Council:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/301
Territory adjacent to the City may be annexed by ordinance with or without the consent of the owners or
inhabitants thereof, subject to such procedural rules as may be prescribed by law.
(c) Detachment of Territory:
Territory lying within the boundary limits of the City and adjacent in the outer limits may be detached from
the City upon presentation to the Council of a petition in writing signed by a majority of the owners of land
within the territory.
The Council, after hearing the arguments for and against such actions, may grant or deny the request;
however, any territory so detached shall be liable for its pro-rata share of any debts incurred while it was a part
of the City, and the City shall continue to levy and collect taxes on the property until such indebtedness has been
discharged.
In such cases, a revised official map, depicting the revised boundaries of the City shall be duly recorded in
the minutes of the City of Atlanta, and shall be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours by the City Secretary.
Section 1.04. General Powers of the City.
The City shall be a Home Rule City, as authorized by Article XI, Section 5, of the Texas Constitution, and
Chapter 9 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas, with full power of local self government,
including the right to amend this Charter, as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State. It shall have all
the powers granted to cities by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied
power necessary to carry into execution such granted powers. It may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued;
may contract and may be contracted with; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas, or any
agency or political subdivision thereof, or the Federal Government or any on its agencies, to accomplish any
lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety and convenience of
the City and its inhabitants; may acquire property within, or without its corporate City limits for any municipal
purpose in fee simple, or any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and,
subject to the provisions of this Charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, and control such property as
may now or hereafter be owned by it; may enact ordinances and adopt such regulations as may be expedient for
the maintenance of good government, order, and peace of the City and the welfare, health, morals, comfort,
safety, and convenience of its inhabitants, and shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions,
rights, privileges, and immunities of every kind and nature whatsoever, subject only to the limitations imposed
by the State Constitution, the State Laws and this Charter.
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be judged to be exclusive, and, in addition to the
powers enumerated or implied herein, it is intended that the City shall have and may exercise all the powers
which, under the Constitution and Laws of this State, it would be competent for this Charter to enumerate
specifically.
Section 1.05. Streets and Public Property.
The City shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction, in, upon, over and under the public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, highways, squares, ways and parks within the corporate limits of the City and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, and in, upon, over and under all public property of the City. With respect to
each and every public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, square, park or other ways within the corporate limits of
the City and the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, the City shall have the power to establish and maintain,
improve, alter, abandon or vacate the same; to regulate; establish or change the grade thereof; to police, control
and regulate the use thereof, and to abate and remove in a summary manner any encroachment thereon.
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
Section 2.01. Composition and Terms of Office.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/301
The Legislative and Governing Body of the City Council shall consist of six (6)members including the Mayor
and five (5) Council members. Except as hereinafter provided, each Council member including the Mayor, shall
serve a term of two (2) years upon being duly elected. The City shall be divided into four (4) separate and
distinct geographical districts. Each district shall, to the extent reasonable possible, be equally populated. Four
(4) Council members shall be elected, one (1) from each of the four (4) geographical districts, which shall be
numbered One, Two, Three and Four respectively. The qualified voters of each of said districts shall by plurality
vote, elect one (1) Council member to a Place on the council numbered to correspond with the district of which
the voter is a resident. The fifth Council member, to be designated as Place Number 5, and the Mayor shall be
elected at large by all of the qualified voters of the City by a plurality vote.
Following upon the adoption of this Proposed Charter Amendment an election shall be held on the first Saturday
in May of 1988 and Council members for Places One, Two, Three, Four and Five and the Mayor shall be
elected. In said election, the Mayor and Council members for Places Five and One shall be elected to serve two
(2) year terms but Council members for Places Two, Three and Four shall be elected for only a one year term
thereafter on the first Saturday in May in each odd numbered year an election shall be held to elect the Council
members for Places Two, Three and Four for two (2) year terms and on the first Saturday in May in each even
numbered year an election shall be held to elect the Mayor and Council members from Places Five and One for
two (2) year terms from the date of their election.
(Sec. 2.01. ameneded by general election; May 10, 2008)
Section 2.02. Compensation of Official Expenses.
Each member of the Council shall receive $10.00 for each regular meeting attended, and the Mayor shall receive
$30.00 for each regular meeting attended; further, actual expenses incurred when on official business shall be
reimbursed. Effective May 1996, each member of the Council shall receive $25.00 for each regular meeting
attended and the Mayor shall receive $50.00 for each regular meeting attended.
Section 2.03. Indemnification.
Duly elected City officials acting in their official capacity shall be protected by the City from personal financial
loss resulting from Council decisions made while in official sessions as a result of law suits filed pertaining to
such decisions.
Section 2.04. Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore.
The Mayor shall preside at the meetings of the Council and shall be recognized as the Head of the City
Government for all ceremonial purposes, and for military law or other emergencies. The Council shall elect from
among its members a Mayor Pro Tempore at the first meeting after the General Election, to serve one year. The
Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in the absence or disability of the Mayor, and will have no voting powers while
serving in this capacity except in case of tie.
Section 2.05. Qualification and Eligibility.
Each of the four (4) Council members elected from a district shall be a qualified voter of the State of Texas and
have been a resident of the district from which the Council member is elected for no less than six (6) months
prior to the filing for office and must continue to reside in that district for his or her entire term of office. The
Mayor and the one (1) Council member elected at large shall be a qualified voter of the State of Texas and each
shall have been a resident of the City of Atlanta for no less than six (6) months prior to filing for office and must
continue to reside in the City for his or her entire term.
If any member of the Council shall at any time fail to possess any of the above qualifications, his/her office shall
immediately become vacant. If any member is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings without
explanation acceptable to a majority of the other members, his/her office shall be declared vacant at the next
regular meeting of the Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/301
Section 2.06. Judge of Qualifications.
The Council shall be the judge of the qualification and election of its own members and shall, on the next regular
meeting after each regular and special election, canvass the returns and declare the results of each election.
Section 2.07. Vacancies.
When a vacancy occurs in the Council, the remaining members shall, within thirty (30) days, appoint a qualified
person to serve until the next regular or special City election, when it shall be filled for the unexpired term, if
any, by regular election procedure. The Council shall not, however, fill more than one (1) vacancy by
appointment within the period between two (2) regular City elections. In the event more than one (1) vacancy
occurs during said period, then the Council shall order a special election to be held within forty-five (45) days of
the last vacancy, to elect the successor or successors to the office or offices vacated; however, no special election
shall be held within ninety (90) days before a regular City election. Vacancies filled by special election shall be
for the remainder of the term of office. In the event three (3) or more vacancies occur together, the County Judge
of Cass County shall, within thirty (30) days, call an election to fill such vacancies.
Section 2.08. Quorum, Voting and Recording.
A simple majority of the voting members of the Council shall constitute a quorum at a regular or special Council
meeting. The affirmative vote of a simple majority of the members of the Council present shall be necessary to
take any action at a regular or special Council meeting. The Mayor shall have no veto power.
Voting shall be by “For” or “Against” on roll call. The Mayor shall have no vote except in case of tie. All
members of the Council present, except the Mayor, shall vote upon every resolution or ordinance, except when
there is a conflict in interests and the reason shall be stated concisely in the record, and the vote of each member
shall be recorded in the minutes.
Section 2.09. Powers.
All power of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter.
Section 2.10. Ordinances.
The City Council shall exercise its powers by oral resolution recorded in the minutes, written resolution, and
written ordinances so that there will be a written record for all action. Written ordinances shall be required for
every act establishing a penalty, or when required by law or this charter. Otherwise the Council shall determine
whether to use an oral resolution recorded in the minutes, a written resolution, or a written ordinance to exercise
its powers. To be effective each resolution and ordinance shall be passed in accordance with the provisions for
taking action prescribed in Section 2 08 of this Charter. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written
or printed form as may be required by law and the subject matter shall be clearly expressed in its title Except as
otherwise provided by this Charter, it shall be necessary that the ordinance be read, exclusive of exhibits and
incorporations by reference one (1) time at each of two (2) regular or special Council meetings before it can be
voted upon and passed. Unless otherwise provided herein, said ordinances shall take effect upon final passage.
The City Secretary shall cause the descriptive caption and penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of its
provisions to be published in one (1) issue of the official newspaper of the City of Atlanta with a statement of
places where copies have been filed for public inspection and, with the exception of emergency notices, no such
ordinance shall take effect until after the date of publication. The City Secretary shall note on every ordinance
whose caption and penalty clauses are required to be published, and on the record thereof, the date of publication
which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Mayor and the City Secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance
book in a manner approved by the Council. It shall be necessary to record only the caption or title of ordinances
in the minutes or journal of the Council meetings.
Section 2.11. Emergency Ordinances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/301
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may adopt
emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the
rate charged by any public utility for its service, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in
Section 9.14. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances
generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the
enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific
terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, or amended, by a simple majority of the Council members
present. After adoption, emergency ordinances shall be published and printed as prescribed for other ordinances.
They shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as the ordinance may specify. Every emergency
ordinance except one made pursuant to Section 9.14 shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first (61st)
day following the date of adoption, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance in the manner
specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption
of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
Section 2.12. Ordinances Now in Effect.
All ordinances of the City now in existence and not inconsistent with provisions of this Charter shall remain in
effect until amended or repealed by the City Council.
Section 2.13. Prohibitions.
(a) Holding Other Office or Being a Candidate.
Except upon resignation from office, no Council member or Mayor shall become a candidate for any other
elective office when the term of such office begins prior to the expiration of the term of the office presently held.
In the absence of a formal resignation, the act of filing to become a candidate for such an office shall be deemed
resignation from the Council and create a vacancy on the Council. Nothing in the paragraph shall prohibit a
Council member or Mayor from becoming a candidate for the same or another office when his or her term of
office ends at the same time the office sought begins. If any employee of the City or an appointee of the Council,
other than an appointed Council member, files for an elective office, in the City of Atlanta, his or her position
shall be vacant upon such filing. No former Council member may hold any compensated appointive City office
or employment until two (2) years after the expiration of the term for which he or she was appointed or elected
to the Council.
(b) Appointments and Removals.
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any
City administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to
appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything
pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
(c) Interference with Administration.
Except for the purpose of inquires and investigations under Section 2.14, the Council or its members shall
deal with City officers, department heads, and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the
City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any
such, department head, or employee, either publicly or privately.
Section 2.14. Investigations.
The Council may make investigations into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any City department, office
or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the
production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these
powers by the Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00.
Section 2.15. Audit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/301
Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Council shall designate a certified public accountant, who, as of the end
of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts, and other financial transactions of the City
Government and shall submit a report, in open meeting, to the Council for approval, and to the City Manager.
Such accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City Government or
any of its officers. A copy of such audit shall be kept in the office of the City Secretary subject to inspection by
any citizen and officer during regular office hours The audit shall be completed and submitted to the City
Council within one hundred twenty (120) days of the conclusion of the fiscal year for which the audit is being
performed.
Section 2.16. Meetings of the Council.
The Council shall meet regularly at least once each month and any other time the Council deems necessary. The
time and/or place may be changed by ordinance or resolution. Special meetings of the Council may be called by
the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore, or a majority of the Council Except as otherwise provided by the provisions of
Article 6252-17 of the Revised Civil Statues of Texas, as from time to time amended, or specifically permitted in
the Texas Constitution, every regular, special or called meeting of the Council shall be open to the public. All
meetings of Council, whether in regular, special, called or in executive session shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the laws of the State of Texas pertaining thereto. The City Secretary shall make diligent
effort to cause the news media of the City of Atlanta to be notified of all Council meetings a minimum of two (2)
hours prior to such meetings. (Sec. 2.16. amended by general election; May 6, 2000)
Section 2.17. City Secretary.
The City Manager shall appoint a City Secretary and one or more deputies. The City Secretary or deputies shall
give notice of Council meetings, keep detailed minutes of it proceedings, shall authenticate by his or her
signature, and record in full all ordinances and resolutions in a book kept and indexed for this purpose, and shall
perform such other duties as the City Manager shall assign and those elsewhere provided in this Charter.
To facilitate the keeping of minutes of each meeting of the Council, the City Secretary shall make, and keep for
public review for a period of twelve (12) months, a tape recording or other suitable verbatim record of each
meeting. In the event a question or dispute arises concerning the minutes of a meeting, the recording shall be
consulted to resolve such question, and the minutes shall be corrected accordingly. Nothing contained herein
shall require the public disclosure of tape recorded proceedings of the Council in executive session or other
meeting not open to the public.
Section 2.18. City Attorney.
The Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas who shall
be the City Attorney, who shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council and who shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor, attorney and counselor for the
City, its officers and departments. The Council shall, when it deems necessary, appoint one (1) or more assistants
to the City Attorney and set their compensation. The City Attorney and his/her associates shall represent the City
in litigation at such fees as may be agreed upon with the Council, but at the Council’s discretion may or may not
participate in litigation for the collection of delinquent taxes. Special attorneys may be employed under contract
for the collection of delinquent taxes and for any other purposes, at such fees, and for such length of time as the
Council may prescribe.
Section 2.19. Administrative Departments.
The City Council shall appoint the City Manager, City Attorney, and the Municipal Judge. All other positions
within the City shall be filled through appointment by the City Manager, except those positions requiring
approval by the City Council as provided in Sections 7.02 and 8.02.
Section 2.20. Advisory Boards, Commissions and Officers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/301
The Council may, by ordinance, establish or abolish such advisory boards, commissions, or other advisory
officers as may be deemed appropriate or desirable from time to time, and may fill such boards, commissions, or
offices, by appointment of qualified residents of the City of Atlanta, the function, term, and exact composition of
such boards, commissions, and offices to be prescribed by the ordinance.
ARTICLE III
ELECTIONS
Section 3.01. Order and Regulation of Elections.
The General City Election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, or such other date as may be
specified for a General City Election by the Texas Election Code, at which time Council members will be
elected to fill those places which become vacant that year. The election shall be ordered by the Mayor on
resolution of the Council, and the Mayor, on resolution of the Council, shall order such special elections as are
authorized by state laws and the provisions of this Charter. Notice of elections shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the first publication to be not earlier than the
thirtieth (30th) day nor later than the tenth (10th) day before election day.
The Council shall appoint a presiding election judge and an alternate presiding judge for each polling place in
which an election is held. The presiding election judge for each polling place shall appoint the election clerks to
assist the judge in the conduct of the election at the polling place served by the judge. The appointment of clerks
and judges shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 32, Texas Election Code. The Council shall also
state the hours and set the places for holding each election and shall make all regulations it considers necessary
or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the Laws of the State governing elections. Voters for City
elections shall be only resident qualified voters in accordance with state and City laws and regulations. (Sec.
3.01. amended by general election; May 14, 2005)
Section 3.02. Filing as a Candidate.
Any person qualified under Section 2.05 who desires to become a candidate for the Council and to have his or
her name appear on the ballot, shall file with the City Secretary, or his or her representative, during regular office
hours and within the filing period prescribed by 143.007, Texas Election Code, a signed application, on a form
provided by the City Secretary. Before certifying an applicant’s name to appear on the ballot, the City Secretary
shall verify that the residence stated by the applicant is consistent with the residency qualifications for the office
being sought. Should an applicant be found disqualified, the City Secretary shall immediately notify the
applicant and the Mayor by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the nature of the disqualification.
Section 3.03. The Official Ballot.
The names of all candidates for the office of Council member, except such as may have died, withdrawn or
become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot without party designation in the order determined in a
drawing conducted by the City Secretary, pursuant to 52.094, Texas Election Code. If two candidates have the
same or similar surnames they may be further identified in accordance with 2.032, Texas Election Code.
All official ballots shall be printed at least twenty (20) days prior to date of the election and early voting shall be
governed by the general election laws of this State.
Section 3.04. Election by Plurality.
At any regular or special election the candidates for the Office of Council member who shall receive the greater
number of votes for the office for which he is a candidate be declared elected. In the event a tie vote makes it
impossible to determine a winning candidate, the Council shall order a run-off election between the tied
candidates on the third Tuesday following the election where the tie occurred.
Section 5.02. Judge of the Municipal Court.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/301
The Judge of the Court shall be appointed by the Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council and at such
salary as may be fixed by the Council.
When the Judge is absent, disabled, or unable to perform his or her duties for any cause, or the office becomes
vacant by reason of death, removal or resignation, the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore shall be the Judge of said
Court, or the Council may appoint a Special Judge of said court who shall serve until the Judge of said court
returns to his or her duties, or a successor is appointed and qualified.
(Sec. 5.02. amended by general election; May 14, 2005)
Section 5.03. Clerk of the Municipal Court.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall appoint a court clerk who shall have the power to administer oaths and
affidavits, make certificates, affix the court’s seal, and do and perform all acts and duties permitted and required
of clerks of courts of Texas in issuing processes and conducting the business of said court.
ARTICLE IV
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 4.01. Initiative and Referendum.
(a) Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council and, if
the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a
City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance
relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees.
(b) Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council
of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it
at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency
ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes.
Section 4.02. Requirements for Initiative and Referendum Petitions.
Any five (5) resident, qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceeding by filing with the City
Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners’ committee and be responsible for circulating
the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all
notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to twenty-five
(25%) per cent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular City election, or two hundred (200),
whichever is greater. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one
instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in indelible ink and shall be followed by the address of
the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an
affidavit executed by the circulator stating he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures
thereon, that all signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine
signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing
to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
Initiative petitions may be filed at any time but referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after
adoption by the Council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Section 4.03. Filing, Examination and Certification of Petitions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/301
The petition for initiative or referendum shall be filed with the City Secretary, who shall, within twenty (20)
days thereafter, determine whether the petition is sufficient in form and has been signed by the required number
of voters. The City Secretary shall promptly notify the petitioners’ committee by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of his or her finding. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid
signatures may be amended once if the petitioners’ committee files a notice of intention to amend with the City
Secretary within four (4) days after notice of its insufficiency has been received and files a supplementary
petition within fourteen (14) days after notice has been received.
Section 4.04. Suspension of Effect of Ordinance by Petition.
When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the ordinance sought to be repealed shall be
suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when there is a final determination of
insufficiency of the petition, the Council repeals the ordinance, or after canvass of votes of the referendum
election.
Section 4.05. Action by the Council.
When a petition as originally filed, or amended, is found to be sufficient, the City Secretary shall so certify to the
Council at its next regular meeting. If the Council fails to adopt an ordinance proposed by initiative without
change in substance or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the petition was
certified as sufficient, it shall submit the proposed ordinance or the referred ordinance to the qualified electors of
the City for approval or rejection at a regular or special election in not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty
(60) days from the date of the final Council vote thereon.
Section 4.06. Ballot for Initiated or Referred Ordinances.
Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors under provision of this Article shall be submitted by ballot title,
prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title and shall be a
clear, concise statement, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. Immediately below the ballot title, the
ballot shall contain the following propositions in the order indicated: “For the Ordinance,” and “Against the
Ordinance.” Any number or ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same
ballot.
Section 4.07. Results of Election.
(a) If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be
considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same
manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the
same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such
conflict.
(b) If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results.
(c) No ordinance which has been initiated by petition and adopted at an election by the qualified voters shall
be repealed or amended by the Council within one (1) year thereafter, and no ordinance enacted by the Council
and thereafter rejected by the qualified voters in an election held on petition for referendum shall be re-enacted
by the Council within one (1) year thereafter.
Section 4.08. Recall of Elected Officials.
The citizens of the City shall have the power to remove any member or members of the Council from office by
recall.
(a) For the offices of Mayor and the At-Large Council seat, the power of recall may be exercised by filing
with the City Secretary a petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to fifty (50%) per cent
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/301
of the total number of votes cast at the last regular City election, or one thousand (1,000) whichever is greater.
(b) For the Council members elected from single geographical districts, the power of recall may be exercised
by filing with the City Secretary a petition signed by qualified voters of the respective geographical district equal
in number to fifty (50%) per cent of the total number of votes cast in that geographical district at the last regular
City election, or three hundred (300), whichever is greater.
(c) The recall petition shall be initiated, signed, verified and filed in the same manner as initiative and
referendum petitions. The petition must distinctly and specifically point out the grounds upon which the recall is
predicated.
Section 4.09. Recall Election.
Within twenty (20) days after a recall petition has been filed, the City Secretary shall examine it, and if it is
found to be sufficient, he or she shall notify the Council member (s) sought to be recalled of this action, by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If the Council member (s) sought to be recalled do not resign within five
(5) days after such notice, the City Secretary shall submit the recall petition to the Council with a certificate of
sufficiency. The Council shall order a recall election to be held not less than thirty-five (35) nor more than sixtyfive
(65) days after the date the Council received certification of the recall petition.
Ballots used in a recall election shall submit with respect to each person whose removal is sought the question,
“Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of council member by recall?” Immediately below each
such question the two following propositions shall be listed, one above the other in the order indicated.
“For the removal of (name of person).” “Against the removal of (name of person).”
Section 4.10. Results of Recall Election.
When a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of an elected official, he or she
shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be
for the recall of an elected official, he or she shall be deemed removed from office regardless of any technical
defects in the recall petition and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in section 2.07. An official removed
from office by recall shall not be eligible to succeed himself.
Section 4.11. Limitation on Recall.
No elected official shall be subject to recall within six (6) months of his or her election to office and no elected
official shall be subjected to more than one recall election during any two (2) year term in office. A recall
election need not be ordered by the Council against any elected official on whom a petition is filed if his or her
term of office is to office is to expire within one hundred eighty (180) days after the petition is filed with the
City Secretary or his or her designee.
Section 4.12. District Judge May Order Election.
Should the Council refuse or fail to order any election provided for in this article, when all the requirements
have been met by the petitioner’s committee it shall then be the duty of the Presiding Judge of the Judicial
District of Cass County, upon application by the petitioners’ committee, to order such elections and to enforce
carrying into effect the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE V
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 5.01. Municipal Court.
A municipal court of the City of Atlanta is hereby created and shall be maintained for the trial and disposition of
misdemeanor offenses with the powers and duties as are now and may hereafter be prescribed by the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/301
Constitution and Statutes of the State of Texas.
Section 5.02. Judge of the Municipal Court.
The Judge of the court shall be a qualified voter and resident of the City. He or she shall be appointed by the
Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council and at such salary as may be fixed by the Council.
When the Judge is absent, disabled, or unable to perform his or her duties for any cause, or the office becomes
vacant by reason of death, removal or resignation, the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore shall be the Judge of said
Court, or the Council may appoint a Special Judge of said court who shall serve until the Judge of said court
returns to his or her duties, or a successor is appointed and qualified.
Section 5.03. Clerk of the Municipal Court.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall appoint a court clerk who shall have the power to administer oaths and
affidavits, make certificates, affix the court’s seal, and do and perform all acts and duties permitted and required
of clerks of courts of Texas in issuing processes and conducting the business of said court.
ARTICLE VI
THE CITY MANAGER
Section 6.01. Appointment and Qualifications.
The Council shall, by a minimum of three (3) affirmative votes, appoint or remove a City Manager who shall be
the chief administrative and executive officer of the City and shall be responsible to the Council for the efficient
administration of all the affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis
of his executive and administrative qualifications, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City. He or
she must, however, reside in the City during his tenure in office.
Section 6.02. Term and Salary.
The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the
Council by a minimum of three (3) votes. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City
Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for
such suspension or removal in the Council. In the case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the
Council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or
disability. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council.
Section 6.03. Powers and Duties of the City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. He or she shall be responsible to the
Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. He or she
shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) He or she shall appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the City, suspend or remove
all City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as
otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. He or she may
authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these
powers with respect to subordinates in that officer’s department, office or agency.
(b) He or she shall direct and supervise the administration or all departments, offices and agencies of the City,
except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
(c) He or she shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not
vote.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/301
(d) He or she shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the Council subject to enforcement
by him or her, or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
(e) He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Council.
(f) He or she shall submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances
and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year.
(g) He or she shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of City
departments, offices and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision.
(h) He or she shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City
and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as he or she deems desirable.
(i) He or she shall examine and execute on behalf of the City, with the approval of the City Council, all
contracts, orders, and other documents by which the City incurs financial obligations, having previously
ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations become
due and payable.
(j) He or she shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the
Council.
ARTICLE VII
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section 7.01. Establishment.
There shall be established and maintained a Police Department to preserve order within the City and to secure
the residents of said City from violence, and the property therein from injury or loss.
Section 7.02. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief administrative officer of the Department of Police. He or she shall, with
the approval of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such
duties as may be required of him by the City Council. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City
Manager, with the approval of the City Council, for an indefinite term. The Chief of Police shall be fully
responsible to the City Manager for the administration of his department, and for the carrying out and
enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the City Council. He or she may be removed from office by
said City Manager, with the approval of the City Council.
Section 7.03. Appointment of Subordinates.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to appoint, discharge, suspend, and remove all subordinate personnel of
the Police Department, subject to the official Personnel Policies and Procedures of the City as adopted by the
City Council. (Sec. 7.03. amended by general election; May 14, 2005)
ARTICLE VIII
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section 8.01. Establishment.
There shall be established and maintained a Fire Department to protect life and property within the City and to
secure the residents of said City from destruction of the property therein and from injury or loss of life.
Section 8.02. Fire Chief
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/301
The Fire Chief shall be the chief administrative officer of the Fire Department. He or she shall, with the approval
of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as
may be required of him by the City Council. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the
approval of the City Council, for an indefinite term. The Fire Chief shall be fully responsible to the City
Manager for the administration of his department. He or she may be removed from office by said City Manager,
with the approval of the City Council.
Section 8.03. Appointment of Subordinates.
The Fire Chief shall have the power to appoint, discharge, suspend, and remove all subordinate personnel of the
Fire Department, subject to the official Personnel Policies and Procedures of the city as adopted by the City
Council. (Sec. 8.03. amended by general election; May 14, 2005)
ARTICLE IX
THE BUDGET
Section 9.01. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first (1st) day of October and shall end on the last day of September
of the succeeding calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in
this Charter, the term “budget year” shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in
which it is administered.
Section 9.02. Preparation and Submission of Budget.
The City Manager shall, at least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, submit to the Council
a proposed budget and an explanatory budget message in the form, and with the contents provided by Section
9.11, 9.12, and 9.13. For such purpose, at such date as he or she shall determine, he or she, or an officer
designated by he or she shall obtain from the head of each office, department, or agency estimates of revenue
and expenditure of that office department or agency detailed by organization units and character and object of
expenditure and such other supporting data as he or she may request. In preparing the budget, the City Manager
shall review the estimates, shall hold hearing thereon, and may revise the estimates, as he or she may deem
advisable.
Section 9.03. Budget a Public Record.
The proposed budget and accompanying message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the
office of the City Secretary open to public inspection during normal office hours. The City Manager shall have
sufficient copies of the proposed budget and accompanying message prepared for distribution to interested
persons.
Section 9.04. Publication of Notice of Public Hearing.
The Council shall post in the City hall and publish in the official newspaper a general summary of the proposed
budget, as revised, and a notice stating:
(a) The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public.
(b) The time and place, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after such publication, for a public
hearing on the proposed budget.
Section 9.05. Public Hearing on Budget.
At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to
time be adjourned, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget as revised, at which all
interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against, the estimates of any item thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/301
Section 9.06. Action After Public Hearing.
After the public hearing, the Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget,
it may add or increase programs or amounts and my delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except
expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit provided that no amendment to the
budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income plus
funds available from prior years.
Section 9.07. Date of Final Adoption; Failure to Adopt.
The Council shall adopt its annual budget by ordinance, on one reading, by the fifteenth (15th) day of
September, or as soon thereafter as practical. Adoption of the budget shall require an affirmative vote of at least
a majority of all members of the Council. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts
specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. Should the Council take no final action on or prior to
the twenty-seventh (27th) day of September, the budget as submitted by the City Manager shall be deemed to
have been adopted by the Council.
Section 9.08. Effective Date of Budget; Certification, Copies Made Available.
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget as adopted, shall be
filed with the City Secretary and the County Clerk of Cass County. The City Secretary shall reproduce sufficient
copies for the use of all offices, departments, agencies, and for interested persons and civic organizations.
Section 9.09. Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised by Property Tax.
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated in the budget as the amount to be raised by property tax
shall be the amount of the property tax levy for the corresponding tax year.
Section 9.10. Budget Message.
A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs shall be
submitted with the budget. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year,
describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures, and revenues, with reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the City’s debt
position and include such other material as the City Manager deems desirable.
Section 9.11. Budget Contents.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. It shall contain the following:
(a) A budget message.
(b) A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds.
(c) An analysis of property valuations.
(d) An analysis of tax rate.
(e) Tax levies and tax collections by years for the preceding five (5) years.
(f) General fund resources and all other fund resources in detail.
(g) Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity.
(h) Summary of proposed expenditures by character and object.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/301
(i) Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries mentioned
in (g) and (h) above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the
number of persons having each title and the rate of pay.
(j) A revenue and expense statement for all type of bonds.
(k) A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, call date,
if any, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding.
(l) A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds.
(m) A special funds section.
(n) The appropriation ordinance.
The total estimated expenditures of each fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund
(prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as
nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on
Municipal Accounting or some other nationally accepted classification.
Section 9.12. Anticipated Revenues; Comparison With Other Years.
In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue there shall be placed the actual amount of such item for
the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the
ensuing budget year.
Section 9.13. Proposed Expenditures; Comparison With Other Years.
The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance and capital outlay of each office,
department, or agency of the City shall be itemized by character and object. In parallel columns opposite the
various items of expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last
completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and proposed amount for the ensuing
budget year.
Section 9.14. Emergency Appropriations.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may make
emergency appropriations, Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the
provisions of Section 2.11. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such
appropriations, the Council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes or
time warrants at the lowest rate of interest obtainable, as determined by the City Manager with the approval of
the Council, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals, of any fiscal year
shall be paid not later than the last day of the current fiscal year.
Section 9.15. Reduction of Appropriations.
If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he or she shall report to the Council without delay indicating the
estimated amount of the deficit, remedial action already taken, and any recommendations as to other steps to be
taken The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit
and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one (1) or more appropriations.
ARTICLE X
FINANCE ADMINISTRATION
Section 10.01. Director of Finance; Surety Bond.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/301
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which may be the City Manager who shall provide a bond
with such surety and amount as the Council may require, except that such bond shall be in an amount of not less
than twenty thousand ($20,000.00), the cost to be borne by the City.
Section 10.02. Director of Finance; Powers and Duties.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall be responsible for the administration of the financial affairs of
the City and to that end he or she shall have authority and shall be required to:
(a) Provide the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the preparation of the budget.
(b) Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and control expenditures to ensure that
budget appropriations are not exceeded.
(c) Maintain a general accounting system for the City and each of its offices, departments and agencies;
exercise financial and budgetary oversight for each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for
the items of appropriation contained in the City budget, each of which accounts show the amount of the
appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance;
require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the City at such
intervals as he or she may deem expedient.
(d) Submit to the City Manager a monthly statement of receipts and disbursements and, at the end of each
fiscal year submit a complete financial statement in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the City.
(e) Supervise and be responsible for the assessment of all property within the corporate limits of the City for
taxation, make all special assessments for the City, prepare tax maps and give such notice of taxes and special
assessments as may be required by City. (See Section 11.01.)
(f) Supervise and be responsible for the collection of all taxes, special assessment, license fees and other
revenues of the City or for whose collection the City is responsible and accept all money receivable by the City
from the State or Federal Government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the City.
(See Section 11.01)
(g) Serve as Ex-Officio City Treasurer and have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control
of the City, or any office, department or agency of the City, and have deposited daily all funds coming into his or
her hands in such depository (s) as may be designated by resolution of the Council, as determined by Section (i)
below.
(h) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City, or in possession of such government in a
fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the City and the receipts and delivery of
City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange.
(i) Negotiate with all bank(s) located within the City of Atlanta, Texas, within thirty (30) days from October 1
of each biennium and after advertising for depository bids in one (1) issue of the official newspaper for the bank
(s) to serve as City Depository for all available funds except reserve funds for bonds for the next two (2) years,
or until such time as the successor depository(s) has been selected. The Director of the Department of Finance
shall take into consideration in such negotiations the most favorable interest rates than can be obtained in the
interest of the City on Certificates of Deposit for funds invested, and also on funds borrowed. The Director of
the Department of Finance shall also take into consideration the services offered by the prospective depository(s)
in serving the banking needs of the City, and shall make a recommendation to the City Manager, who shall
report such recommendation to the City Council. The Council shall approve which bank(s) is to serve as the City
Depository(s) during the next biennium. If the City Manager and the Council determine that a satisfactory
depository contract cannot be entered into with the local bank(s), then the City Manager shall advertise in a
newspaper of general circulation within Cass County a request for sealed bids by banks within Cass County to
act as City Depository for the next two (2) years and the Council shall, prior to December 1st of each biennium
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/301
stated above select one of the banks to serve as City Depository. The bank(s) that has been selected to be the
City Depository(s) shall have adequate security pledged at all times to protect all City funds.
Section 10.03. Transfer of Appropriations.
At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation
balance among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon written request by the City Manager,
the Council my transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or
agency to another.
Section 10.04. Accounting Supervision and Control.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall have power and shall be required to:
(a) Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments, and
agencies of the City.
(b) Audit and certify for accuracy bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidences of claims, demands, or charges
against the City and with the advice of the City Attorney, determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of
such claims, demands or charges.
(c) Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office,
department or agency of the City apart from accounts kept in his or her office and report the results to the City
Manager.
Section 10.05. Appropriations Lapse at End of Year.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year
to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of
any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or
encumbrance of the appropriation.
Section 10.06. Fees Shall be Paid to City.
Any funds paid from any source to a City employee or officer for services performed while on duty with the
City, or for the use of City equipment, shall belong to the City, and be tendered to the Department of Finance
daily.
Section 10.07. Division of Purchases.
The Division of Purchases, pursuant to rules and regulations prescribed by the City Manager shall contract to
purchase, store, and distribute all supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office, department, or
agency of City.
The Division of Purchases shall also have power and shall be required to:
(a) Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials, and equipment required by the
City.
(b) Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, material, and equipment, and determine
their quality, quantity, and conformance with specifications.
(c) Have charge of general storerooms and warehouses.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/301
(d) Transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies, or with the approval of the Council sell surplus
supplies, material and equipment.
(e) Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, material, equipment
and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the City. The Purchases Division shall maintain a
current written inventory of all real property and all non-expendable supplies and equipment belonging to the
City, which shall be a public record, available for inspection at all reasonable times by interested parties or the
public.
(f) Approve all proposed expenditures. No appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be
encumbered and no expenditure shall be made unless the Director of the Department of Finance shall certify that
there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds.
All purchases made and contracts executed by the City shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the
Constitution and Statues of the State of Texas.
Section 10.08. Sale of City Property, Procedure.
Before the City makes any sale or contract for sale of any surplus personal property belonging to the City,
having an estimated value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, opportunity shall be given for open
competition under such rules and regulations as the Council may prescribe. In the sale of any such property
valued at more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the property shall be advertised for sale and bids in the local
newspaper, the contract of sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder after such public notice and
competition as may be prescribed, provided the Council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise
again. These same procedures shall be used whenever the City acts as transfer agent.
Section 10.09. Purchase Procedure.
The City of Atlanta shall have a written purchasing policy which is approved by the City Council. The City
Council shall review the City purchasing policy at least annually and may make revisions to the policy as needed
upon the recommendation of City Manager. The City Purchasing Policy shall at all time comply with the
purchasing laws of the State of Texas as they currently exist or shall in the future by amended. (Sec. 10.09.
amended by general election; May 6, 2000)
Section 10.10. Contracts for City Improvements.
All capital improvement work of the City shall be obtained pursuant to the officially adopted purchasing policy
of the City and in compliance with the laws of the State of Texas as they now exist or shall in the future be
amended. (Sec. 10.10. amended by general election; May 6, 2000)
Section 10.11. Accounting Control of Purchases.
All purchases made and contracts executed by the Division of Purchases shall be pursuant to a written
requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged. All written
requisitions shall be approved by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative.
Section 10.12. Disbursement of Funds.
All checks or vouchers for the withdrawal of money from the City Depository shall be signed by the City
Manager and countersigned by the City Secretary. In the absence of the City Manager or the City Secretary,
checks may be countersigned by the Deputy City Secretary as designated by the Council by resolution.
Section 10.13. Borrowing in Anticipation of Revenues Other Than Taxes.
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of revenues other than taxes of that budget year,
the Council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the City,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/301
each of which shall be designated “special revenue note for the year 19_” (stating the budget year). Such notes
may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals shall mature and be payable
not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes have been issued.
Section 10.14. Sales of Notes, Report of Sale.
All notes issued pursuant to this article may be sold at not less than par at private sale by the City Manager
without previous advertisement. The notes shall bear interest at the prevailing rate. Such sale shall be authorized
in advance by the Council as provided in Section 9.14.
ARTICLE XI
TAX ADMINISTRATION
Section 11.01. Division of Taxation.
There shall be established in the Department of Finance a Division of Taxation, the head of which shall be the
City Collector of Taxes. The Collector shall give a surety bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties
including compliance with all controlling provisions of State Law bearing upon the functions of his or her office
in a sum of which shall be fixed by the Council, but in no event shall the amount be less than fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) the cost to be borne by the City The Council, by ordinance, may contract with the Cass
County Appraisal District, or its successor agency, to provide services in connection with the assessment and
collection of taxes. In such event, the director of the Cass County Appraisal District or its successor agency shall
be designated the City Collector of Taxes.
Section 11.02. Taxes; When Due and Payable.
All taxes due the City shall be payable at the office of the Collector and may be paid at any time after the tax
rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall not be later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid
before February 1 of the next year and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and
shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the Council may provide by ordinance. Unless otherwise provided
by the Council by ordinance, the amount of the penalty and the rate of interest shall be as set by the Texas Tax
Code for ad valorem taxes within the State of Texas. The Council may by ordinance provide a discount for
current taxes paid prior to January 1st, of the following year, and may exempt from taxation an amount, to be
established by the Council by ordinance, for homesteads, and an additional amount for the homesteads of the
elderly, disabled veterans, and the surviving spouses of disabled veterans.
Section 11.03. City to Foreclose Tax Liens.
The City Collector shall foreclose the tax liens on all property before the same shall be barred by limitation The
tax liens shall be foreclosed in accordance with the provisions of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas as now or
hereafter amended.
ARTICLE XII
ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS
Section 12.01. Borrowing.
The City shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem
to be in the public interest.
Section 12.02. General Obligation Bonds.
The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds
for permanent improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the
State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City previously issued. All such
bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/301
Section 12.03. Revenue Bonds.
The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
extending, or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities, or any other self liquidating municipal function
not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the
obligations created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest
therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to
demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in
conformity with the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 12.04. Bonds Incontestable.
All bonds of the City having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall
thereafter be incontestable and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued
shall, and after said exchanges, be incontestable.
ARTICLE XIII
FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 13.01. Powers of the City.
In addition to the City’s power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities, and to
manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the City shall have such further powers as
may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.
Section 13.02. Power to Grant Franchise.
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, extend and amend, by mutual agreement, all
franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City. No franchise shall be for an
indeterminate period and no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than thirty (30) years from the date of
the grant and no franchise shall be exclusive.
Section 13.03. Ordinance Granting Franchise.
All ordinances granting, renewing, extending or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at two (2)
separate regular meetings of the Council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first
reading. No such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage. After the first reading
and before final passage, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City, the cost of publication to be borne by proponent of the
franchise.
Section 13.04. Transfer of Franchise.
No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance.
The term “transferable” as used herein shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the franchise holder
from pledging said franchise as security for a valid debt or mortgage.
Section 13.05. Franchise Value Not to be Allowed.
No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility
service within the City and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property
which it may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.
Section 13.06. Right of Regulation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/301
Each grant, renewal extension or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance
or not, shall be subject to the right of the council:
(a) To forfeit by ordinance at any time any franchise for the failure of the holder to comply with all terms of
the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing, and a reasonable opportunity to correct
the default.
(b) To require such expansion and extension of plant and facilities as are reasonably necessary to provide
adequate service to the public.
(c) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in
service or rates.
(d) To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public.
(e) To examine and audit at any time during regular business hours the records and accounts of any such
utility which are relevant to the City’s right of regulation, and to require and prescribe annual and other reports,
including reports on operations within the City.
(f) To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the Laws of State of Texas, including the
right to establish minimum annual fees to maintain the franchise in force.
(g) To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility; provided, however, that any utility which shall keep
its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National
Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal
Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor or successors, shall be
deemed in sufficient compliance with this paragraph.
Section 13.07. Consent of Property Owners.
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension,
maintenance or operation of any public utility; however, nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted
thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or
injury to his property as is now or may hereafter be provided by law.
Section 13.08. Extensions.
All extension of public utilities within the City shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility,
shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter
and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the
original grant and shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.
Section 13.09. Rights of Prior Grants.
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City and the grantee. The contractual
right as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except the
power of the City to exercise the right to eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things
reserved. Also, the general power of the City to regulate rates, within the limitations of Section 13.11 and
services of a grantee, shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the
maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every grant, renewal or
extension of a franchise hereafter shall be subject to all the terms and conditions contained in this Article
whether or not they are listed or referred to in the grant, extension or renewal. Nothing in this Article shall
operate to limit in any way the discretion of the Council or the electors of the City in imposing terms and
conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.
Section 13.10. Accounts of Municipally Owned Utilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/301
Accounts for each public utility owned or operated by the City shall be kept in such manner to show the true and
complete financial results of such City ownership and operation. All assets and liabilities shall be appropriately
subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus. Also, revenues, operating expenses
including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income shall be included. The
accounts shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to, or rendered by, such utility to any
City department; The Council shall have an annual report made by a Certified Public Accountant and shall
publish such report showing the financial results of City ownership and operation, giving the information
specified in this Section and such other data as the Council may require.
Section 13.11. Regulation of Rates.
The Council shall have the full power to regulate in accordance with applicable laws of the State of Texas and
the United States of America the rates of every public utility operating in the City. If no State law is applicable,
the Council shall have full power to regulate by ordinance, after notice and hearing, the rates of every public
utility operating in the City and shall have the right to employ expert advice and assistance in determining a
reasonable rate and equitable profit to the public utility. Notice of any proposed increase in utility rates and
service cost shall be given through publication of the proposal in one (1) issue of the official newspaper of the
City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing on such proposal. The notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing, the name of the proponent and a comparison of the existing schedule of rates and
charges with the proposed schedule, the cost of the notice to be paid by the proponent. The Council shall have
the renewal thereof, or as a condition precedent to any hearing concerning rates and service of any public utility
operating within the City, that the proponent seeking the rate or service change pay the reasonable cost of the
service of a rate consultant chosen by the Council. No notice need be given nor public hearing held where the
change in rates or service charges is solely one of reduction.
Section 13.12. Service Beyond the City Limits.
The Council shall have the authority to sell and distribute water, and to sell and provide for sewer services, and
any other utilities and services to customers outside the limits of the City of Atlanta under such terms,
conditions, and charges as determined by the Council.
ARTICLE XIV
MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING
Section 14.01. Platting of Property.
Every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City, or within any area over which
the City may have jurisdiction under State Law, who may divide the same into two (2) or more parts for the
purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the City shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
212 of the Local Government Code of Texas, and all amendments thereto, and said Chapter 212 and
amendments are hereby adopted.
Section 14.02. Development of Property.
No expenditure of public funds shall be authorized by the Council for privately owned subdivisions situated
within or beyond the limits of the City except for the extension of utilities or services provided by the City to
such area.
Section 14.03. Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Council shall appoint a City Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of five (5) members who shall be
residents of the City and who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed at the first regular
meeting in November of each year for a two (2) year term with two (2) to be appointed each year on a
continuing basis. (Sec. 14.03. amended by general election; May 6, 2000)
Section 14.04. Vacancies on the Commission.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/301
Vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the term within thirty
(30) days after the vacancy occurs. Any member who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall
be dropped automatically and the commission chair shall notify the Council immediately that a vacancy exists.
Section 14.05. Organization of the Commission.
At its first meeting following the annual appointment of members by the Council, the Commission shall elect
one (1) of its members as chair. The Commission shall establish rules of procedure which shall include the
following:
(a) The commission shall hold, at a minimum, quarterly meetings and report to the Council quarterly. All
meetings shall be open to the public and minutes of the proceedings shall be kept and shall be a public record.
All meetings shall be held at City Hall unless prior notice has been given in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City.
(b) A quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership An affirmative vote of a majority of those present
shall constitute adoption of any pending motion.
(c) The chair shall be entitled to vote.
(d) The City Manager shall be ex-officio member to the Commission, and shall be responsible for ensuring
that minutes of meetings are recorded and maintained.
Section 14.06. Powers and Duties of the Commission.
The Commission shall:
(a) Be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the Council.
(b) Make, amend, extend, and add to a master plan for the physical development of the City.
(c) Review all plans for platting or subdividing of land within the City and within adjacent areas as permitted
by law and submit findings and recommendations to the Council.
(d) Make and recommend to the Council for adoption, a zoning plan and amendments thereto.
(e) Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the Council may prescribe in
accordance with the Laws of the State of Texas.
Section 14.07. Board of Adjustment.
The Council shall appoint the Board of Adjustment with all the powers and duties conferred in Chapter 211 of
the Local Government Code of the State of Texas as now or hereafter amended.
ARTICLE XV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 15.01. Oath of Office.
Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and
subscribe to the appropriate oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the City Secretary:
For elected officers:
“I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of , of
the City of Atlanta, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect, and defend the
Constitution and Laws of the United States of American and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/301
City. I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or promised to
pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised to contribute any money
or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote
at the election at which I was elected. So help me God.”
For appointed officers:
“I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of , of
the City of Atlanta, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect, and defend the
Constitution and Laws of the United States of America and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this
City. I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or promised to
pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised any public office or
employment, as a reward to secure my appointment or the confirmation thereof. So help me God.”
Section 15.02. Publicity of Records.
All record and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any
citizen or any representative of the press during regular business hours. Provided that such police records, vital
statistics records, or other records, which are closed to the public by law shall not be considered public records
for the purpose of this section.
Section 15.03. Official Newspaper.
The Council shall have the power to contract annually with, and by resolution designate, a public newspaper of
general circulation in the City as official organ thereof, and to continue as such until another is designated; and
shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter required to be published by this
Charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.
Section 15.04. Notice of Claim.
Before the City shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damages to or
destruction of property of any kind, which does not constitute a taking or damaging of property under Article 1,
Section 17, Constitution of the State of Texas, the person injured, if living, or his representatives, if deceased, or
the owner, his agent or attorney, of the property damaged or destroyed shall give the City Manager or City
Secretary notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within thirty
(30) days after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the
death, injury, damage or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages
sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual
residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury,
damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it has relied to establish the
claim for damages. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the City for such death, injury, damage
or destruction prior to the expiration of sixty (60) days after the notice hereinbefore described has been filed
with the City Manager or the City Secretary. After the expiration of the sixty (60) days aforementioned, the
complainant may then have two (2) years from the date of the occurrence in which to bring an action of law.
Section 15.05. Assignment, Execution and Garnishment.
The real and personal property belonging to the City shall not be liable for sale or appropriation under any writ
of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the City in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall
not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account
of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor
any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ or garnishment on any account whatever.
The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or
contractors.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/301
Section 15.06. Security or Bond.
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City is a party for any bond, undertaking
or security to be executed in behalf of the City, but all actions, suits and proceedings shall be conducted in the
same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given and the City shall be liable in the same
manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking or security required in ordinary cases had been given
and executed.
Section 15.07. Personal Interests.
Any member of the Council, officer or employee of the City who has a substantial financial interest, direct or
indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any
land, material, supplies or services to the City or to a contractor supplying the City shall make known that
interest to the Council and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as an officer
or employee in the making of such sale or in the awarding or performance of such contract. Any officer or
employee who violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance and shall forfeit his office
or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation
contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the City Manager or
the Council.
Section 15.08. Nepotism.
No person related within the second degree by affinity or the third degree by consanguinity to any member of
the Council or to the City Manager shall be appointed to any office, position, clerkship or other service of the
City. This prohibition shall not apply to any person who shall have been employed by the City for a period of
two (2) years prior to and at the time of the election or the appointment of the official so related to him.
Section 15.09. Power to Settle Claims.
The Council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and
character in favor of or against the City, except suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.
Section 15.10. Judicial Notice.
This Charter shall be held a public act, and shall have the force and effect of a general law; may be read in
evidence without pleading or proof and judicial notice thereof shall be taken in all courts and places without
further proof.
Section 15.11. Effect of Charter on Existing Law.
All City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter and not in
conflict with this Charter shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the Council, and all rights
of the City under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect.
Section 15.12. Removal of Health and Safety Hazards.
The City Council shall use due diligence to see that dilapidated or unkempt property which it deems a menace to
the health or safety of the Citizens of the City is cleaned up and such conditions are remedied by the owners of
such property.
In the event said owners of property shall fail or refuse, within a reasonable time, to take such corrective
measures as the Council may direct, the Council may cause such remedies and corrections to be made and to
charge the cost of same, in the same manner as a tax lien, against such property.
Section 15.13. Separability Clause.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/301
If any section or part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of
a section of this Charter.
Section 15.14. Amending the Charter.
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors of the City by a Charter Commission
in the manner provided by law.
Section 15.15. Charter Review Commission.
At its first regular meeting in June 1994 and every fifth year thereafter the Council shall appoint a Charter
Review Commission of five (5) citizens of the City. It shall be the duty of the commission to:
(a) Inquire into the operation of the City Government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any
such provisions require revision and to this end, public hearings may be held and the commission shall have the
power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the City to require the submission of any of the
City records which it may consider necessary to the conduct of such hearing.
(b) Make any recommendations it considers desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of this Charter
by the several departments of the City.
(c) Propose amendments to this Charter to improve its effective application to current conditions.
(d) Report its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the Council.
The Council shall receive and have published in the official newspaper of the City any report submitted by the
Charter Review Commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and, if any amendment or amendments
be presented as a part of such report, may order such to be submitted to the electors of the City in the manner
provided in Section 15.14.
The term of office of the Charter Review Commission shall be six (6) months, and, if during this term no report
is presented to the Council, then all records of the proceedings of the commission shall be filed with the City
Manager and shall be a public record.
Section 15.16. Submission of Charter to Electors.
The Charter Commission finds and declares that this Charter is so construed that in order for it to function
efficiently, it must be adopted in its entirety. For this reason, the Commission finds it would be impracticable to
segregate each subject for a separate vote thereon, and, therefore directs it to be voted on as a whole, and that it
be submitted to the qualified electors of the City at an election to be held for that purpose. In not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the election for the adoption of this Charter, the City Secretary shall mail a copy of this
Charter to each qualified elector of the City as appears from the tax collector’s last roll. If said Charter is
approved by a majority of the electors voting at said election, it shall become the Charter of the City of Atlanta
upon the entering in the City records of the Council of an official order declaring the adoption of the Charter. A
copy of the adopted Charter, authenticated and certified by the City Secretary and the seal of the City, shall be
forwarded to the Secretary of State of the State of Texas.
We, the members of the City of Atlanta Charter Review Commission, appointed by the City Council on January
20, 1993, to perform those duties set fourth in Section 14.19 of the City of Atlanta Home Rule Charter, submit
this report of our inquiry into, and examination of, the City of Atlanta Home Rule Charter and the operations of
the City departments, offices and agencies under the Charter, and we recommend the amendment of the City
Charter as proposed in this report.
/s/ /s/
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/301
J . Ransom, Chair Gloria Phillips, Secretary
/s/ /s/
Bill Adams, Member Carolyn Patterson, Member
/s/
Rev. A. C. Williams, Member
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.100 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.101 Designation and Citation of Code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, 1997, City of Atlanta, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.102 Catchlines of Articles and Sections
The catchlines of the several articles and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the article section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as
any part of the articles and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
articles and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.103 Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City. The words “the city” or “this city” shall be the City of Atlanta, the County of Cass and the State of Texas.
City Commissioner. As used herein, shall refer to a member of the governing body of the City of Atlanta,
Texas. The terms “city commissioner” and “city councilmember” shall be interchangeable herein.
City Council. Shall refer to the governing body of the City of Atlanta. The terms “governing body” and “board
of aldermen” shall mean the city council.
City Manager, City Secretary and Other City Officers or Departments. Shall be construed to mean the city
manager, city secretary or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Atlanta,
Texas. Reference to an officer or employee by title shall include his or her duly authorized assistants or
representatives. The term “city clerk” shall be interpreted to mean the city secretary of the City of Atlanta,
Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/301
Computation of Time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
Council. Whenever the term “council,” “this council,” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Atlanta, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Cass, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males.
Month. Shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
submitted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight
savings time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
fiduciaries, representatives and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Preceding and Following. Shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
Sidewalk. Shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway, and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or Subscription. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. Shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues,
recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P. Refer to the divisions of Vernon’s Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or In Writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. Shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1.104 Amendments to Code
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code,
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/301
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may
be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence on such subsequent ordinances until such time that this code
and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference
to the article and section number of this code in the following language:
“That Chapter , Article _____, Section , of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Texas, is hereby
amended to read as follows: ... ”
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
(c) In the event a new article or section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language shall be
used:
“That Chapter , of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section,
to be number Article/Section , which said article/section shall read as follows: ...”
The new article or section shall then be set out in full as desired.
(d) It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this code in the manner provided
for above shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section.
Sec. 1.105 Supplementation of Code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement
and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into
the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages
shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the
code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to
prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the
code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision
numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this
section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance articles or
sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.106 General Penalty for Code Violations*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/301
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful of an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such code or ordinance the doing of an act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00), except for:
(1) violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense; and
(2) violations of traffic laws and ordinances which are punishable as a class C misdemeanor shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(b) Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any
violation of any provision of this code which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes.
Sec. 1.107 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this code are severable and, if any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this code since the same would have been enacted by the city council without
the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.200 ELECTIONS*
Sec. 1.201 Place System
From and after the effective date of this article all subsequent elections of members of the city council shall be
governed by this article, and Places 1 through 4 shall be elected from separate and distinct election districts by
the qualified voters of the separate and distinct election districts.
(1) Place No. 1 shall be elected by the voters of district No. 1 which is herein after described by metes and
bounds on Exhibit “A” attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes to the same extent as if copied
verbatim herein.
(2) Place No. 2 shall be elected by the voters of District No. 2 which is hereinafter described by metes and
bounds on Exhibit “B” attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes to the same extent as if copied
verbatim herein.
(3) Place No. 3 shall be elected by voters of District No. 3 which is hereinafter described by metes and
bounds on Exhibit “C” attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes to the same extent as if copied
verbatim herein.
(4) Place No. 4 shall be elected by voters of District No. 4 which is hereinafter described by metes and
bounds on Exhibit “D” attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes to the same extent as if copied
verbatim herein.
(5) Place No. 5 and the Mayor shall be elected by plurality from the city at large and no description is
necessary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/301
(Ordinance 384, adopted 2/1/88, Section 1)
Sec. 1.202 Polling Places
From and after the effective date of this article, all elections shall be held in each district at the polling places set
forth below, unless other wise designated by this council in the notice of each election called hereunder:
District No. Polling Place
(1) 1. Atlanta Elementary School
(2) 2. Atlanta Junior High School
(3) 3. City Hall
(4) 4. Chamber Office
(Ordinance 384, adopted 2/1/88, Section 2; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.300 TAXATION*
Sec. 1.301 Freeport Goods
The city elects to rescind Ordinance 392 and elects not to tax that personal property described in Article VIII,
Section 1-J, Subsection (a), Texas Constitution and Section 11.251, Texas Property Tax Code. (Ordinance 392,
adopted 12/18/89)
Sec. 1.302 Delinquency
(a) Whenever any accounts for delinquent property taxes owed to the below-named Taxing Unit are given to its tax
attorney for collection, on or after July 1 of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect,
an additional penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any interest owed) due on
each delinquent property at the time of collection, either before or after suit and or foreclosure sale, as provided by Section
33.07 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in Section 1 above, whenever a delinquent tax suit is filed, the
city shall be entitled to recover reasonable expenses, subject to the approval of the court, that are incurred by the Taxing
Unit in determining the name, identity and location of necessary parties and in procuring necessary legal descriptions of
the property on which a delinquent tax is due, as provided by Section 33.48 (a)(3) of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(Ordinance 361 adopted 8/1/83)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 33.01.
Sec. 1.303 Sales and Use Tax
(a) There came on to be considered the Returns of an election held on the 6th day of April, 1968, upon the question of
the adoption of a local sales and use tax for the benefit of said city in accordance with the provisions of House Bill No.
207, 60th Legislature, Regular Session, 1967, and it appearing that said election was in all respects legally held and that
said Returns were duly and legally made and that there were cast at said election 987 votes, of which number 726 votes
were cast “FOR adoption of a one per cent (1%) local sales and use tax within the city,” and 261 votes were cast
“AGAINST adoption of a one per cent (1%) local sales and use tax within the city,” and said question or proposition
having been approved by 465 votes.
(b) The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of said local sales and use tax, the said tax is
hereby imposed in said city and shall become effective as provided in said House Bill 207, and the city secretary is hereby
instructed to forward to the Comptroller of Public Accounts, State Capitol, Austin, Texas, by registered or certified mail a
certified copy of this article and a map of this city clearly showing the boundaries thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/301
(Ordinance 226 adopted 4/8/68)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose local sales and use tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Chapter 321.
Sec. 1.304 Economic Development Sales Tax
(a) On the 1st day of May, 1993, an election was held in the city, at which the voters of the city considered the following
proposition:
Vote “FOR” or “AGAINST” the proposition:
SHALL THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS, ADOPT AND IMPOSE AN ADDITIONAL SALES AND USE TAX, FOR
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF NEW AND EXPANDED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES, AT THE RATE OF
ONE-HALF OF ONE PERCENT, (1/2%).
(b) The total number of votes cast “For” the proposition was 814.
(c) The total number of votes cast “Against” the proposition was 440.
(d) The number of votes by which the proposition was approved was 374.
(e) The imposition of an additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax within the city, has been approved by the
voters of said city for use pursuant to the provisions of Article 5190.6, Section 4A of the Revised Civil Statutes of the
state.
(f) In accordance with the provisions of Article 321.405 of the Texas Tax Code, the city secretary shall send to the
Comptroller of Public Accounts of the State of Texas by certified mail, a certified copy of this article.
(g) This article shall be effective immediately from and after its passage; provided, however, the collection of the sales
and use tax shall commence upon the date authorized by the statutes of the state.
(Ordinance 416, adopted 5/17/93)
Sec. 1.305 Taxation of Gas and Electricity for Residential Use
(a) The city council adopted a sales and use tax authorized by Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act (the “Act”) before May
1, 1979;
(b) This section exempts the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption
within the municipality of gas and electricity for residential use from taxes imposed by the act; and
(c) The city council hereby reimposes the taxes on gas and electricity for residential use pursuant to section 321.105 of
the act.
(Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 10/3/11)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Sec. 321.103.
Sec. 1.306 Economic Development Sales Tax
By election on May 6, 1995, in consideration of the adoption an additional one-half of one percent sales and use
tax in accordance with V.T.C.S., Article 5190.6, Section 4B, a majority of the qualified voters of the city voted
in favor of approving and adopting such tax. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.307 Homestead Tax Freeze for Disabled Persons and Persons Age 65 and Older
(a) Definitions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/301
Disabled. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code Section 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or
may be amended.
Residence Homestead. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code Section 11.13(j)(1), as it
currently exists or may be amended.
Tax Code. The Texas Tax Code, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(b) Residence Homestead Tax Freeze for Elderly or Disabled. There is hereby created and established a tax freeze on the
amount of property taxes imposed by the city on the homesteads of disabled individuals or individuals age sixty-five or
older, which shall be governed by Section 11.261 of the Tax Code, as follows:
(1) The tax freeze shall become effective beginning with the 2012 tax year and shall remain effective for
each successive tax year until otherwise amended or repealed by the city council or other authorized authority.
(2) The total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead of a person who qualified that
residence homestead for the exemption in accordance with the Tax Code as that of a person who is disabled or
is sixty-five years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of this
person or that person’s spouse who is disabled or fifty-five years of age or older.
(3) If the person who is disabled or sixty-five years of age or older dies in a year in which the person
received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence
homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person’s surviving spouse if:
(A) The surviving spouse is fifty-five years of age or older at the time of the person’s death;
(B) The residence homestead of the deceased person is also the residence homestead of the surviving
spouse on the date of the person’s death; and
(C) The residence homestead remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the
extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than
improvements made to comply with governmental requirements.
(5) A person may not receive the tax freeze for more than one residence homestead, no matter where
located, in the same year. A person may designate a new residence homestead within the city in accordance
with the Tax Code.
(6) The limitations on taxes provided by this section may expire in accordance with Section 11.261(d) of the
Tax Code. If a tax limitation is erroneously allowed, back taxes may be assessed in accordance with Section
11.261(e) of the Tax Code.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 9/19/11)
Sec. 1.308 Taxation of Telecommunication Services
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For the purposes of this section,
the sale of telecommunication services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunication device
from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be two percent (2%) which is the same rate imposed by the city, for
all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(c) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of public accounts for the state by United States certified or
registered mail a copy of this section along with the minutes of the city council’s vote and discussion on this section.
(Ordinance 2011-08 adopted 10/3/11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/301
ARTICLE 1.400 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.401 Director Designated
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in Section 1.403 of this article. He
may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the director.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 1)
Sec. 1.402 Powers and Duties of Director
The powers and duties of the director shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards
which threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or
recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the
impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall
supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for
adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential
for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the
authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its
next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing
personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as
well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 2)
Sec. 1.403 Duties and Responsibilities of Director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management
organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel.
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency
management organization of the city.
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or
other emergency management organizations.
(4) The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as video for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment
or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency
management plan.
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate
operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan.
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life
and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall
receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/301
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution,
if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other
municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(8) The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment,
including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city.
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public
shelter and other purposes.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 3)
Sec. 1.404 Emergency Management Organization
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of
the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in
accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate
officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization,
title and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and
of the federal government. (Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 4)
Sec. 1.405 Use of Sirens
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this article. (Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 5)
Sec. 1.405 Rules to Supersede, Not to Conflict
(a) At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect,
they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 6)
(b) This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 7)
Sec. 1.406 Governmental Function
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health
and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury
to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for
loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 8)
Sec. 1.407 Expenditure of Public Funds
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/301
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 9)
Sec. 1.408 Hindering Enforcement Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall
likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable by fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 10)
Sec. 1.409 Oath Required
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to
support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of the state, and the ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 356, adopted 10/4/82, Section 11)
Secs. 1.410–1.430 Reserved
Division 2. National Incident Management System
Sec. 1.431 Adopted
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. (Ordinance
2005-08 adopted 8/1/05)
ARTICLE 1.500 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.501 Definition of City Records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (Ordinance 402, adopted
8/20/91, Section 1)
Sec. 1.502 Additional Definitions
Department Head. Means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office
of the city that creates or receives records.
Essential Record. Means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the
city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection
and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent Record. Means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is
given as permanent.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/301
Records Control Schedule. Means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management
officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition
information that the records management program may require.
Records Management. Means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance,
retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the
efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management
of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical
and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records Liaison Officers. Mean the persons designated under Section 1.510 of this article.
Records Management Committee. Means the committee established in Section 1.506 of this article.
Records Management Officer. Means the person designated in section of this article.
Records Management Plan. Means the plan developed under Section 1.507 of this article.
Retention Period. Means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or
the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 2)
Sec. 1.503 City Records Declared Public Property
All city records as defined in Section 1.501 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or
use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 3)
Sec. 1.504 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 4)
Sec. 1.505 Designation of Records Management Officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. (Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 5)
Sec. 1.506 Establishment of Records Management Committee; Duties
A records management committee consisting of the city attorney and city manager is hereby established. The
committee shall:
(1) assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the
records management program;
(2) review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if
needed;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/301
(3) review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules;
and
(5) actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 6)
Sec. 1.507 Records Management Plan to be Developed; Approval of Plan; Authority of Plan
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan
for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs
and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly
preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments,
divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created,
maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not
exempt the department head or the records in the department head’s care from the application of this article and the records
management plan adopted under it may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the
records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 7)
Sec. 1.508 Duties of Records Management Officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) in cooperation with department heads identifying essential records and establish a disaster plan for each
city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations
quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city;
(5) establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and
control system for the city;
(7) provide records management advise and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or
manuals of procedure and policy and by on site consultation;
(8) monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and
Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city’s records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/301
(10) instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) instruct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation
for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city
records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and
the requirements of state law;
(13) maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the
volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result
of such disposal or disposition;
(14) report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each
department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13);
and
(15) bring to the attention of the city council non-compliance by department heads or other city personnel
with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 8)
Sec. 1.509 Duties and Responsibilities of Department Heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established
in the City of Atlanta for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article.
(2) adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for
which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or
other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of
the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 9)
Sec. 1.510 Designation of Records Liaison Officer
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer
determines that in the best interest of the records management program more than one records liaison officer
should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison
officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to
all records of the City of Atlanta maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement,
dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the
department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as
records liaison officer for his or her department. (Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 10)
Sec. 1.511 Duties and Responsibilities of Records Liaison Officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/301
(1) conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the
development of records control schedules;
(2) in cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 11)
Sec. 1.512 Records Control Schedules to be Developed; Approval; Filing With State
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records Liaison officers, shall prepare
records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and
the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the
disposition of city records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a
regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to
reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the City of
Atlanta.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the
department head, the city attorney, and the city manager.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and
librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it
acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and
librarian.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 12)
Sec. 1.513 Implementation of Records Control Schedules; Destruction of Records Under Schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under Section 1.507 shall be
implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records
request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head
requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction
must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 13)
Sec. 1.514 Destruction of Unscheduled Records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (Ordinance 402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 14)
Sec. 1.515 Records Center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by Section 1.507, shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the records management officer, policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/301
records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under Section 1.507. (Ordinance
402, adopted 8/20/91, Section 15)
ARTICLE 1.600 PUBLIC LIBRARY
Sec. 1.601 Illegal Removal of Materials; Fines
No adult person shall take or borrow from the Atlanta Public Library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or
other property without properly checking out such items in accordance with the rules of the library. Any adult
person guilty of violating this provision shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 450, adopted 3/20/95, Section 1)
Sec. 1.602 Return of Borrowed Materials; Fines
Every adult person who shall take or borrow from the Atlanta Public Library any book, pamphlet, periodical,
paper or other library property which is allowed to be checked out, and who shall neglect, refuse or fail to return
the same within two (2) weeks after the date of mailing a notice to his or her address noted on the current library
card shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code, for each offense, exclusive of
and in addition to any administrative fees normally assessed by the library for late return of books or materials.
(Ordinance 450, adopted 3/20/95, Section 2)
Sec. 1.603 Defacing of Library Materials, Fines
Every adult person who shall recklessly cut, mutilate, mark, tear, write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or
injure in whole or in part, any book, pamphlet, periodical, map or document, picture, or written or engraved or
printed paper or any other library property belonging to the Atlanta Public Library, or shall suffer any such
injury to be inflicted while such property is in his custody, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section
1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 450, adopted 3/20/95, Section 3)
Sec. 1.604 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, an “adult person” is any person who has reached his or her seventeenth birthday.
(Ordinance 450, adopted 3/20/95, Section 4)
Sec. 1.605 Responsibility of Parents and Guardian for Conduct of Children
Parents and/or guardians are responsible for the conduct or activities of their children under the age of seventeen
(17) years. A parent or guardian is liable for any property damage to library materials proximately caused by (1)
the negligent conduct of the child if the conduct is reasonably attributable to the negligent failure of the parent or
guardian to exercise their duty of control and reasonable discipline of said child, or (2) the willful or malicious
conduct of a child who is at least twelve (12) years of age, but under eighteen (18). (Ordinance 450, adopted
3/20/95, Section 5)
Sec. 1.606 Copy Charge
That the Atlanta Public Library shall charge and collect from library patrons and members of the general public
the sum as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, for each copy made on the library
premises with library equipment. (Ordinance 424, adopted 9/21/93)
ARTICLE 1.700 CITY PARKS
Sec. 1.701 Park Operating Policy
(a) Except for unusual or unforeseen emergencies, city parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during the
hours of 7:00 a.m., CST, until 10:00 p.m., or, unless different opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/301
posted therein.
(b) Park hours may be extended for groups/organizations after receiving written approval from the city manager and/or
his/her designee. Any group/organization desiring to conduct a function at city parks shall request, in writing, permission
from the city manager. This request shall include the name of the organization, type/purpose of the function, the hours that
the event is scheduled to occur, and the name, address, and telephone number of an authorized representative of the
group/organization. This request shall be submitted to the city manager not less than 72 (seventy-two) hours prior to the
occurrence of the event/function. The city manager and/or his/her designee retains the authority to approve or reject any
such request.
(Ordinance 419, adopted 8/6/93, Section 1)
Sec. 1.702 Penalty for Violations
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article or rule promulgated pursuant to this article shall
be deemed guilty of a Class “C” misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Section 42.01 of the Texas Penal
Code. (Ordinance 419, adopted 8/6/93, Section 2)
Sec. 1.703 Motor Vehicles in Parks
No person shall operate or drive a motorized vehicle in any city park except on roads, driveways or parking lots
designated for such purpose. The penalty for any such violation shall be as provided in Section 1.702.
(Ordinance 00-06 adopted 10/16/00)
ARTICLE 1.800 HANGAR STORAGE FEES
(a) Beginning the 1st day of July, 2003, and continuing monthly thereafter each aircraft owner utilizing a “T-Hangar” or
other such structure for the storage of aircraft, shall pay to the city a monthly rental fee as provided for in the fee schedule
in the appendix of this code.
(b) Each aircraft owner using field storage or tie down facilities provided by the city shall pay to the city a monthly
rental fee provided for in the fee schedule in the appendix of this code.
(c) Each aircraft owner utilizing a “T-Hangar” or similar structure, or claiming ownership in any “T-Hangar” or similar
structure, on or before the 1st day of July, 2003, shall every five years, execute a hanger site lease agreement with the City
of Atlanta on a uniform form prepared and approved by the city attorney.
(Ordinance 2003-03 adopted 6/16/03)
(d) Hangar storage fees are subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
ARTICLE 1.900 PUBLIC FUND INVESTMENT*
Sec. 1.901 Scope
This investment policy applies to the investment activities of the City of Atlanta, Texas. This policy serves to
satisfy the statutory requirements of defining and adopting a formal investment policy in accordance with the
Public Funds Investment Act Number TX 74 R HB 2459. All financial assets of city funds except those
expressly prohibited by covenant or regulation shall be administered according to the provisions of these
policies. (Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section I)
Sec. 1.902 Objectives
(a) Compliance. The city must adopt rules and designate staff to manage local funds and submit related reports per
Chapter 2256 Government Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/301
(b) Safety. The primary objective of the city’s investment activity is the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio.
Each investment transaction shall seek first to ensure that capital losses are avoided, whether they be from security defaults
or erosion of market value.
(c) Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the city to meet operating
requirements that might be reasonably anticipated. Liquidity shall be achieved by matching investment maturities with
forecasted cash flow requirements and by investing in securities with active secondary markets.
(d) Yield. Funds held for future capital projects shall be invested in securities that reasonably can be expected to produce
enough income to offset inflationary construction cost increases. However, such funds shall never be exposed to market
price risks or default risks that would jeopardize the assets available to accomplish their stated objective, or be invested in
a manner inconsistent with applicable federal and state regulations.
(e) Risk of Loss. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly as custodians of the public trust.
Investment officials shall avoid any transactions that might impair public confidence in the city’s ability to govern
effectively. The governing body recognizes that in a diversified portfolio, occasional measured losses due to market
volatility are inevitable, and must be considered within the context of the overall portfolio’s investment return, provided
that adequate diversification has been implemented.
(Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section II)
Sec. 1.903 Responsibility and Control
(a) Delegation. Management responsibility for the investment program is hereby delegated to the city manager. The city
manager or his designee shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program, consistent with this
investment policy. Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment
transactions.
(b) Designation. All persons involved in investment activities will be referred to as “investment officials”. No person
shall engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures established
by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall make recommendations to the city council for
approval of all investments. All investment officials must receive proper training through continuing education programs
to ensure that prudent and educated investment decisions are made.
(c) Quarterly Reports. The city manager or his designee, shall prepare an investment report quarterly that summarizes
recent market conditions, economic developments and anticipated investment conditions. The report shall explain the
quarter’s total investment return and compare the return with budgetary expectations.
(d) Annual Report. Within sixty (60) days of the end of the fiscal year, the city manager or his designee, shall prepare a
comprehensive annual report on the investment program and investment activity.
(e) Due Care. Investments shall be made with exercise of due care, which persons of prudence exercise in the
management of their own affairs, not for speculation but for Investment considering the probable safety of their capital as
well as the probable income to be derived.
(f) Conflicts of Interest. Employees and investment officials involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that would conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their
ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment officials shall disclose to the city manager, who
in turn shall report to the city council any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business with the
City of Atlanta, Texas, and they shall further disclose any large personal financial or investment positions that could be
related to the performance of the city’s portfolio. Employees and investment officials shall subordinate their personal
investment transactions to those of the City of Atlanta, Texas, particularly with regard to the timing of purchases and sales.
(Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section III)
Sec. 1.904 Investments
(a) Active Portfolio Management. The city intends to pursue an active versus a passive portfolio management
philosophy. That is, securities may be sold before they mature if market conditions present an opportunity for the city to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/301
benefit from the sale.
(b) Eligible Investments. Assets of funds of the government of the City of Atlanta, Texas, may be invested in:
(1) U. S. Treasury securities maturing in less than three (3) years.
(2) Short-term obligations of U. S. Government Agencies.
(3) Fully insured or collateralized certificates of deposits at commercial banks and savings and loan
associations.
(4) Repurchase agreements collateralized by U. S. Treasury or U. S. Government agency securities.
(5) Local government investment pools which are rated in the highest investment category by at least one
nationally recognized rating service.
(c) Length of Investments. Except for funds in debt service funds, special assessment funds, bond proceeds and reserve
funds, the City of Atlanta, Texas, shall invest in instruments whose maturities do not exceed two (2) years at the time of
purchase. Assets held in debt service funds, special assessment funds, bond proceeds and reserve funds may be invested in
maturities exceeding two years.
(d) Diversification. Assets held in the common investment portfolio shall be diversified to eliminate the risk of loss
resulting from one concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issuer, or a specific class of securities. Portfolio
maturities shall be staggered in a way that protects interest income from the volatility of interest rates and that avoid undue
concentration of assets in a specific maturity sector.
(Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section IV)
Sec. 1.905 Selection of Banks and Dealers
(a) Bidding Process. Depositories shall be selected through the city’s banking service procurement process, which shall
include a formal request for proposals issued at least every five years. In selecting depositories, the credit worthiness of
institutions shall be considered, and the city manager or his designee shall conduct a comprehensive review of prospective
depositories credit characteristics and financial history.
(b) Insurability. Banks and savings and loan associations seeking to establish eligibility for the city’s investment
program, shall submit financial statements, evidence of federal insurance and other information as required by the city
manager or his designee.
(c) Investment Dealers. For brokers and dealers of government securities, the city manager or his designee shall select
only primary government securities dealers that report daily to the New York Federal Reserve Bank, unless a
comprehensive credit and capitalization analysis reveals that other firms are adequately financed to conduct public
business. Investment Officials, in their dealing with city funds, shall not conduct business with any securities dealer with
whom or through whom public entities have sustained losses on investments.
(d) Signed Agreement. Any financial institution, broker or dealer selling an authorized investment to the city must sign a
statement that a written copy of the city’s investment policy has been received and reviewed and that controls are in place
that would prevent “imprudent” investment activities.
(Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section V)
Sec. 1.906 Safekeeping and Custody
(a) Insurance or Collateral. All deposits and investments of city funds other than direct purchases of U. S. Treasury or U.
S. Agency notes or bills shall be secured by pledged collateral with a market value equal to at least 100 percent of the
deposits or investments, less and amount insured by FDIC or FSLIC. Evidence of the pledged collateral shall be
maintained by the city manager or his collateral will be reviewed monthly to ensure the market value of the securities
pledged equals or exceeds the related bank balances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/301
(b) Collateral. The City of Atlanta, Texas shall accept only the following securities as Collateral:
(1) FDIC and FSLIC insurance coverage.
(2) United States Treasuries and Agencies.
(3) Texas State, city, county, school or road district bonds with a remaining maturity of ten (10) years or less
with an investment grade bond rating of not less than A or its equivalent from an nationally recognized
investment rating firm.
(c) Audit. All collateral shall be subject to inspection and audit by the city manager or his designee, and the city’s
independent auditor.
(d) Delivery vs. Payment. Treasury Bills, Notes and Bonds and Government Agencies securities shall be purchases
using the delivery versus payment method. That is, funds shall not be wired or paid until verification has been made that
the collateral was received by the Trustee. The collateral shall be held in the name of the city or held on behalf of the city.
The Trustee’s records shall assure the notations of the city’s ownership of or explicit claim receipts shall be delivered to the
city.
(Ordinance 462, adopted 1/22/96, Section VI)
ARTICLE 1.1000 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND
Sec. 1.1001 Establishment of Municipal City Technology Fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the fund, pursuant
to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; and
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
Sec. 1.1002 Establishment of Amount of the Fee and Assessment and Collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule located in appendix A of this code.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person’s case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal clerk of the City of Atlanta, Texas, who
shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
Sec. 1.1003 Designated Use of the Fund and Administration
(a) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of technology enhancements for the municipal
court of the city. “Technology enhancements” shall include any and all items described in Article 102.0172 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the councilmembers of the city.
(Ordinance 2003-14 adopted 12/15/03)
ARTICLE 1.1100 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND(
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/301
Sec. 1.1101 Establishment of Fund
There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to Article 102.017
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Sec. 1.1102 Establishment of Fees
The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court
building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the
municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
Sec. 1.1103 Definition of Conviction
A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
(1) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
Sec. 1.1104 Authorization to Collect Fee
The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay the same to the treasury of the city. All
fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
Sec. 1.1105 Use of Funds
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or
buildings housing the municipal court of the city. Security devices and/or services shall include any and all items described
in Article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Sec. 1.1106 Administration
The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 2007-07 adopted 12/3/07)
ARTICLE 1.1200 CEMETERIES*
Sec. 1.1201 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish clear and unambiguous rules and regulations pertaining to the Pinecrest
Cemetery.
Sec. 1.1202 Definitions
Words and terms used in this article shall be given the meanings set forth in this section. All words not defined
shall be given their common, ordinary meanings, as the context may reasonably suggest. In case of a dispute
over the meaning of a term not defined in this section, or over the application of a definition that is set forth, the
city attorney shall give a written interpretation of such term(s) and application(s).
Caretaker. A person who is granted authority to enforce the cemetery organization’s rules, state laws, and
municipal rules in the cemetery as necessary to protect cemetery property.
Cemetery. A place that is used for interment, and includes a graveyard, burial park, or mausoleum.
Funeral Establishment. A place of business used in the care and preparation for interment or transportation of
human remains, or any place where one or more persons, either as sole owner, in copartnership, or through
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/301
corporate status, are engaged or represent themselves to be engaged in the business of embalming or funeral
directing.
Grave. A space of ground that is in a burial park and is used for interment in the ground.
Human Remains. The body of a decedent.
Interment. The permanent disposition of remains by burial.
Interment Right. The right to inter the remains of a decedent in a space.
Lot. A space in Pinecrest Cemetery owned by an individual that is used for interment.
Perpetual Care. The maintenance, repair and care of all places in the cemetery.
Perpetual Care Cemetery. A cemetery for the benefit of which a perpetual care trust fund is established as
provided by state law.
Plot Owner. A registered owner:
(1) In whose name a space or lot is listed in the city office as the owner of the exclusive right of sepulture;
or
(2) Who holds, from the city a warranty deed or other instrument of conveyance of exclusive right of
sepulture in a particular space or lot in the Pinecrest Cemetery.
Remains. Either human remains or cremated human remains only.
Sepulture. Burial of remains or interment of remains, or a burial place.
Space. A single grave for burial of remains, but no more then two sets of remains when one set of remains is
ashes or two sets of ashes.
Standard Grave. The standard size of a grave in this article is five feet (5') wide, ten feet (10') long and six feet
(6') deep.
Sec. 1.1203 Management of the Cemetery
The city manager shall have general charge and supervision of the Pinecrest Cemetery. The city manager shall
cause to be kept records of all lots and spaces sold so that the same can be found and properly identified and he
shall see that all maps and plans of the grounds are preserved.
Sec. 1.1204 Conveyance of Lots and Spaces
All lots and spaces in the Pinecrest Cemetery shall be conveyed to the purchaser by warranty deed duly executed
by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk with the city seal impressed thereon. Said deed shall contain a
provision making said sale subject to the terms and conditions of this article. A recording fee shall be collected
from the buyer.
Sec. 1.1205 Transfer or Sale of Lots and Spaces by Grantee
Owners of a lot in the Pinecrest Cemetery shall not allow interments to be made in their lot for remuneration nor
shall any transfer or assignment or sale of any lots or spaces or an interest therein be valid without the consent in
writing of the mayor of the city endorsed upon such transfer or assignment.
Sec. 1.1206 Interments and Disinterments
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/301
Disinterment shall only be made under the direction of the funeral establishment and in conformity with state
laws and subject to approval of the city manager in writing.
Sec. 1.1207 Charges Generally
The city council may from time to time fix the prices at which lots or single spaces may be sold.
Sec. 1.1208 Rules and Regulations for Beautification and Improvements
(a) In the beautification and improvements of the Pinecrest Cemetery the plan as outlined on the maps and plats are
made a part hereof shall be followed as far as practical and in order to prevent any interference with said plan of
beautification and improvement of said premises the following rules and regulations shall be followed:
(1) All lots and spaces shall be maintained on a uniform level and no lot shall be raised or terraced.
(2) A lot or space enclosure of any kind whatsoever shall not be permitted unless approved by city manager.
(3) No sign or other indication that a lot or space is for sale shall be permitted within the cemetery.
(4) No metallic urns, monuments, headstones, or anything of any shape in metal and no wooden items shall
be permitted upon the lots or spaces in said cemetery. Pure bronze, statuary or stone, cement or cement
pedestals will be permitted.
(5) Only one monument shall be placed on each lot and said monument shall not exceed six (6) feet in
height above the surface of the ground and said monument shall be placed on the center of said lot and shall
only be erected when proper foundation is built to support the weight of same.
(6) The headstone for graves or any structure to mark a grave shall be authorized by the city.
(7) The foot stone for a grave shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in
length and must be installed flush with the ground. Only one foot stone shall be allowed per grave site.
(8) No steps to lots will be permitted in Pinecrest Cemetery. Stone slabs shall be permitted so long as slabs
do not extend or protrude above the natural ground level of the cemetery lot or space in question, being
understood that it is necessary from a maintenance standpoint that the city be able to mow over and across any
slab without damage to the slab or equipment.
(9) Owners of the lots or spaces shall not plant flowers, shrubs or trees on said lots or spaces.
(10) All work performed in the cemetery by any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity not
connected with the city shall be conducted and performed during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday. No work shall be performed by such outside
laborers on Saturday afternoons or Sunday or during any other time not expressly authorized herein. It is
understood that this shall not apply to the city or its employees, contractors.
(11) The city council shall have the right to authorize removal of any monument(s), effigies, structures,
shrubs, trees or flowers placed in or upon any lot or space in the cemetery which shall be determined by the
city council to be offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or grounds; and in
order to remove same, the city manager shall authorize city staff to enter upon such lots or spaces.
(b) Other Regulations.
(1) The city will not be held responsible for any article left on cemetery property or for any stones or
anything on any lot damaged or destroyed by fire, vandalism or other damages accruing to private property.
(2) Riding or driving across any grave is prohibited, except by authorized personnel in discharge of their
duties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/301
(3) Defacing or injuring any monument, grave, stone, slab, corner post, building, fence, tree, shrub or flower
is unlawful.
(4) It is unlawful to go into or loiter in the cemetery at any hour, day or night.
(Ordinance 2009-03 adopted 6/15/09)
ARTICLE 1.1300 DRILLING OR MINING IN PUBLIC PARKS
Sec 1.1301 General Regulations
(a) All forms of drilling and mining are permanently prohibited in any public park located within the city limits.
(b) No previously drilled and abandoned well or mine may be reopened in any public park located within the city limits.
(Ordinance 2015-002 adopted 5/18/15)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.100 GENERAL ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Sec. 2.101 Definitions
When used in this article the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall
be interpreted as follows:
Owner. Any person who has right of property in an animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises for
a period of three days.
Harboring. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premise to which the animal returns
for a period of three days.
Domestic Animal. Shall include the following species: dog, cat, horse, cow, pig, sheep, and goats. does not
include hybrid individuals resulting from crossing wild with domestic species.
Wild Animal. Refers to any mammal native to North America except the domestic species (dog, cat, horse, cow,
pig, sheep, and goat).
Pet Animal. Shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and any other species of animal which is
sold or retained as a household pet but shall not include any species of wild, exotic, or carnivorous animal that
may he further restricted in this law.
Dog. A domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized.
Cat. A domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized.
Vicious Animal. Any animal that commits an unprovoked attack upon a person on public or private property or
that attacks, threatens to attack or terrorizes a person on public property or in a public place.
Stray Animal. Any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/301
Running At Large. Shall pertain to an animal off the premises of the owner and not under the physical, visible, or
audible control of the owner or his authorized representative. An animal intruding upon the property of another
person than the owner shall be termed “running at large”. An animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its
owner shall not be deemed “running at large”.
Rabies Control. Shall mean the vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine
approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the
State of Texas.
Local Health Authority. Shall mean the reporting agent for the purposes of this law, whose duties consists of the
following:
(1) receiving all reports of animal bites and scratches to humans;
(2) receiving all reports of suspected rabid animals;
(3) investigation of all reported animal bites and scratches and suspected rabid animals;
(4) order quarantine, if appropriate, of any animal which has exposed an individual or which may be rabid;
and
(5) other duties as entailed by the test of this law.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 1)
Sec. 2.102 Rabies Control*
(a) In the City of Atlanta, Texas, the local health authority shall be the city health officer.
(b) Vaccinations. Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against
rabies. Annual revaccination shall be required thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the
city shall comply with this article within 10 days after having moved into the city.
(c) Certification of Vaccination. Upon vaccination the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or
cat as evidence thereof, a certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate
copy .
Such certificate shall contain the following information:
(1) Owner’s name, address, and phone no.
(2) Animal identification: species, age, sex, size (in lbs.), predominant breed and colors.
(3) Vaccine used, produced, expiration date and serial number.
(4) Date vaccinated.
(5) Rabies tag number.
(6) Veterinarians signature and license number.
(d) Rabies Tags. Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in subsection (b),
the owner of the dog shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog a metal tag, serially numbered
to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance and the name of the issuing
veterinarian and his address.
(e) Duplicate Tags. In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in subsection (c), the owner of the dog
shall obtain a duplicate tag.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/301
(f) Proof. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his
copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this article.
(g) Harboring Unvaccinated Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been
vaccinated against rabies, as provided herein, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate.
(1) Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid
animal or its fresh tissues should be:
(A) humanely killed under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian,
(B) if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal should be
immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for six months and given a booster
vaccination one month prior to release from isolation.
(2) Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal should
be:
(A) humanely killed under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian,
(B) if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed vaccinated animal should be
given a booster rabies vaccination and placed in strict isolation for three months.
(3) These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is available.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 2)
Sec. 2.103 Reporting Bites from Animals Susceptible to Rabies Related Procedures
(a) Duty to Report. Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human shall immediately report the
incident to the local health authority. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for such
bites shall within twelve hours report such treatment to the local health authority or his agent, giving name, age, sex and
precise location of the bitten person or persons and such other information as the local health authority may require.
(b) Exclusions. Human bites from rodents, rabbits, birds, and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements of
this section.
(c) Suspected Rabies. Any veterinarian who clinically diagnosis rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or
other domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the local health authority or his agent stating
precisely where such animal may be found. If a known or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks a domestic animal, such
incident shall also be reported as required above.
(d) Confinement of Dogs and Cats. Any dog or cat which has bitten a person shall be observed for a period of ten (10)
days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the local health authority. If
the dog or cat is not allowed an at-home quarantine, confinement shall be by impoundment at any veterinary hospital of the
owners’ choice. Such confinement shall be at the owners’ expense. Stray dogs or cats whose owners cannot be located
shall be confined at the direction of the local health authority. The city shall be responsible for all costs as set out in the
attached contract agreement. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall
on demand produce said dog or cat for impoundment as prescribed in this section and each day of such refusal shall
constitute a separate and individual violation. At no time shall a dog or cat be allowed an at-home quarantine if it is in
violation of any provision of this article.
(e) Removal of Dogs and Cats from Confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of
confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized, without the consent of the local health authority.
(f) Procedures for Other Animal Bites. Procedures concerning bites from other animals shall be discussed with the local
health authority, animal control officer, or The Texas Department of Health for proper disposition. Any wild animal which
has bitten a person should be caught and killed and the brain immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies
examination. An exception to this rule may be allowed for large exotic, or valuable zoo species, which, by reason of their
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/301
close confinement, would be unlikely rabies vectors. Rodents, rabbits, birds, and reptiles are considered for laboratory
examination for rabies.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 3)
Sec. 2.104 Animals Running at Large*
(a) Restraining. It shall be unlawful for any animal, owned, kept, or harbored to run at large, as is defined in Section
2.101 of this article. The supervisor of animal control or any officer designated by him shall have the authority to impound
such animals running-at-large. He shall furthermore be enabled by this article to enter onto privately owned property for
this purpose, so long as in doing so he does not violate a property owners “posted” or “no trespassing” notice.
(b) Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner to harbor any dog, cat, or other pet animal which by any sound or cry or
other activity shall disturb the peace, comfort, or property of the inhabitants of the neighborhood and such disturbance is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this article.
(c) Confinement During Estrus. Any unspayed female dog or cat in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during
such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure and said area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other
dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in
heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the
owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer shall be a violation of this article and the dog
or cat will then be impounded as prescribed in this article.
(d) Injured Animals. Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical
treatment pending notification of the owner. If the injured animal is treated and/or impounded, the owner of such animal
shall be liable for all expenses of the treatment and/or impoundment; however, disposition may be made according to
subsection (e) of Section 2.106.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 4)
Sec. 2.105 Vicious Animals
(a) Vicious Animals. No person shall own or harbor a vicious animal within the City of Atlanta, Texas. Such an animal
shall be impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of said animal running at large cannot be made with safety to the
animal control officer or other persons, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer.
(b) Guard Dogs. It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog which has been specifically trained to attack, in any
area for protection of persons or property unless the dog is physically confined to a specific area or is under complete or
absolute control. The area or premises in which a guard dog is confined must be conspicuously posted with warning signs
bearing letters not less than two inches high.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 5)
Sec. 2.106 Impounded Animals
(a) Impoundment. Animals owned or harbored in violation of this article or any other article or law of the State of Texas
shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other designated official and impounded. Stray animals shall be
similarly impounded.
(b) Animal Shelter. If any animal shelter is provided for the purpose of boarding and caring for any animal impounded
under the provision of this article, such shelter shall be constructed in accordance with recommendations from the Texas
Department of Health. In lieu of constructing a shelter, the city may contract with any chartered humane society
organization having a suitable facility that has been approved by the Texas Department of Health.
(c) Removal of Animals from Animal Shelter. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from
an animal shelter without the consent of the animal control officer or local health authority.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/301
(d) Removal of Biting Dogs and Cats from Confinement. The impoundment of dogs and cats that have inflicted human
bites shall be for a period of ten (10) days for observation and shall not be terminated until consent from the local health
authority is secured.
(e) Disposition of Impounded Animals. As soon as practical after impoundment, if the owner of the impounded animal
is known, immediate notice shall be given to him. Any impounded animal may be redeemed upon payment of the care and
feeding charges, veterinary charges, rabies vaccination charges and such other costs as set by the city council. If such
animal is not redeemed within three (3) days, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be placed for adoption, subject to
payment of the impoundment fee, care and feeding charges, veterinary charges, rabies vaccination charges and such other
costs as set by the city council, or said animal may be humanely euthanized. If any impounded animal appears to be either
seriously ill or injured in such a manner as to render treatment impractical, it may be humanely destroyed before the end of
the three(3) day waiting period to end its suffering.
(f) Disposition of Impounded Animal Being Held on Complaint. If a complaint has been filed in the city court in the
City of Atlanta, Texas, against the owner of an impounded animal for violation of this article; the animal shall not be
released except on the order of the court which may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this article in
addition to all impoundment fees. The court may, upon making a finding that such animal is vicious or that it presents
danger or nuisance to the citizens or other animals in the community, order said animal to be euthanized in a humane
manner. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the owner
immune from the decision of the court, nor to the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this article.
(g) Disposition of Diseased Animals. Any animal taken into custody by the animal control officer except those animals
which have inflicted human bites during the preceding ten days and that are visibly affected with any sign of
communicable disease other than rabies which are being held at the impounding facility, may instead of being impounded,
be humanely destroyed provided:
(1) That any animal which has inflicted any human or animal bite during the preceding ten (10) days have
its head removed by the animal control officer and submitted to the laboratory for rabies examination.
(2) Any animal exhibiting symptoms of rabies must be handled in a manner prescribed by the local health
authority.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 6)
Sec. 2.107 Animals Prohibited
(a) Animals Prohibited. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep,
maintain, harbor or permit in the City of Atlanta, Texas, any monkey, or other non-human primate, skunk, raccoon, jaguar,
leopard, lynx, tiger, lion, ocelot, bobcat, mountain lion, wildcat, panther, bear, wolf, coyote, fox, or other carnivorous
animal or poisonous reptile.
(b) Endangered Species. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep,
maintain harbor, or permit in the City of Atlanta, Texas, any endangered species of animal as defined by the United States
Department of the Interior or the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife.
(c) Section Does Not Apply. This section does not apply to:
(1) A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park.
(2) A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research.
(3) A circus duly authorized to do business in the City of Atlanta, Texas.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 7)
Sec. 2.108 Inhumane Treatment*
(a) Cruelty to Animals. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to commit or cause to be
committed any act of cruelty, harassment, or torture to any animal or intentionally cause such animal to be mutilated or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/301
inhumanely killed. Ownership, or the commission of such acts of cruelty on private property shall not be justifiable
defense for violation of this section.
(b) Poisoning. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to poison any domestic animal or to
distribute poison or toxicants on public or private property in any manner whatsoever with the intent of poisoning any
domestic animal.
(c) Abandoning Animals. It is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any animal;
or to withhold food or water from any animal such that its health is endangered, or it is caused to suffer unduly.
(d) Display or Sale of Dyed or Immature Animals. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess, display, sale, barter, or give away dyed, colored or in any way artificially treated baby chick, ducklings, fowl,
rabbits or any animals as pets, play-things, novelties, gifts, or for any other purpose. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit their display of hatcheries, stores, owners, dealers, or persons engaged in the business of selling such immature
animals to be raised for food; but such hatcheries, store owners, dealers, or persons shall not sell or give away baby chicks,
ducklings, or any other immature domestic fowl as pets, playthings, novelties or gifts.
(e) Fighting Animals. It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate, or encourage any
dog or other animal to fight with another of its own species or with another of a different species. It shall be unlawful for
any person to train or keep any dog or other animal for the purpose of fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain a place where any dog or other animal is permitted to fight for exhibition, wager, or sport.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 8)
Sec. 2.109 Safety Provisions
(a) Interference with the Local Health Authority or His Authorized Representatives. It shall be unlawful for any person
to interfere with, molest, hinder, or prevent the local health authority or his authorized representatives in the discharge of
their duties as herein prescribed, or to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(b) Penalty For Violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or other sections of this article
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code, unless pre-empted by a state penalty provision.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 9)
Sec. 2.110 Fees, Fines, Records
(a) The city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas, approves the initial fee schedule, payable to the City of Atlanta by
animal owners, as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) Records. It shall be the duty of the local health authority of the City of Atlanta, Texas, to maintain such records as
deemed necessary to the enforcement of all provisions of this article and have those records available for display to the city
council, or to the public at any time during regular business hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(c) Fees are subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 10; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.111 Petitions
Petitions complaining of barking dogs or cats:
(1) Whenever any person shall complain to the police department that a dog habitually barks, howls or
yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the city, the police department
shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint has been received and that the person should take
whatever steps necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/301
(b) If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or cat as set forth in (a) above is
ineffective, then a verified complaint of at least two citizens not from the same family may be presented to the
police department, alleging that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or
howls is being kept by any person within the city. The police department shall inform the owner of such dog or
cat that said petition has been received and shall cite the owner of the dog or cat for the violation alleged in
said petition.
(Ordinance 365, adopted 10/3/83, Section 2)
ARTICLE 2.200 LIVESTOCK*
(a) Except for parcels exceeding five acres and zoned A-E agricultural and estate district it shall be unlawful for any
person or property owner within the corporate limits of the city to keep, raise, feed or possess livestock within the city
limits. The livestock limited and prohibited by this article shall include cattle, horses, sheep, goats, pigs, large fowl or any
other wild animal.
(1) Horses may be authorized in a residentially zoned district so long as there is a minimum of three (3)
contiguous acres of fenced land available for the horse, and:
(A) The area is kept reasonably clean and free of odorous or unsanitary conditions as outlined in
subsection (c) below; and
(B) The municipal judge is authorized to permanently deny this special horse privilege upon any
finding of violations of this section.
(b) No poultry shall be kept within the corporate limits of the city unless such poultry or similar fowl are kept within an
enclosure, all parts of which are more than 200 feet from any residence or occupied building within the corporate limits of
the city.
(c) It shall be illegal for any person to keep or maintain any livestock or animal within the corporate limits of the city
under conditions which are unsanitary, odorous, or which constitute a nuisance either public or private.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2015-003 adopted 8/17/15)
ARTICLE 2.300 DANGEROUS DOGS†
Sec. 2.301 Dangerous Dog Defined
As used in this article, “dangerous dog” means a dog that:
(1) makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an
enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the
enclosure on its own; or
(2) commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that
was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
Sec. 2.302 Chief of Police to Investigate Incidents; to Rule on Dangerous Dogs; Appeals
(a) If a person reports an unprovoked attack as described in Section 2.301, the chief of police or his or her designee may
investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the chief of police or his or her designee
determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, he/she shall notify the owner of that fact.
(b) An owner, not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the date the owner is notified that his/her dog is a dangerous
dog, may appeal the determination of the chief of police or his or her designee to municipal court of competent
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/301
jurisdiction. An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other civil cases.
Sec. 2.303 Requirements for Owners of Dangerous Dogs
(a) Not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after a person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog, he/she shall:
(1) register the dangerous dog with the chief of police or his or her designee;
(2) restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure
enclosure; and
(3) obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily
injury to a person.
(b) For purposes of this section, a person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) the owner knows of an attack described in Section 2.301; or
(2) the owner is informed by the chief of police or his or her designee that the dog is a dangerous dog.
Sec. 2.304 Registration of Dangerous Dogs
(a) The chief of police or his or her designee shall formally register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) presents proof of:
(A) liability insurance or financial responsibility as required by Section 2.303(a)(3);
(B) current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(C) the secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and
(2) pays an annual registration fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) The chief of police or his or her designee shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag.
The owner must place the tag on the dog’s collar.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address within the city, he/she, not later
than the fourteenth (14th) day after the date of sale or move, shall notify the chief of police or his or her designee. On
presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog’s prior registration tag and payment of a fee as provided for in the
fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, the chief of police or his or her designee shall issue a new registration tag
to be placed on the dog’s collar.
(d) Every owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the chief of police or his or her designee by whom the dog
was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people.
Sec. 2.305 Attacks by Dangerous Dog
(a) A person commits an offense if his/her dangerous dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the
dog’s enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. Should the attack cause serious bodily injury or death, the
person may be subject to other criminal prosecution under the laws of the State of Texas in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(b) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this article, the court may order that the dangerous dog be destroyed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/301
(c) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty as
provided for in the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. The city attorney may file suit in a court
of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the City of
Atlanta.
Sec. 2.306 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed
by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray
animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with and while performing the duties of
that position.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the
Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or
corrections purposes and such person has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with and
while performing the duties of that position.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog
company under the Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act found at Article 4413 (29bb), Vernon’s Texas
Civil Statutes and while performing the duties of that position.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.400 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS
No more than three (3) dogs and/or cats over the age of six (6) months shall be kept on their owner’s premises
within the city limits of the City of Atlanta, nor shall any person keep, house, feed, breed, or maintain more than
three (3) dogs or cats over the age of six (6) months at any time, within the City of Atlanta. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION
ARTICLE 3.100 STANDARD CODES ADOPTED
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully:
(1) International Codes, 2006 editions;
(2) National Electrical Code, 2008 edition;
(3) NFPA 101 Code for Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures, 2009 edition.
Each to be adopted with current revisions automatically adopted as they are passed.
(Ordinance 2010-06 adopted 9/7/10)
ARTICLE 3.200 BUILDING PERMITS
Sec. 3.201 Information Required Prior to Construction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/301
From and after the date of the publication of this article, no wall, structure, building, or part thereof shall be
built, enlarged or altered within the city limits of Atlanta, Texas, unless and until information as to the proposed
work and materials to be used shall have been submitted to the city manager of the City of Atlanta, Texas, who
shall, if the proposed work is not in violation of the ordinances and regulations of such city, issue a permit for
the proposed construction. Before such permit is issued, the builder, representative or contractor, may be
required to furnish any information regarding the name of the owner, proposed location, character of occupancy,
kind of material, plumbing, wiring, roofing, chimney and flue construction, manner and kind of heat to be used,
estimated cost of improvements, estimated time for completion and the name of the contractor. (Ordinance 389,
adopted 10/2/89, Section 1)
Sec. 3.202 Fees
(a) It shall be the duty of any builder or contractor or owner to pay, and the duty of the city secretary to collect fees for
the issuance of building permits as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) Moving of Building or Structures. For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(c) Demolition of Building or Structures. For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be as provided for
in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(d) Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit,
the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully
complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
(e) Building permit fees are subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 389, adopted 10/2/89, Section 2; Ordinance adopting Code; Resolution No. 2000-03 adopted
4/17/00)
Sec. 3.203 Building Permit Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any contractor or builder to commence or construct any improvement costing more than
$1,000.00 without first obtaining the written permit from the city secretary, as herein provided.
(b) No building permit will be required upon determination by the building official that the work to be done is
replacement work such as re-roofing, fence replacement, etc.
(Ordinance 389, adopted 10/2/89, Section 3; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.204 Building Moving
No building shall be moved from one location to another within the city limits of Atlanta, Texas until a permit
has been obtained therefore. The city secretary shall be required to keep a record of all building permits issued,
which shall be available for inspection of the public. (Ordinance 389, adopted 10/2/89, Section 4)
Sec. 3.205 Penalty for Violations
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 389, adopted 10/2/89, Section 5)
ARTICLE 3.300 MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 3.301 Definitions
Mobile Home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/301
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designated to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Unless specifically provided for otherwise, the term
“mobile home” as used herein shall refer to both mobile homes and HUD-code manufactured homes. (Ordinance
430, adopted 12/6/96, Section 1)
HUD-Code Manufacture Home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in
the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designated to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include recreational vehicle.
(Ordinance 430, adopted 12/6/96, Section 1)
Mobile Home Park. A unified development of two (2) or more mobile home spaces or stands arranged on a tract
of land under private ownership. A site plan for a mobile home park must be approved by the Planning &
Zoning Commission.
Mobile Home Subdivision. A unified development of lots for mobile home sites which have been divided for the
purpose of individual ownership, and which is governed by the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the
City of Atlanta.
Parking Space. An area measuring approximately 180 square feet not on a public street or alley, surfaced with
an all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-weather driveway connecting the parking
space with a street or alley permitting unimpeded ingress and egress.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is not designed to be used as a permanent dwelling, and in which the
plumbing, heating, and electrical systems are self-contained and may be operated without connection to outside
utilities and which is self-propelled or designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
(Ordinance 406, adopted 5/15/92, Section 1)
Sec. 3.302 Requirements
Each mobile home park or mobile home subdivision situated within the city shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Minimum Site Requirements. The minimum area of a lot shall be 5,500 square feet. The minimum width
of each lot shall be 50 feet. The minimum depth of each lot shall be l00 feet. Lots that back up to a major
thoroughfare shall have a minimum depth of 130 feet;
(2) Open Space Requirements.
(A) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to
the front line of the lot;
(B) No mobile home shall be closer than 10 feet to any property line;
(C) The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 15 feet.
(3) Height Regulations.
(A) The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy shall be 35 feet;
(B) The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation measured at 90 degrees
to the frame, shall not exceed three (3) feet.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/301
(4) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient manner; No mobile home park or mobile
home subdivision shall be permitted to exist within any portion of the city’s most current flood plane
developed by the United States Corps of Engineers.
(5) Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements. Each mobile home site shall have at least two off-street
parking spaces per mobile home.
(Ordinance 406, adopted 5/12/92, Section 2)
Sec. 3.303 Buffers
Each mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be encompassed by a six foot high or higher sitebarring
fence or wall. The fence or wall shall be maintained in a good state of repair. (Ordinance 406, adopted
5/12/92, Section 3)
Sec. 3.304 Utilities
Each lot within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall have individual municipal water meters
and connections, and sanitary sewer connections installed at the sole expense of the owner or developer of each
mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. (Ordinance 406, adopted 5/12/92, Section 4)
Sec. 3.305 Streets
All interior streets within any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall comply with the curb, gutter
and paving requirements of the city’s subdivision ordinance. (Ordinance 406, adopted 5/12/92, Section 5)
Sec. 3.306 Placement of Mobile Home Prohibited
From and after the effective date of these provisions, it shall be unlawful to place any mobile home, as opposed
to a manufactured home, in the City of Atlanta. Manufactured homes shall be allowed upon compliance with all
relevant provisions of this article. Those mobile homes now present in the city shall be unaffected by this
section, however, said mobile homes may not be moved to any new location in the city. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.307 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be liable to a fine, and upon
conviction of such violation, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section
1.106 of this code. Each day any such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to
the foregoing penalty. (Ordinance 389, adopted 10/2/89, Section 6)
ARTICLE 3.400 MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 3.401 Title
The title of this article shall be “The Heating, Air Conditioning and Mechanical Refrigeration Code of the City
of Atlanta, Texas”, and may be cited as such. (Ordinance 391, adopted 11/20/89, Section I)
Sec. 3.402 Scope, General Requirements, Definitions
(a) Scope. The purpose of this code is to protect the health, safety, property, and welfare of the general public and to
protect the public from any improper business practices employed by an person or persons, and to insure the safe design,
construction, installation and service of mechanical equipment pertaining to heating, ventilation, air conditioning and
mechanical refrigeration in the City of Atlanta.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/301
(b) Exemptions.
(1) This act does not apply to a person who:
(A) performs air conditioning and refrigeration contracting in a building owned solely by him as his
home;
(B) performs environmental air conditioning maintenance work if (i) the person is a maintenance man
or maintenance engineer who is a regular bona fide employee of the property owner, the property lessee,
or the management company managing the property where the maintenance work is being performed,
(ii) the work is performed in connection with the business in which the person is employed, and (iii) the
person and the person’s employer referred to an (i) above do not engage in the occupation of air
conditioning and refrigeration contracting for the general public;
(C) performs air conditioning and refrigeration contracting and is regularly employed by a regulated
electric or gas utility;
(D) is licensed as a professional engineer under The Texas Engineering Practice Act (Article 3271a
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), performs work in connection with the business in which the person is
employed, and does not engage in the practice of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting for the
general public;
(E) performs process cooling or heating work for an industrial operation such as a chemical plant,
petrochemical plant, refinery, natural gas plant, or natural gas treating plant when employed by that
operation; or
(F) performs air conditioning and refrigeration contracting on:
(i) a portable or self-contained ductless environmental air conditioning product that has a
cooling capacity of three tons or less;
(ii) a portable or self-contained heating product that does not require the forced movement of
air outside the heating unit; or
(iii) environmental air conditioning equipment that is intended for temporary use and is not
fixed in place.
(2) The work described by Subsection (1) of this section remains subject to any permit, inspection, or
approval requirements prescribed by a municipal ordinance.
(3) A person licensed under this act may not perform or offer or attempt to perform any act, service, or
function that is defined as the practice of engineering by the Texas Engineering Practice, as amended
(Ordinance 3271a, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes).
(4) A person licensed under this act may not perform or offer or attempt to perform any act, service or
function regulated under Chapter 113, Natural Resources Code, unless licensed or exempted by rule under that
law. A person regulated under Chapter 113, Natural Resources Code, may not perform or offer or attempt to
perform air conditioning or refrigeration contracting unless licensed under this act.
(5) A person licensed under this act may not perform or offer or attempt to perform any act, service, or
function that is defined as plumbing work under The Plumbing License Law (Article 6243-101, Vernon’s
Texas Civil Statutes) unless licensed under that law. A person who is licensed in this state as a plumber and is
engaged in business as a plumber may not perform or offer or attempt to perform air conditioning and
refrigeration contracting unless licensed under this act.
(6) This article does not apply to a person or firm that is registered as a manufacturer, retailer, or installer
and regulated pursuant to the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f, Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes) and that engages exclusively in air conditioning and refrigeration contracting for manufactured
homes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/301
(7) A person who assists in the performance of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting work under
the supervision of a licensee is not required to be licensed by a municipality.
(c) Reporting Requirement. Each person licensed under this act shall notify the municipal authority who has control of
the enforcement of regulations relative to air conditioning and refrigeration contracting in the municipality in which the
person is engaged in air conditioning and refrigeration contracting that the person has obtained a state license. The
notification must be in the form required by the municipality.
(d) Penalty. A person commits an offense if the person knowingly or intentionally engages in air conditioning and
refrigeration contracting without a license issued under this act. An offense under this section is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 391, adopted 11/20/89, Section II)
Sec. 3.403 Heating, Air Conditioning License and Fees
(a) License Categories. A license to engage in the air conditioning business in the City of Atlanta shall be one of five (5)
classification, as follows:
(1) Class “I” License. Master contractor shall qualify the holder to install, alter or repair air conditioning
system using compressors of any size. The holder may take out permits.
(2) Class “II” License. Journeyman contractor shall authorize the holder of such license to install, or alter,
air conditioning systems of any size, but license holder may not take out permits. The journeyman contractor
must work under a master contractor.
(3) Class “III” License. Master sheet metal may fabricate, install and repair air conditioning duct work and
may take out permits for duct installation only.
(4) Class “IV” License. Journeyman sheet metal may not take out permits and must work under a master
sheet metal license holder.
(5) Class “V” License. A contractor not holding a City of Atlanta license but with a license from some other
approved municipality, without examination. Holder of this permit may take out one (1) permit per year.
(b) License Fees. The initial fee for a license, Classes “I”, “II”, “III”, “IV” and “V” are as provided for in the fee
schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(c) License Not Transferable. Licenses are not transferable, but the license of any active member, officer or supervisory
employee of a partnership, firm or corporation shall be sufficient to qualify the partnership, firm or corporation to engage
in the business of air conditioning contracting of the type for which the license qualified the holder is employed by that
firm only and does in fact supervise and control those installations and alternations of heating, ventilating, air conditioning
and refrigeration systems which are required by this article to be installed or altered by a person licensed under the
provision hereof.
(d) Valid License at all Times. A partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the business of air conditioning contracting
shall steadily employ a person holding a master contractor’s license as provided herein.
(e) Obtaining Permit for Others. A permit obtained under the provisions of this article will require that the work be done
by or under the supervision of the person obtaining the permit.
Licensed air conditioning contractors shall not be simultaneously employed by, or work for, more than one
business entity for the purpose of obtaining permits under this article, or for the purpose of doing or supervising
work that can only be done by authority of a permit obtained under the provisions of the article.
(f) Bond Requirements. Each person licensed under this article in the City of Atlanta shall file with the city secretary a
corporate surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00 conditioned upon full compliance with the ordinances of the city regulating
air conditioning work and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all contracts entered into for the installation or
repair of air conditioning apparatus. Said bond shall be further conditioned that such person shall, without additional cost
to the person for whom the work is done, remedy any defect therein due to faulty workmanship or incorrect construction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/301
due to faulty material furnished or used by such person, and that such person shall reconstruct or repair such work to the
satisfaction of the inspector of the city at any time within one (1) year after the construction, repair or installation, and after
forty-eight (48) hours notice from the inspector to reconstruct or repair the same, and the opinion of the inspector shall be
binding on the parties thereto. The bond shall for such purchases be in force for one (1) year after the construction, repairs
or air conditioning installation is done and one recovery shall not exhaust said bond, but said bond shall be a continuing
obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount thereof shall have been exhausted. In case the bond herein
provided for shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained, arising out of the violating of any
condition of the same, the city inspector shall require, upon notice of such fact, an additional bond to be given by any such
person in accordance with this section in any amount sufficient when added to the unexpired amount of the original bond
to be at all times equal to the sum of $5,000.00. The city may, for itself, or for the use and benefit of any person injured or
damaged by reason of failure to repair any defective construction, repairs or installation or for the failure or refusal by any
person to pay any of the fees required by this article maintain suit on said bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof, or
suit may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any person who shall do any
work of air conditioning construction, repairs or installation, to observe the conditions of said bond.
(g) Suspension or Revocation of Class I or Class III License. The building inspector shall have the right and authority to
suspend any Class I or Class III license upon the violation of any portion of this article and the building inspector shall,
upon suspension, file with the city secretary a statement setting forth the reasons for such suspension. A copy of such
report shall be given the license holder upon his request. If the license holder feels aggrieved by such suspension, then he
may notify the city council in writing of his feelings and may appear and be heard by the city council. If upon full hearing
before the city council it is determined by the council that such suspension is well founded, then the license holder’s
license will be revoked. In the event the suspended license holder refuses or fails to appeal to the city council within ten
(10) days, then the city secretary shall place before the city council the building inspector’s report. It shall then be the duty
of the city council to revoke the suspension order or revoke the license.
(Ordinance 391, adopted 11/20/89, Section III)
Sec. 3.404 Penalty Clause
(a) Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trustee or their agents, servants or employees who shall
violate any of the terms or provisions of any section or subsection of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(b) Each and every day’s continuance of any violation of any terms or provisions of this article shall constitute and be
deemed a separate offense. That in case of any such violation of any of the terms of provisions of this article by a
corporation or company, the officers, agents, and person or persons responsible for directing, authorizing or permitting the
violation shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. All remedies or penalties expressed herein shall not be exclusive
but shall be accumulated.
(Ordinance 391, adopted 11/20/89, Section VI)
ARTICLE 3.500 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.501 Purpose
This article is enacted to the authority granted by Chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, as well as by the
Texas Constitution, and is intended to establish minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all
buildings regardless of the date of their construction by limiting the definition of substandard and dilapidated
buildings to those with specified defects.
Sec. 3.502 Substandard Buildings
(a) General. Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the
adopted building code; or any building or portion thereof including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the
premises on which the same is located in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in this section to an extent
that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and
hereby are declared to be substandard buildings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/301
(b) Inadequate Sanitation. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are unsanitary.
Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(2) Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in hotel.
(3) Lack of or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(4) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
(5) Lack of hot or cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or apartment complex.
(6) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(7) Lack of or improper operation of required ventilation equipment.
(8) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by city codes.
(9) Room and space dimensions less than required by city code.
(10) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(11) Dampness of habitable room
(12) Infestation by insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the building official.
(13) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(14) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(15) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
(16) Partial destruction or damage by fire unrepaired for more than ninety (90) days.
(17) Lack of required air conditioning.
(c) Structural Hazards. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are or contain structural
hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
(2) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
(3) Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed load with safety.
(4) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective
material or deterioration.
(5) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads
with safety.
(6) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other original members which sag, split or
buckle due to defective material or deterioration
(7) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient
size to carry imposed loads with safety.
(8) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration.
(9) Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/301
(10) Heating flues and exhausts which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration.
(d) Nuisance. Buildings or portions thereof in which there exists any nuisance as defined by ordinance are deemed
substandard buildings.
(e) Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the
time of installation, or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not being used in a safe manner shall
be considered substandard.
(f) Hazardous Plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not free of cross-connections of siphonage
between fixtures shall be considered substandard.
(g) Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in
effect at the time of installation, or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered
substandard.
(h) Faulty Weather Protection. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they have faulty
weather protection which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
(2) Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken
windows or doors.
(3) Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or
weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.
(4) Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
(i) Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which,
in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or the fire marshal, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or
provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any case shall be considered a
substandard building.
(j) Faulty Materials or Construction. The use of materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or
approved by the building official and the currently adopted building code and which have been adequately maintained in
good and safe condition shall cause a building to be substandard.
(k) Hazardous or Insanitary Premises. The accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage
offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions on a premises constitutes a
nuisance to be abated as provided by this article.
(l) Inadequate Exits. Except for those buildings or portions thereof which have been provided with adequate exit
facilities conforming to the provisions of this code, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in
violation of code requirements in effect at the time of their construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in
number or width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use or occupancy
subsequent to the time of construction shall be considered substandard.
Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of their construction, buildings or portions
thereof shall be considered substandard when the building official finds that an unsafe condition exists through an
improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of exit or when other conditions exist which are
dangerous to human life.
(m) Inadequate Fire Protection or Fire-Fighting Equipment. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered
substandard when they are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by the codes of the city, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at
the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/301
adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in
occupancy.
(n) Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied by living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes
which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard.
Sec. 3.503 Notices and Orders of Building Official
(a) Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building
and has found and determined that such building is:
(1) Dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety and
welfare;
(2) Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and is
unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or caused by vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
(3) Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the
building in the manner described by subsection (a)(2) hereof,
he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or demolition of the building.
(b) Notice. The building official shall issue a notice directed to the record owner of the building. The notice shall
contain:
(1) The street address and legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the
building is located;
(2) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard with a brief and concise
description of the conditions found to render the building substandard;
(3) A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official;
(4) A requirement that the owner or person in charge of the building or premises secure required permits and
commence the required action within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice and that all work be
completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable;
(5) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the notice shall
contain a requirement that the building be vacated within such time from the date of the notice as determined
by him to be reasonable;
(6) A statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced within the time
specified the building official will, without further notice, order the building vacated and posted to prevent
further occupancy until the work is completed;
(7) A statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced or completed
within the time specified, proceedings will be commenced to have the building repaired or demolished and the
cost of such assessed as a charge against the land.
(c) Service of Notice. The notice and any amended notice shall be served upon the record owner.
(d) Methods of Service. Service of notice shall be made upon all persons entitled hereto either personally or by mailing a
copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his
address as it appears on the last tax roll of the city or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so
appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be published twice within ten (10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/301
consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Failure to receive such notice or order shall not affect
the validity of any proceeding taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section
shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. Service by publication shall be deemed effective on the date of the second
publication.
(e) Order to Vacate. An order to vacate immediately may be issued only if the building or structure is in such condition
as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants.
(f) Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in subsection (d), be posted at or upon
each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially
the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a Misdemeanor to Occupy this Building
or to Remove or Deface this Notice.
Building Official
City of Atlanta
See. 3.504 Violations
No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been posted as provided in Section 3.503(f), except
that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or
deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed
and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the adopted building code. Any person
violating this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and any person who fails to meet the
requirements made in any notice duly served as provided in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each
day such failure continues after the date the notice requires compliance.
Sec. 3.505 City Repair or Demolition
If the required repair or demolition has not been commenced within fifteen (15) days from the date of any notice
served pursuant to this article, or if required action has not been completed as required by such notice, the
building official shall commence proceedings as follows:
(1) The building official shall cause such building to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice
reading:
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
It is a Misdemeanor to Occupy this Building
or to Remove or Deface this Notice
Building Official
City of Atlanta
(2) The city council shall be notified and requested to consider holding a public hearing to decide whether to
order the repair, removal or demolition specified in such notice to be done and whether to cause the cost of
such work to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/301
(3) The city council may set a date and time for a public hearing to consider ordering the improvement and
assessment of any property the owner has failed to improve as required by notices described in this article.
Such public hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date such
hearing is set.
(4) A title search shall be conducted to discover each mortgagee, and notice of the public hearing to be held
before the city council shall be given by causing a notice thereof to be served on the owner of such property
and upon each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on which the
building is located. Such notice shall be mailed to such owner and lienholder by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice shall include the date, time and place of such hearing and shall state that the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit proof of the scope of any work that may be required to
comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work together with:
(A) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description of the building and the property
on which it is located;
(B) A description of the violation of city standards that is present at the building; and
(C) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time.
(5) The city secretary shall, at the time notices are mailed, file a notice of the hearing in the Cass County
Clerk’s Office, describing the land, owner and stating the purpose, time and place of the hearing.
(6) After conducting a hearing authorized under this section, if the council finds that the allegations are true,
the council shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within thirty (30) days:
(A) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or
(B) Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing
that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days.
(7) If the council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove or
demolish the building, the council shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed as determined by the council.
(8) The owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall not be allowed more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove or
demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(9) If the council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part
of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall be
required to regularly submit progress reports to the city to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order
may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the council or its designee to demonstrate
compliance with the time schedule.
(10) In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this article,
the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. The council
shall specify reasonable time for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the
owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an additional reasonable time for the ordered
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/301
action to be taken by the mortgagees or lienholder in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within
the time provided for action by the owner.
(11) The council’s requirement shall be reduced to writing and shall be considered an order. Within the (10)
days after the date that the order is issued the city secretary shall:
(A) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(B) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the building is located a
notice containing:
(i) The street address or legal description of the property;
(ii) The date of the hearing;
(iii) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(iv) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(12) After the hearing, the city secretary shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the order to the owner of the building, and if the owner does not take the ordered action within the
allotted time, the municipality shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the
order to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building.
Sec. 3.506 Performance
(a) Procedure. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or the occupants are not relocated within the
allotted time pursuant to the provisions of the order of the city council, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or
by private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises and the lot shall
be cleaned. The building or building materials may be sold if removal is ordered and the proceeds shall be used to offset
other costs of cleaning the lot.
(b) Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from the city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a lien
against such property to secure its payment from the date the lien is recorded in the county clerk’s office. Such liens shall
be privileged as provided by law. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction to foreclose the
lien and to recover the costs incurred by the city.
Sec. 3.507 Notice of Lien
A sworn account of the expense incurred by the city in the repair, removal or demolition of any building done
pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be filed by the building official with the city secretary. The city
secretary shall file such notice of the city’s assessment and lien in the records of the county clerk. Such notices
shall read substantially as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF CASS
NOTICE OF LIEN
, Building Official for the City of Atlanta, makes oath and says that the City of Atlanta has
incurred as expense of $ in improving property, the legal description of which is .
Such expense was incurred to repair, remove or demolish substandard buildings after notices pursuant to
ordinance and to Chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, were served on the record owner thereof,
, whose address is .
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/301
Building Official
City of Atlanta, Texas
SWORN AND SUBSCRIBED before me by the said this day of , 20 , to certify which
witness my hand and seal of office.
Notary Public
Sate of Texas
Sec. 3.508 Prohibitions Against Service
No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed for any such property until any
lien imposed pursuant to this article is discharged.
(Ordinance 2001-03 adopted 4/16/01)
ARTICLE 3.600 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.601 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the city council does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.602 Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to
other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Sec. 3.603 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/301
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.604 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which
may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.605 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial Fan Flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant Structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A
usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in
any given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/301
Breakaway Wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical Feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing Construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood Elevation Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Protection System. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/301
Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of
the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/301
Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New Construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 9348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the constriction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/301
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications;
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.606 Lands to Which This Article Applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.607 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Cass County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas,” dated April 3, 2012, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundaryfloodway
maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated April 3, 2012, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.608 Establishment of Development Permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.609 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.610 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/301
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.611 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.612 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.613 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of
this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood
Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.614 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas
Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 3.607, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/301
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Sections 3.617–3.622.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the
community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.615 Permit Procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 3.618(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 3.614(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance
and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
Sec. 3.616 Variance Procedures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/301
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from
the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in Section 3.615(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (Section
3.603).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) above are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/301
Sec. 3.617 General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or elate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.
Sec. 3.618 Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Sections
3.607, 3.614(8), or 3.619(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator
that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 3.615(a)(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures
are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1 square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/301
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community’s FHBM or
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of
this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that
are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(5) Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and
AE on the community’s FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of Section 3.615(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements
for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
Sec. 3.619 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent
with Sections 3.602–3.604 of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/301
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Sections 3.608; 3.615; and the provisions of
Sections 3.617–3.622 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not
otherwise provided pursuant to Section 3.607 or Section 3.614(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, has, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or elate flood
damage.
Sec. 3.620 Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.607, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is
specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM
(at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified
flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator
that the standards of this section, as proposed in Section 3.615 are satisfied.
(4) Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 3.621 Floodways
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.608, are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 3.617–3.622.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/301
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result
in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions
required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.622 Penalties for Noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ordinance 2012-01 adopted 2/6/12)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS & COMMERCE
ARTICLE 4.100 FAIR HOUSING*
Sec. 4.101 Definitions
For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the plural number include the singular, and words
in the singular number include the plural.
Discriminatory Housing Practice. Means an act that is unlawful under Sections 4.102, 4.103, or 4.104 of this
article.
Dwelling. Means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual.
Person. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
To Rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 1)
Sec. 4.102 Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/301
Except as exempted by Section 4.105, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental
of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or
national origin;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or
in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, or
national origin;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement
regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, sex, religion, or national origin, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
(5) For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or
persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion or national origin;
(6) For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words,
acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance
of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 2)
Sec. 4.103 Discrimination in the Financing of Housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or
residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling: or to discriminate against
any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions
of such loan or their financial assistance, because of:
(1) The race, color, sex, religion, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or
(2) The race, color, sex, religion, or national origin of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 3)
Sec. 4.104 Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or
participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion or national origin. (Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78,
Section 4)
Sec. 4.105 Exemptions and Exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of Section 4.102 hereof all transactions involving:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/301
(1) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of
such units as his residence;
(2) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the
remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are offered.
(3) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that:
(A) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the
sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of
any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such
broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(B) The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written
notice in violation of Section 4.102(3) of this article (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or
transfer the title); and
(C) The owner does not own more than three single family houses at the time of the sale; and
(D) The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental or more than three such single family houses at any one time.
(E) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to
one such sale within any twenty-four month period.
(b) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any non-profit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or society from limiting
the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such person, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of
race, color, sex, or national origin.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental
or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(d) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or
rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains
common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 5)
Sec. 4.106 Fair Housing Administrator
The mayor shall appoint and council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as
“administrator”), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate
his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. (Ordinance
335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 6)
Sec. 4.107 Complaints
(a) Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be
irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person
alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/301
which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and
furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
(b) If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe
that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint
has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such
complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
(c) The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968,
Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to
paragraph (a) of this section.
(d) All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing
a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged
discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
written complaint.
(e) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 7)
Sec. 4.108 Investigation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and
full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
(b) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if
it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur. attempt by informal endeavors to
effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of
future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal
endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complaint or by any other party to the proceedings without the
written consent of all persons concerned.
(c) Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty
(30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary
compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing
practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violations be prosecuted in
the municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city
attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of
such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute
same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 8)
Sec. 4.109 Cumulative Legal Effect
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person
aggrieved may pursue. (Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 9)
Sec. 4.110 Unlawful Intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this article, because he or they have
exercised his or their rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he or they have
made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have
made any report to the administrator. (Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/301
Sec. 4.111 Cooperation With Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968,
Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the
policies of this article. (Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 11)
Sec. 4.112 Education and Public Information
In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public
information programs. (Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 12)
Sec. 4.113 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each day a
violation continues after passage of seventy five (75) days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the
administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a
court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.
(Ordinance 335, adopted 4/17/78, Section 13)
ARTICLE 4.200 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Sec. 4.201 Article on Exercise of Police Power
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the State of Texas, and of the City of
Atlanta, for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of said city, and all of
the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ordinance 396, adopted
1/22/90, Section 1)
Sec. 4.202 License Required
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place in the City of
Atlanta, Texas, soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines,
without having first applied for and obtained a license so to do from the city secretary of said city. It shall also
hereafter be unlawful to sell of solicit in said city as aforesaid without carrying such license while engaged in
such soliciting or selling. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 2)
Sec. 4.203 Hours Restricted
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place in the City of
Atlanta, Texas, soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines
between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit any items in this
section between the hours of 8:00 P.M. Saturday and 8:00 A.M. Monday. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90,
Section 3)
Sec. 4.204 Application
Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place in the City of Atlanta, Texas, to sell or
solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to
newspapers or magazines, shall make written application to the city secretary of said city for a license so to do,
which application shall show the name and address of applicant, the name and address of the person, firm, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/301
corporation, if any, that he or she represents and the kind of goods offered for sale, and whether such applicant
upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final
delivery, and the period of time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in said city. Decisions by the city
secretary shall be appealable to the city manager whose decision shall be appealable to the city council.
(Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 4; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.205 Applicability of Article
An itinerant merchant or an itinerant vendor as the terms are used in the article shall be held to be any person,
firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engaged in any activity mentioned in Section 4.202
hereof. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 5)
Sec. 4.206 License Fee
The license fee for an itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in
the appendix of this code. Provided, however, when any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or
association engages in any activity mentioned in Section 4.202 hereof, through one or more agents or
employees, such person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association shall, in addition to said fee
above mentioned, pay a license fee also provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, for
each agent or employee so engaged, all of which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their
issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing
of said licenses. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 6)
Sec. 4.207 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in
the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of farm or
dairy products. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 7)
Sec. 4.208 Exclusive Agreements
The City of Atlanta may name an exclusive concession or concessionaires who shall have the exclusive right to
sell food, beverages, or novelty items within public streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other outdoor public property
within the confines of the entertainment area. Such exclusive concession rights shall be granted only for the
duration of the event and shall be limited to public streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other outdoor public property
within the entertainment area as that area is defined by agreement between the city and the sponsor. (Ordinance
396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 8)
Sec. 4.209 Interstate Commerce Exemption
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce as that term is herein defined;
provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place
to place in the City of Atlanta, Texas, without having first registered with the city secretary of said city giving the
following information:
(1) Name, home address and local address, if any, of registrant.
(2) Name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that he or she represents or for whom or
through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared.
(3) Nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited.
(4) Whether registrant, upon any sale or order shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of
money in advance of final delivery.
(5) Period of time which registrant wishes to solicit or sell in said city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/301
(b) The registrant at the time of the registration as herein provided for, shall submit for inspection of the city secretary
written proof of his identity which may be in the form of an automobile operator’s license, identification letter or card
issued to registrant by the person, firm or corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared.
(c) The term “interstate commerce” means soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods,
wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines which, at the time the order is taken, are in another state or
will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders.
(Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 9)
Sec. 4.210 Penalty for Violations
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article or failing to observe any provisions
hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code and each and every day or fraction of a day during
which this article, or any part thereof, shall be violated, shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as
such. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 10)
ARTICLE 4.250 OUTDOOR SALES
(a) This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the State of Texas, and of the City of Atlanta for the
public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of said city, and all of the provisions hereof shall
be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(b) The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this subsection.
Outdoor Sales Activity. The sale, display, offering for sale, or soliciting of any merchandise, goods, or services from an
outdoor location not within any permanent building or structure designed for the sale of such goods. The term shall
specifically include the sale of merchandise, goods, or services from a stationary display by means such as stands, stalls, or
tents; from a mobile display by means of a vehicle; and all other sales not within a permanent structure.
(c) No person shall engage in, or attempt to engage in any outdoor sales activity unless such activity is incidental to the
normal conduct of business operated by the same merchant or his employer in an on-site building for which a valid
certificate of occupancy exists.
(d) No person shall display, store, stock or allow to remain outdoors items for retail sale that would not normally be
stored, sold or used after sale outdoors. Items that are sold primarily for outdoor use may be stored outdoors incidental to
the normal conduct of business operated by the same merchant or his employer in an on-site building for which a valid
certificate of occupancy exists. Items that are prohibited for the display, storage, stocking, or that are allowed to remain
outdoors for sale include, but is not limited to, food, clothing, and household goods. Items prohibited under this section
may be displayed outdoors temporarily for sale on a daily basis if removed at the close of business on that day.
(e) Business transacted for the sale of items which are allowed to be displayed, stored, stocked, or allowed to remain
outdoors must be conducted within a building operated with a valid certificate of occupancy.
(f) Each day of sale, display, storage, stocking, or allowing items to remain outdoors in violation of this article
constitutes a separate offense.
(g) Any existing outdoor sales activities are hereby granted for a period of six months from the date of the passage of
this article to comply with its terms and failure to comply within such time shall be in violation of this article.
(h) Exemptions. This article does not apply to:
(1) Charitable or Nonprofit Events. The conduct of outdoor sales or commercial activity by a governmental
entity, public utility, or nonprofit organization formed for education, philanthropic, scientific, or religious
purposes, where the proceeds and profits are contributed to such entity conducting the activity, or where the
activity occurs on property owned by a governmental entity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/301
(2) Outdoor Displays of Merchandise. Outdoor displays of merchandise by retail businesses shall be
allowed if the display involves items for sale by a commercial retailer located within a permanent structure.
(3) Occasional Sales of Merchandise. An occasional sale of merchandise means no more than two sales of
merchandise at retail during a 12 month period by a person who does not habitually engage, or hold himself
out as engaging, in the business of selling items at retail.
(4) The sale of agricultural goods including food items and live plants.
(Ordinance 2005-02 adopted 4/18/05)
ARTICLE 4.300 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 4.301 Levy of Tax, Rate, and Exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel or motel where such
cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day; such tax to be equal to seven percent (7%) of the
consideration paid by the occupant of such room or space to such hotel or motel.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes, in which no part of the net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual.
(Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 1)
Sec. 4.302 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly
indicated a different meaning, defined as follows:
Hotel. Shall mean any building or buildings, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or court, lodging
houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration,
but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or dormitories.
Consideration. Shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel and shall not include the costs of any food served
or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room, not related to the cleaning and readying of such
room for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental
agency.
Occupancy. Shall mean the use or possession, or the rights to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a
hotel for any purpose.
Occupant. Shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any
room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license contract or agreement.
Persons. Shall mean any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel.
City Secretary. Shall mean the city secretary of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
Quarterly Period. Shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the
months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third
quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October,
November and December.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/301
Permanent Resident. Shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or
rooms in a hotel for at least thirty consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
(Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.303 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to raise money to promote visitors, tourism and conventions for the City of Atlanta,
Texas. (Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 3)
Sec. 4.304 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any motel or hotel within the City of Atlanta, Texas,
shall collect the tax imposed in Section 4.301 hereof, for the City of Atlanta, Texas. (Ordinance 404, adopted
4/6/92, Section 4)
Sec. 4.305 Occupants Exempt from Hotel Tax
(a) The hotel occupancy tax can not be applied against an officer or employee of a federal or state government agency,
institution, board or commission if the employee is traveling on official business for the government entity. This exemption
does not apply to institutions of higher education including any public technical institution, public junior college, public
senior college, university or other agency of higher education as defined in the Education Code 31.
(b) Any military personnel both federal and state traveling on official military business are exempt from paying Hotel
Occupancy Tax. This exemption does not apply to military staff on leave or between stations.
(c) There are no other types of exemptions from local Hotel Occupancy Tax.
(Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 5)
Sec. 4.306 Reports
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in Section 4.302 hereof to
collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the city secretary of the City of Atlanta, Texas, showing the
consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such
occupancies, and any other information as the city secretary may reasonably require. This requirement shall be
met by submitting a copy of the State Hotel-Motel Occupancy Tax Quarterly Report and any amendment thereto
to the city secretary of the City of Atlanta, Texas. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the
time of filing such report. (Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 6)
Sec. 4.307 Rules and Regulations
The city secretary shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect
the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him
to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the
provisions of the article. (Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 7)
Sec. 4.308 Advisory Committee
(a) There shall be created by this article a revenue advisory committee consisting of five (5) members to recommend to
and to advise the city council on uses of the tax revenues created by this article. All members of the advisory committee
are subject to approval by the Atlanta City Council. The uses of the said revenue shall be in accordance with the state law.
(b) The five (5) members of the advisory committee shall be as follows:
(1) One member submitted by and representing Atlanta City Council.
(2) One member submitted by and representing the Atlanta Area Chamber of Commerce
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/301
(3) One member representing the motel or hotel businesses in the City of Atlanta to be appointed by the
city council.
(4) A member at large to be appointed by the city council
(5) A member at large to be appointed by the city council.
(c) The mayor of the City of Atlanta shall be an ex-officio member without voting privileges.
(d) Meetings of this revenue advisory committee shall be open to the public.
(Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 8)
Sec. 4.309 Failure to Collect and/or Report and/or Pay
(a) If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to
pay to the city secretary the tax, as imposed herein, when said report or payment is due, or shall file a false report, then
such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. In addition, such a person who fails to remit the tax or
violates the reporting provisions imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit an additional five per cent
(5%) of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less that one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall
draw interest at the rate of ten per cent (10%) per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due.
(b) Hotel operators who fail to report, collect or pay the Hotel Occupancy Tax, are also subject to the district court
enjoining operation of the hotel until the report is filed and/or tax is paid and any other remedies provided under Texas law
can be exercised.
(Ordinance 404, adopted 4/6/92, Section 9)
ARTICLE 4.400 POOL HALLS
Sec. 4.401 Definitions
Pool Hall. The term “pool hall,” as used in this article shall mean any establishment which operates, for profit,
any pool or billiard table or tables.
Recreation Hall. The term “recreation hall,” as used in this article, shall mean any establishment which operates,
for profit, any coin-operated machine for amusement.
Recreational Area. The term “recreational area,” as used in this article, shall mean that area in any establishment
whose primary business is not associated with amusement activities, where coin-operated machines are provided
as a service to their customers, not solely for profit.
(Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 1)
Sec. 4.402 License
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of persons, corporations, and every other organization, save
and except religious, charitable or educational organizations, authorized under the laws of the State of Texas, to
own and operate for profit, any pool hall, recreation hall or recreational area, as such terms are herein defined,
within the city, without first obtaining an appropriate license from the city secretary, as herein provided, which
license shall at all times be displayed in some conspicuous place within the licensed place of business.
(Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 2)
Sec. 4.403 License Fee
The city secretary is authorized to collect the following annual license fee for each location of any pool hall,
recreation hall, or recreational area owned and operated for profit, to wit: the sum as provided for in the fee
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/301
schedule found in the appendix of this code. (Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 3)
Sec. 4.404 License Term
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be for one (1) year and shall be non-transferable. (Ordinance
405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 4)
Sec. 4.405 Hours of Operation
No person may engage in the operation for profit of any pool hall, recreation hall or recreational area within the
city on Sunday through Thursday, between the hours of 10:00 o’clock P.M., and 8:00 o’clock A.M. following;
nor, on Fridays or Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 o’clock midnight and 8:00 o’clock A.M., following.
(Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 5)
Sec. 4.406 Alcoholic Beverages
The sale, consumption or presence of an alcoholic beverage or beverages in or on the premises licensed
hereunder, or within three hundred feet (300') of the premises licensed hereunder is prohibited. (Ordinance 405,
adopted 3/16/92, Section 6)
Sec. 4.407 Penalty
Violation of any of the terms of this article shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 7)
ARTICLE 4.500 SURFACE MINING
Surface mining and/or drilling operations for the purpose of producing surface minerals in paying quantities
from real property owned in fee simple by the city, or hereafter acquired by the city, shall be prohibited;
provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed from prohibiting the city, its agents, servants or employees,
from drilling one or more wells for the production of water on said premises. (Ordinance 425 adopted 10/18/94)
ARTICLE 4.600 CABLE TELEVISION*
Sec. 4.601 Definitions
In this article:
Basic Cable Rates. Means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated
equipment.
Basic Service Tier. Means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any
other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must carry signals, all PEG channels, and all
domestic television signals other than superstations.
Benchmark. Means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
Cable Act of 1992. Means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
Cable Operator. Means any person or group of persons:
(1) who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
significant interest in such a cable system; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/301
(2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of
such a cable system.
City Council. Means the city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
Channel. Means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost of Service Showing. Means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or
the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service
tier and to continue to attract capital.
Equipment Basket. Means a cost center to which the cable operator assigns the direct costs of service
installation, leasing, maintaining, and servicing customer equipment. It includes an allocation of all system joint
and common costs that installation, leasing, and repairing equipment share with other system activities and a
reasonable profit, but excludes general system overhead.
FCC. Means the Federal Communications Commission.
HSC. Means the hourly service charge that allows the cable operator to recover all equipment basket costs,
except for the cable operator’s costs of purchasing and financing the lease of customer equipment.
Initial Basic Cable Rates. Means the rates that the cable operator is charging and which the city finds to comply
with the FCC’s rate standards after reviewing the cable operators initial filing under rate regulations.
Must-Carry Signal. Means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be
carried on the basic service tier.
PEG Channel. Means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and
facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
Price Cap. Means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based
on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business
and changes in overall inflation.
Reasonable Rate Standard. Means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
Superstation. Means any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 1)
Sec. 4.602 Initial Review of Basic Cable Rates
(a) Notice. Upon the adoption of this article and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately
notify the cable operator in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber
rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
(b) Cable Operator Response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city, the cable operator shall file with the city,
its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the
reasonableness of its rates.
(c) Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator’s rates for the basic service
tier and associated equipment are within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable
benchmark, the city council shall:
(A) hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/301
(B) act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed Its basic cable rates
with the city.
(2) If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed Its basic cable
rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect.
(d) Extended Review Period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC’s reasonable rate
standard based on the material before H, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city
council shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and by
adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final
determination:
(A) 90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC’s reasonable
rate standard; or
(B) 150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate
above the applicable benchmark.
(2) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150 day period, the city council shall issue a
brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(e) Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city council
shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections.
(f) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the
city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the
decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city
secretary with the objector’s name and address.
(g) Benchmark Analysis. If a cable operator submits Its current basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the
FCC’s reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city councils findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established
as follows:
(1) If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable
rates and the cable operator’s rates will be capped at that level.
(2) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable
operator’s per channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by 10 percent or the applicable benchmark,
adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring week September 30, 1992, and the
Initial date of regulation.
(3) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator’s per channel rate was
below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for
inflation.
(h) Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable
operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing as provided by the Cable Act of 1992 in an attempt
to justify an initial basic cable rates above the FCC’s reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-ofservice
submission pursuant to the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic
cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator’s September 30, 1992, rates minus 10 per
cent, will prescribe the cable operator’s new rates.
(i) Decision.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/301
(1) By formal resolution. After completion of Its review of the cable operator’s proposed rates, the city
council shall adopt Its decision by formal resolution. The Decision shall include one of the following:
(A) If the proposal is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service
analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator, or
(B) If the proposal is not within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis,
if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are
within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
(2) Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted
exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator’s cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates,
the city council may order the rates reduced in accordance with Paragraph (g) or (h) above, as applicable. In
addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion
of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax
refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and
the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council’s decision
resolution.
(3) Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are
disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the
resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of its decision.
Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city.
(j) Appeal. The city council decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be
appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 2)
Sec. 4.603 Review of Request for Increase in Basic Cable Rates
(a) Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated
equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator desires the
increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until at least 90 days after the
determination of the initial basic cable rates.
(b) Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operators rate increase request for
basic cable service is within the FCC s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the
city council shall:
(A) hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(B) act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed Its request
with the city.
(2) If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with
the city, the proposed rates with go into effect.
(c) Extended Review Period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC s reasonable rate
standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city
council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable
to make a final determination:
(A) 90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure than the requested increase is within the
FCC s reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/301
(B) 150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate
increase above the applicable price cap.
(2) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
(3) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150 day period, the city council shall issue
brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and in whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(d) Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city
council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested Persons may express their views and record objections.
(e) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city
secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the
decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city
secretary with the objector s name and address.
(f) Delayed Determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate
increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund
if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
(g) Price Cap Analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC’s
price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form
authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council’s findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
(1) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed
rates shall become the new basic cable rates.
(2) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council
shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
(h) Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate
increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant the FCC standards for cost-of-service
review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary
showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator s then
current rate will prescribe the cable operator’s new rate.
(i) Decision. The city council’s decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If
a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties
to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public
hearing by a person requesting the city secretary to record the objection or may be submitted in
(j) Refunds.
(1) The city council may order refunds of subscribers the payments with interest if:
(A) the city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in
paragraph (c) above: and
(B) the cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and
(C) the city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or
that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city
council disapproves any portion of the rate increase
(2) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as
directed in the city council’s decision resolution.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/301
(k) Appeal. The city council’s decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be
appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 3)
Sec. 4.604 Cable Operator Information
(a) City May Require.
(1) In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds
the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition
to that submitted, including proprietary information, needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a
cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section.
(2) In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may
request additional information in order to document that the cable operator s rates are in accord with the
standard.
(b) Request for Confidentiality.
(1) A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information
not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all
of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
(2) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any
information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which
the request applies shall be clearly identified.
(3) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the
facts upon which those reasons are based.
(4) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered.
(c) City Council Action. Requests which comply with the requirements of Subsection (b), will be acted upon by the city
council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence a case for
nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public
file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and
the city council denies the request, the city council shall take on of the following actions:
(1) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator
may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with
this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires, will the information be made
available for public inspection.
(2) If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made
available for public inspection.
(d) Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality. the cable operator may seek review of that decision
from the FCC within five (5) working days of the city council’s decision, and the release of the information will be stayed
pending the review and final decision by the FCC.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 4)
(e) Fines. If the cable operator fails to provide information requested by the city in order to make a rate determination
within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of such request, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for
each day the cable operator fails to provide the requested information. (Ordinance 432 adopted 6/6/94)
Sec. 4.605 Automatic Rate Adjustments
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/301
(a) Annual Inflation Adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per
channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
(b) Other External Costs.
(1) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier
automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors
exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local
taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost
of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to its
relation to the GNP-PI.
(2) For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date
for measuring charges in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the
date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1992, whichever occurs
first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes
in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
(c) Notification and Review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based
on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as
automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within 30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may
go into effect.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 5)
Sec. 4.606 Enforcement
(a) Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the
following circumstances:
(1) A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge
or above the actual cost of equipment; or
(2) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(b) Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subjected
to a fine of $500.00 for each day the cable operator fails to comply.
(Ordinance 428, adopted 1/18/94, Section 6)
ARTICLE 4.700 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.701 Purpose and Intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
market.
(b) It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of this article are promulgated pursuant to Texas
Local Government Code, Chapter 243. It is the intent of the city council that all provisions of this article are promulgated
pursuant to the city charter and the Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 1)
Sec. 4.702 Definitions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/301
In this article the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Building Official. Means the building official of the city.
Establishment. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or note a sexually oriented business, to any sexually
oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee. Means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as
well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nudity or a State of Nudity. Means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals,
or female breasts.
Person. Means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, as association or other legal entity.
Sexually Oriented Business. Means a massage parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore,
adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, or other commercial enterprise,
the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any
other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Business. Means the increase of more than twenty-five (25) per
cent, as the floor area exists on August 1, 1994.
Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Business. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control
of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 2)
Sec. 4.703 Exempt Businesses
The following are exempt from regulations under this article:
(1) A bookstore, movie theater or video store, unless the business is an adult bookstore, adult movie theater,
or adult video store, as defined in Section 4.702 above;
(2) A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed
athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions under the license
held; or
(3) A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing
the healing arts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/301
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 3)
Sec. 4.704 License Required
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a license issued by the city for the
particular type of business.
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the building official. The application must be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated
scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.
Applicants who must comply with Section 4.717 of this article shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of Section
4.717.
(c) The applicant must be qualified to the provisions of this article, and the premises must be inspected and found to be
in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department and building official.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a
license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each
individual who has a twenty (20) per cent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under Section 4.705, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
(e) The fact that a person posses a valid pool hall license, recreation hall license, or recreation area license does not
exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually
oriented business and posses a theater license, public house of amusement license or dance hall license shall comply with
the requirements and provisions of this article as well as any other prevailing code, laws and/or ordinances pertaining to
those other such licenses.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 4)
Sec. 4.705 Issuance of License
(a) The planning and zoning commission shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days
after receipt of an application, unless it finds one (1) or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(2) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in his payment to the City of Atlanta taxes, fees, fines
or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business;
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has
falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or is residing with a person whose license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(5) The license fee required by this article has not been paid;
(6) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with Sections
4.713, 4.714, 4.715, 4.716, or 4.717.
(b) It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the planning and zoning
commission the evidence required to determine present fitness as may be requested by the planning and zoning
commission.
(c) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date and the address of the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/301
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 5)
Sec. 4.706 Fees
(a) The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix
of this code.
(b) If an applicant is required by this article and/or other city ordinances to also obtain other necessary licenses for the
business at a single location, payment of the fee for the sexually oriented business license does not exempt the applicant
from payment of other necessary licenses.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 6)
Sec. 4.707 Expiration of License
(a) Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
required in Section 4.704. Application shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date.
(b) When the planning and zoning commission denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license
for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the planning and zoning commission finds that the basis
for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 7)
Sec. 4.708 Suspension
The planning and zoning commission shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with Sections 4.713, 4.714, 4.715, 4.716, or 4.717 of this article.
(2) Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article.
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises;
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding
manner, thus necessitating action by a law enforcement officer.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 8)
Sec. 4.709 Revocation
(a) The planning and zoning commission shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 4.708 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the twelve (12) preceding months.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall revoke a license if it determines:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the building official or the
planning and zoning commission during the application process;
(2) A licensee or employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
(3) A licensee or employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/301
(4) A licensee or employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when
the licensee’s license was suspended.
(5) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact”
shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of motel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes
related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) When the planning and zoning commission revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the
licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the planning and zoning commission finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date of the revocation
became effective.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 9)
Sec. 4.710 Notification of Denial or Revocation
If the planning and zoning commission denies the issuance of a license or suspends or revokes a license, it shall
send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the
right to an appeal. (Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 10)
Sec. 4.711 Appeal
If an applicant for a license or a licensee is dissatisfied with the decision of the planning and zoning commission,
he/she may appeal the decision to the city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas. If the applicant is dissatisfied
with the decision of the city council, he/she may appeal the decision to the district court of Cass County.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 11)
Sec. 4.712 Transfer of License
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another. nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (Ordinance 437,
adopted 8/1/94, Section 12)
Sec. 4.713 Location of Sexually Oriented Business
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000) feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined by the Atlanta, Texas, Zoning Ordinance;
(4) A public park adjacent to a residential district as defined by the Atlanta, Texas, Zoning Ordinance;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use;
(6) A licensed day-care center.
(b) A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargements, or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually
oriented business.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/301
(c) A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one (1) sexually oriented business in the same business, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any
sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or
secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, residential lot or day-care
center.
(e) Four purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closed exterior walls of the
structures in which each business is located.
(f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully in operation on August, 1, 1994, that is in violation of subsections (a), (b),
or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of
thirty (30) days or more. Such non-conforming uses shall be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use
may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet
of one another and otherwise in permissible locations, the sexually oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the after-established businesses(es) is
nonconforming.
(g) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential lot or residential district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 13)
Sec. 4.714 Exemption from Location Restrictions
(a) The planning and zoning commission may grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of Section Sec. 4.713
if it makes the following findings, that
(1) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby
properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article;
(3) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or
quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(4) The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not. be contrary to any program
of neighborhood conservation nor interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
(5) All other applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested party. Disputes of
fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the planning and zoning commission
is final.
(c) If the planning and zoning commission grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date
of the planning and zoning commission’s action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in
violation of the locational restrictions of Section 4.713 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(d) If the planning and zoning commission denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until
at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the planning and zoning commission’s action.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/301
(e) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other than the
locational restrictions of Section 4.713.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 14)
Sec. 4.715 Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios
(a) A nude model studio may not employ anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years
was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state
of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa
may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 15)
Sec. 4.716 Additional Regulations for Adult Motion Pictures and Adult Theaters
(a) The requirements and provisions of other applicable chapters of the prevailing Ordinance remain applicable to adult
theaters and adult motion picture theaters.
(b) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a
state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(c) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or
on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) and (c) of this section if the person under eighteen (18) years was
in restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 16)
Sec. 4.717 Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof, specifying the location of one (1) or more manager’s stations
and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons
will not be permitted. A manager’s station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required;
however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The planning and zoning
commission may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications, if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/301
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the prior
approval of the planning and zoning commission.
(4) It is the duty of the owner and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on
duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has
two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be
by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owner and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees
present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the
premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1)
of this section.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficiently intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle, as
measured at floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the owner and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees
present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (8) of subsection (a) above commits an offense if he
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 17)
Sec. 4.718 Enforcement
(a) Any person violating Section 4.713 of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(b) Any person violating a provision of this article other than Section 4.713, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.715 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirety or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which as no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and not advertising that indicated that a
nude person is available for viewing; and
(B) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of
the class; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/301
(C) Where not more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time.
(D) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.717 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or
video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
(Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94, Section 18)
Sec. 4.719 Injunction
The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring a civil action in the district court of Cass County, Texas, to enjoin
a person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license, or in violation of
this article. Such violations shall also be subject to prosecution for criminal violations. (Ordinance 437, adopted
8/1/94, Section 19)
ARTICLE 4.800 MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK YARDS
Sec. 4.801 Prohibited without Approval
(a) No motor vehicle junk-yard or business shall be established, operated or maintained in the City of Atlanta, unless a
written request for a special use permit and/or license has been reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and
approved by the city council.
(b) A “motor vehicle junk-yard or business” is hereby defined as any business and any place of storage or deposit which
displays or in or upon which there are displayed vehicles or any motor vehicle which is self-propelled and which is
inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid motor
vehicle safety inspection certificate and which is wrecked, partially dismantled or discarded, and/or iron, metal, glass,
paper, cordage or other waste discarded or secondhand material which has been a part or is intended to be a part of any
motor vehicle.
(Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section I)
Sec. 4.802 Permit Application
Application for a special use permit and/or license required by Section 4.801 hereof shall be made to the
building official and shall set forth the following information: the name and address of the applicant; the trade
name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the location where such business is to be
conducted; if the applicant is a firm or corporation, its organization and personnel; the size of the territory the
applicant proposes to allot such business; that the interest of said city require the establishing, operating or
maintaining of such yard or business at the location designated; and any other information as may be required by
the city council. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section II)
Sec. 4.803 Investigation
The building official shall make or cause to be made such investigations as the building official may deem
desirable, as to any application for a certificate of approval under this article, and shall determine whether or not,
in the interest of the safety, health, decency, comfort, convenience, necessity and welfare of the inhabitants of
said city, or requirement for the operation of such a business exists, and whether or not the applicant is a fit and
proper person or concern to conduct such business; and such investigation may extend to the fitness of the
stockholders and officers of any corporation making such application. The building official shall submit his or
her findings to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation of approval or disapproval to the
city council. In considering such application, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the
nature and development of the surrounding property, the proximity of churches, schools, hospital, public
buildings and other places of public gathering, the sufficiency in number of such other yards or businesses in the
vicinity, the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and the suitability of the applicant to establish,
maintain or operate such yard or business. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section III)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/301
Sec. 4.804 Permit Issuance
(a) If the city council finds that the convenience, necessity, welfare and comfort of the public requires that operation of a
motor vehicle junk-yard, and that the applicant is fit to conduct the business, and that its establishment, operation and/or
maintenance will not be harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, and that any other ordinance or laws affecting
same, and the other requirements herein, have been complied with, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. If it finds
that the public convenience, necessity, welfare and comfort does not require the establishment, operation and/or
maintenance of such business in the location applied for, or that the applicant is not fit to conduct such business, or that the
public health, safety or welfare will be or is likely to be harmed by the establishment, operation and/or maintenance of
such business, or that any other ordinance or law prohibits such establishment, operation and/or maintenance, it shall
forthwith refuse such application, and no special use permit and/or license shall be issued to such applicant. (Ordinance
445, adopted 1/18/95, Section IV)
(b) Upon presentation of the certificate of approval required under this article within thirty (30) days from its date and
satisfactory evidence that all permit and/or license fees have been paid to the city, and that such other fees and taxes as may
be required by law have been fully paid, the building official shall issue to such applicant a special use permit and/or
license to operate a motor vehicle junk-yard. Any special use permit and/or license issued hereunder shall remain in full
force and effect, and no additional certificate shall be required for the purpose of obtaining a license so long as the original
certificate remains in effect and the applicant strictly complies with all of the requirements and provisions of this article,
and all of the requirements and provisions of the Planning and Zoning Ordinance. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95,
Section V)
Sec. 4.805 Fee
(a) In order to defray a part of the expense necessary to provide for the surveillance, supervision and inspection of motor
vehicle junk-yards required under the terms of this article, there is hereby fixed a license fee, which shall be collected from
any person operating a motor vehicle junk-yard in said city in the amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code. Said fee is subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(b) No license for the operation of a motor vehicle junk-yard shall be issued unless and until the city council has issued
the special use permit and/or license under the terms of this article.
(c) The permit and/or license required by this article may be renewed from year to year, upon the payment of the fees as
required for the original permit and/or license, so long as the original certificate of occupancy remains in effect and the
owner or occupant strictly complies with all the requirements and provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section VI; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.806 Permit Nontransferable
The certificate of occupancy and the permit and/or license, when issued, shall not be transferable without the
written consent and approval of the city council had after application and hearing as provided upon original
application by the person to whom the certificate is issued. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section VII)
Sec. 4.807 Operation without Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain a motor vehicle junk-yard or business
without procuring a certificate of occupancy and holding a permit and/or license therefor, as hereinabove
provided, and each day of such operation without such certificate or permit and/or license shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section VIII)
Sec. 4.808 Physical Requirements
(a) Each motor vehicle junk-yard in the city shall be completely enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a fence or
structure with a minimum height of eight (8) feet measured from ground level which shall completely and effectively
render the junked vehicles or scrapped material contained therein not visible from any street or other public or private
property. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the
authorized business. Entrances and exits shall be constructed and maintained so that they may be closed and secured with
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/301
opaque gates which shall likewise effectively render the junked vehicles or scrapped material contained therein not visible
from any street or other public or private property. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section IX)
(b) No motor vehicles or part thereof shall be piled or stacked in any such motor vehicle junk-yard in any manner as to
exceed six (6) feet in height, or six-hundred-twenty-five (625) square feet in floor or lot area. An aisle of at least four (4)
feet shall be maintained at all times between piles or stacks of motor vehicles or parts thereof in such a manner as to allow
free access on the part of the fire department of said city. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section X)
(c) All gasoline shall be drained from the gasoline reservoirs of all motor vehicles stored or kept on the premises of any
such motor vehicle junk-yard unless such motor vehicles are in such state of repair as to enable them to be removed from
the premises under their own power. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section XI)
(d) It shall be absolutely prohibited for the owner or occupier of a junk-yard to burn scrap material or any part thereof at
any time under any circumstances. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section XII)
Sec. 4.809 Existing Businesses
Any motor vehicle junk-yard or business established, operating or maintained in the city on the date this article
first becomes effective, shall be exempt from the enforcement of the terms and conditions of this article for a
period of twelve (12) months for the specific purpose of allowing any such existing motor vehicle junk-yard or
business a sufficient amount of time to comply with all of the terms and conditions of this article. The city
council hereby judicially determines that twelve (12) months is a reasonable amount of time for an existing
motor vehicle junk-yard or business to come in to compliance with the terms and conditions of this article.
(Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section XIII)
Sec. 4.810 Penalty for Violations
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or cause or permit anyone to violate any of the provisions of
this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each and every day that any violation of this
article or any part thereof shall occur shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as
such. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section XV)
ARTICLE 4.900 AMBULANCE SERVICES
Sec. 4.901 Short Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Atlanta Ordinance Regulating Emergency Medical
Service and Private Ambulance Service.” (Ordinance 387, adopted 6/19/89, Article I)
Sec. 4.902 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed thereto by this article:
Advanced Life Support. Emergency Pre-Hospital care using invasive medical acts. A specially skilled emergency
medical technician or a paramedic emergency medical technician shall provide this level of care under medical
supervision and control of a licensed physician.
Ambulance. Any motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, arranged, equipped or used for the purpose of
transporting the sick or injured which meets or exceeds requirements set forth by Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes,
Article 4447o, as one of the following:
(1) Basic Life Support Vehicle;
(2) Advanced Life Support Vehicle; or
(3) Mobil Intensive Care Unit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/301
Ambulance Call. The act of proceeding with an ambulance for the purpose of transporting any patient.
Ambulance Personnel. Any person who has the duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an
ambulance call who holds a current valid certification by the Texas Department of Health as one of the
following:
(1) Emergency Care Attendant (ECA);
(2) Basic Emergency Medical Technician (B-EMT);
(3) Specially Skilled Emergency Medical Technician (SS-EMT); or
(4) Paramedic Emergency Medical Technician (P-EMT).
Certificate. A certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity.
City. All areas within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
Council. The city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
Emergency. Emergency prehospital care provided to the sick and injured during emergency transport to a
medical facility, including any necessary stabilization of the sick or injured in connection with that
transportation.
Fire Chief. The chief of the Atlanta Fire Department or authorized representative of the chief.
Fire Department. The fire department of the City of Atlanta.
License Officer. The fire chief of the City of Atlanta or the chief’s duly authorized representative serving as
licensing officer for certification of Private Non-Emergency ambulance services under standards set forth in this
article.
Atlanta Fire Department Dispatch. The central communications center from which all ambulances operating
under emergency conditions shall be dispatched and/or controlled.
Mutual Aid Agreement. An agreement between two neighboring political jurisdiction in which they mutually
agree to provide limited emergency services to one another during times of disaster.
Non-Emergency. An incident which does not involve serious illness or injury which could result in loss of life or
permanent disability.
Operator. A person engaged in business as the owner, manager, officer or proprietor of a company, firm or
organization providing ambulance service.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other group or combination of individuals.
Physician Director. A licensed physician employed by the city to provide medical direction to emergency
medical services personnel under the terms of the Medical Practices Act, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, Article
4495b, and rules promulgated by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners pursuant to the terms of the
Medical Practice Act.
(Ordinance 387, adopted 6/19/89, Article II)
Sec. 4.903 State Law to Apply
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, Article 4447o, Titled “Emergency Medical Services Act” is hereby adopted by the
council and shall be deemed a part of this article as if fully contained herein. (Ordinance 387, adopted 6/19/89,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/301
Article III)
Sec. 4.904 Emergency Medical Services (Emergency Ambulance)
(a) Provider. The City of Atlanta Fire Department Emergency Medical Services shall be the sole provider of Emergency
Service within the city except as provided by Section 4.905(b).
(b) Fees. Fees for Emergency Medical Services shall be as established by the council.
(c) Area of Service.
(1) The area served by the City of Atlanta Fire Department EMS shall consist of the corporate limits of the
city and other entities or political subdivisions which do not have this type of service available for emergencies
within Cass County.
(2) In cases of Life Threatening Emergency, in which a local medical facility lacks the capability of
providing necessary patient care, the Atlanta Fire Department EMS shall transfer the patient to the NEAREST
medical facility which possesses such capability. A request by a medical facility for such a transfer shall
constitute an agreement by said facility to assume responsibility for any and all fees incurred for said transfer.
(3) Transfers from a medical facility within the city to another medical facility outside Cass County shall be
limited to not more than one (1) at any time.
(d) Level of Service. The City of Atlanta Fire Department EMS shall provide Advanced Life Support capabilities and
transport by EMT Special Skills and EMT - Paramedics acting under the supervision of a physician director.
(Ordinance 387, adopted 6/19/89, Article IV)
Sec. 4.905 Private Non-Emergency Ambulance Service
(a) Certificate Required. No person shall operate a non-emergency ambulance for hire on any street of the city without
first having obtained from the city council a certificate declaring that the public convenience and necessity require such an
operation, except as provided in subsection (b) hereof.
(b) Exceptions. No certificate shall be required for any person operating an ambulance or other vehicle who:
(1) Renders assistance during any disaster or major emergency when the city’s emergency ambulance
service and the private non-emergency ambulance service authorized to operate in the city by certificate are
either insufficient in number or inadequate for any other reason, as determined by the fire chief.
(2) Operates from a location outside the city and transports any patient from a point of origin outside the
city to a destination inside the city.
(3) Operates an ambulance brought in solely for the purpose of a drill or training exercise which is duly
authorized.
(4) Operates any ambulance rendering requested assistance to ambulance currently authorized by the city in
cases of disaster or major emergency pursuant to provisions of a “mutual aid agreement” approved by the city.
(c) Application for Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. Applications for Certificate of Public Convenience
and Necessity for the operation of non-emergency service within the city shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant, and shall be filed with the fire chief of the city or his duly authorized representative, hereinafter designated as
the “license officer”. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the license officer and shall contain at least the
following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to
do business; if the applicant is an individual, the name, age and address of the applicant and the length of time
the applicant had resided in the city; or if a partnership or association, the business name thereof and the name,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/301
age and address of each partner and the length of time each partner has resided in the city; or if a corporation,
the names and addresses of all officers and directors of such corporation.
(2) The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operated and the class, size, design and color scheme of
each vehicle.
(3) Whether or not the applicant has be finally convicted of any felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly
related to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation.
(4) Whether or not the applicant, his associates or employees have any claims or judgments against them for
damages resulting from the negligent operation of an ambulance, or any other vehicle.
(5) The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant.
(6) The nature and character of the service that the applicant proposes to render; the facts showing the
demand for such service; the experience that the applicant has had in rendering such service and the period of
time, if any, that he has rendered that service.
(7) Whether or not the applicant has current valid permit from the Texas Department of Health, as required
by Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, Article 4447o.
(8) Documentation from the applicant’s insurance carrier, stating that the insurance required hereunder is
available to the applicant and that such coverage is or will be provided prior to the issuance by the license
officer of the certificate to operate hereunder.
(9) Such other information as may be required by the city council.
(d) Investigation of Applications. Upon receipt of a properly filed application for a subsection (a) certificate, the license
officer shall cause an investigation to be made of the information provided in the application to determine its accuracy and
completeness. The license officer shall make a written report to the city manager of the results of this investigation.
(e) Public Hearings Upon the Public Convenience and Necessity. Upon receipt of the written report provided for in
subsection (d) the council shall schedule a public hearing on an original application. Notice of such public hearing by the
council shall be given to the applicant and all certificate holders affected thereby by depositing such written notice in the
United States mail, in an envelope, properly addressed to each such person at his respective address on file with the license
officer, and bearing sufficient postage, at least ten (10) days prior to such public hearing. Such notice shall also be
published once in the official newspaper of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for such hearing. The purpose
of such public hearing shall be to determine, among other things, the following:
(1) Whether the public convenience and necessity require that such ambulance or ambulances be operated
for non-emergency calls;
(2) Whether or not the applicant is a fit and proper person to conduct such business, including the fitness of
the officers and stockholders of any corporation making such application;
(3) Whether the applicant will be able to afford public service of such permanence and quality as to best
serve the public interest;
(4) The experience that the applicant has had in rendering ambulance service;
(5) The past experience of the applicant in satisfying judgment, if any, to claimants as a result of injuries
received by reason of negligent operation of the ambulance;
(6) The financial ability of the applicant to respond to damages to property resulting from the negligent
operation of an ambulance; and
(7) The character and condition of the ambulance or ambulances to be used.
(b) In the event the city council finds that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of such a certificate
and that the applicant meets the required qualifications and will be able to give proper and adequate service in the best
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/301
interest of the inhabitants of the city, the council shall direct the license officer to issue a Certificate of Public Convenience
and Necessity to the applicant with any restrictions, including but not limited to the number of ambulances which the city
council feels are required thereunder.
(f) Form and Contents of Certificate. Every certificate issued hereunder shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city
secretary, and shall contain, in addition to the name and address of the applicant, a statement that the operator is authorized
to make non-emergency calls only, and the number of vehicles authorized to be operated pursuant to such certificate.
(g) Issuance Certificate. The license officer, upon receiving direction from the city council to issue a certificate to an
applicant for the operation of ambulances hereunder, shall issue such certificate to the applicant. No certificate shall be
issued until satisfactory evidence of compliance with subsection (k) of this section is filed with the license officer. A copy
of every certificate shall be filed with the fire chief of the city.
(h) Revocation, Alteration or Suspension of Certificate - Causes For. Every certificate issued hereunder shall be subject
to revocation, alteration or suspension by the council when it shall appear that one or more of the following conditions
exist:
(1) The public convenience and necessity no longer warrant such operation;
(2) The operator has refused to render the full service authorized by his certificate;
(3) The operator has been finally convicted of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the
duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation;
(4) The certificate was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally omitted or
falsely stated;
(5) The operator has persisted in permitting his motor vehicles to be operated in violation of any law;
(6) The operator has willfully and knowingly violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions hereof;
(7) The operator or his agent has, without good cause, induced or sought to induce a change of destination to
or from a hospital or other place specified by the person hiring the ambulance;
(8) The operator or his agent has allowed the service to be operated in a negligent manner;
(9) The insurance coverage required herein has been canceled, reduced, withdrawn, suspended or
terminated;
(10) The operator has allowed any of his vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated or unclean
to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use;
(11) The operator fails to show financial ability to maintain services in compliance with the terms hereof;
(12) The operator has failed to comply with the limitations imposed by the city council in the certificate.
(i) Revocation, Alteration or Suspension of Certificate.
(1) The license officer may at any time give notice in writing to the certificate holder or person in control of
the operation and maintenance of such ambulance service that the certificate issued for the operation and
maintenance of such ambulance service has been revoked. The notice shall outline the reason or reasons for
revocation. The notice of revocation shall become a final revocation after the expiration of ten (10) days from
the date of the service of same, unless on or before the expiration of such ten days the certificate holder shall
file with the city council a written appeal of such revocation. The appeal shall operate as a stay of revocation
of the certificate until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication.
Provided, however, the license officer may require an immediate cessation of all non-emergency service in the
notice of revocation. If this requirement is made, the certificate shall be suspended during the period in which
the appeal is pending, and the operator may not provide non-emergency service with the city during this time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/301
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of filing of the appeal, and such action and
judgment of the council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties.
(2) If the notice is given as the result of the conviction of the certificate holder or his agents or employees of
a crime, Vernon’s Ann. Civil St. Art. 6252-13(d) and other applicable state law shall be controlling.
(j) Applications, Certificate Duration and Fees.
(1) Before a certificate is issued or renewed, an annual fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code, shall be paid which may be subject to change from time to time by the city council in
the form of a Resolution. This fee shall not be prorated for fractional parts of a calendar year. The operator
making application for renewal of a certificate shall do so prior to October 1 of any year.
(2) Upon making application to the city for a certificate an application fee which shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the city council shall be paid in addition to the certificate fee paid in advance. No
application shall be proceeded until this fee and the fee contained in subsection (j)(1) are paid.
(3) The fees described in this section shall be non-refundable.
(4) The city council may set the effective dates of the certificate for any period of time not to exceed one
year.
(k) Liability Insurance Required. No ambulance shall be operated on non-emergency calls in the city unless there is at
all times in full force and effect insurance coverage as follows:
(1) Public liability insurance in an amount not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) for
injury to, or death of, each person; Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($3000,000) for each accident; and Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($50,000) for property damage to secure payment of all lawful and property claims arising
out of the operations of the ambulance service authorized hereunder;
(2) Uninsured motorist coverage is an amount equal to the bodily injury liability limits set forth in
subsection (1) above:
(3) A One Million Dollar ($1,000,000) umbrella policy providing additional coverage to all underlying
liability policies;
(4) Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the certificate
granted for the operation of ambulance service hereunder, and the insurer shall be obligated to give not less
than thirty (30) days’ written notice to the city and the medical director before any cancellation or other
termination of any such policy earlier than its termination date.
(l) Central Place of Business. Each operator shall maintain a central place of business with at least one (1) properly
listed telephone for receiving all calls for ambulance service and where all business records and daily manifest herein
required shall be maintained and available; to answer promptly all calls for service; to dispatch promptly all ambulances;
and to be generally responsible for its conduct of all ambulance operations. Each operator shall, in writing, immediately
notify the fire chief of any change of the business address or of the telephone number where said operator may be reached
at all times.
(m) Certificate Holders Records and Reports. Each certificate holder shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be
recorded the time, place of origin and destination. Each such operator shall retain and preserve all daily manifests for at
least eighteen (18) months, and such manifests shall be available for inspection by the city council and/or license officer or
their duly authorized representatives upon request. Each such operator shall maintain such records at a place readily
accessible for said inspection.
(n) Operating Regulations. All certificate holders shall comply with the following regulations.
(1) The certificate holder, operator, ambulance personnel and ambulance vehicles shall be subject to
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, Article 4447o.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/301
(2) In the event an operator receives a private call for ambulance service which is of an emergency nature,
within the area served by the Atlanta Fire Department EMS, said operator shall report to the Atlanta Fire
Department Dispatcher such call, giving the location and the nature of the call. The fire department dispatcher
shall than dispatch the Atlanta Fire Department E.M.S.
(3) It shall be unlawful for ambulance personnel or an operator of a private non-emergency service to make
an emergency ambulance call on the public streets of the city unless an original non-emergency call is later
determined to require emergency transfer. A determination shall be made by the lights and sirens or request
assistance from the Atlanta Fire Department EMS. In cases in which it is determined to continue the transfer
using emergency lights and siren the Atlanta Fire Department Dispatcher shall be notified immediately by
radio.
(Ordinance 387, adopted 6/19/89, Article V)
ARTICLE 4.1000 AMBULANCE SERVICE RATES
(a) The rates for ambulance service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(Ordinance 472, 12/16/96)
(b) Atlanta Memorial Hospital and Brooks Hospital, Inc., shall pay an amount as provided for in the fee schedule found
in the appendix of this code. for the temporary transfer of patients from the City of Atlanta to the City of Texarkana, and
return, for diagnostic purposes.
(c) The special rate to be charged for the services set forth in this article shall apply only to accounts paid within thirty
(30) days from the billing date.
(Ordinance 434 adopted 6/20/94)
(d) Ambulance service rates are subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.100 FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS*
Sec. 5.101 Outdoor Burning
Outdoor burning shall be done only in compliance with the regulations of the Texas Natural Resources Conservation
Commission. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.102 Combustible Materials
No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to
spontaneous ignition, into any combustible receptacle, or place the same within ten (10) feet of any combustible
materials, except in metal or other noncombustible covered receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a
noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the buildings, shall be placed on noncombustible stands and in
every case shall be kept at least two (2) feet away from any combustible wall or partition, or exterior window
opening.
Sec. 5.103 Torches; Flames
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/301
Any person using a torch or other flame producing device for sweating pipe joints in any building or structure
shall have available in the immediate vicinity where the sweating is done one approved fire extinguisher or
water hose connected to a water supply. Combustible material in the close proximity of flame shall be protected
against ignition by shielding, wetting, or other approved means. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain in the
vicinity of the sweating operation for 1 hour after the torch or flame-producing device has been used.
Sec. 5.104 Vacant Buildings
Every person owning, or in charge or control of, any vacant building shall remove therefrom all accumulations
of flammable or combustible waste or rubbish and shall securely lock, barricade, or otherwise secure all doors,
windows, and other openings thereof. The premises shall be maintained clear of any waste or hazardous
material.
Sec. 5.105 Fire on Certain Property Prohibited
No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or his agent;
further, no person shall kindle a fire upon city property, public street, right-of-way, alley, or other public lands.
Sec. 5.106 Vacant Lots, etc.
Roofs, courts, yards, vacant lots and open spaces shall be kept free and clear of deposits or accumulations of
waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible waste or rubbish of any kind. All weeds, grass, vines
or other growth, when same endangers property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the
owner or occupant of the property.
Sec. 5.107 Storage Under Trailers
It shall be unlawful to accumulate or store combustible waste matter beneath trailers or at any other place within
a trailer camp or mobile home park.
Sec. 5.108 Penalty for Violations
Violation of this article is a class “C” misdemeanor punishable of a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 395, adopted 1/22/90)
Sec. 5.109 Recovering Cost for Fire Protection and Emergency Services
(a) Collection of Fees.
(1) The city council authorizes the city manager to adopt charges to be billed against parties involved in
motor vehicle accidents, hazardous waste or chemical spills, or other nonfire suppression activities to which
the city responds with fire department equipment and/or personnel. Those charges shall be billed as a debt to
the party causing the event of a spill or dumping and/or the party transporting said hazardous, dangerous
and/or injurious product. Fire suppression activities resulting from third party negligence may be billed against
that third party. Fire suppression resulting from arson may be billed against the arsonist.
(2) This city manager, or his designee, shall bill and collect all fees and costs for fire prevention and
protection services or other public safety and emergency services for the motor vehicle accidents. The city
manager, or his designee, shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to providing
such services, to include but not limited to all actual expenses including costs of specialists, experts or other
incidental costs incurred by the city as a result of the incident, to the customer, client, owner, designated agent,
representative and/or insurance company who received, covered and/or otherwise benefited from these
services.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/301
(3) Within thirty (30) days of the date of providing fire prevention and protection services or other public
safety and emergency services for the motor vehicle accidents, the city manager, or his designee, shall submit
an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to providing such services, to include but not
limited to all actual expenses including costs of equipment operations, cost of material utilized, costs of
specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full time employment of the city; overtime costs, and
other incidental costs incurred by the city as a result of the incident, to the customer, client, owner, designated
agent, representative and/or insurance company who received, covered and/or otherwise benefited from these
services.
(4) Any bills, fees or penalties, including but not limited to clean up costs, fees or expenses that are imposed
by the city or the city fire department by any local, state or federal agency, related to the rendering of fire
protection or prevention services or of other public safety and emergency services may be included in the
billing or billed separately within thirty (30) days of receipt.
(b) Enforcement. The city may enforce the provisions of this section by any action allowed by law for the collection of
any amounts due hereafter, including reasonable and necessary attorney fees, costs, and expenses in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 5.200 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.201 Created
(a) The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be a division of the existing fire department, the fire
marshal reporting directly to the city manager. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval
of the city council, for an indefinite term. The fire marshal shall be fully responsible to the city manager for the
administration of his/her department, and for the carrying out and enforcement or the resolutions and ordinances of the city
council. He may be removed from office by said city manager, with the approval of the city council.
(b) The fire marshal with the approval of the city manager can appoint such investigators or inspectors as needed to
carry out the duties of the office of fire marshal. These inspectors or investigators shall be properly qualified for the duties
of this office.
(Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 1)
Sec. 5.202 Powers and Duties
(a) The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the
result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begin within twenty-four hours, not including Sunday, of the
occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and
circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation
required by this article. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 2)
(b) The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony,
on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under
investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence
sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy
to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged
with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the
names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony
taken in the case. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 3)
(c) The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by
the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or
document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and
affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 4)
(d) Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said
fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/301
who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said
investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be
prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Provided, however that any person so convicted shall have the right of
appeal. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 5)
(e) All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons
other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses
may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been
examined. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 6)
Sec. 5.203 Entry onto Premises
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 7)
Sec. 5.204 Periodic Inspections
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examination, to enter into and
upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and
make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any
cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so
occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting
devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline,
kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or
other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions
dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall
be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. Provided, however, that if
said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the city
manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such
order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month
the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with separate
report on each fire in the city during the month. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 8)
Sec. 5.205 Maintenance of Fire Hazards
(a) Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for
want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire
would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 9)
(b) Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an
improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys,
flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health or safety of
persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper
arrangement of a lighting device or system or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be
dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting,
augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such buildings,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/301
structures or premises other than the maintenance thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 10)
Sec. 5.206 Notification of Violations
No prosecution shall be brought under Section 5.205 of this article until the order provided for in Section 5.204
be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91,
Section 11)
Sec. 5.207 Violations
(a) The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the
enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section
12)
(b) Every day’s maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct and
separate offense. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 13)
(c) All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be
recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and
punishments for offenses generally against the city. (Ordinance 399, adopted 5/20/91, Section 14)
ARTICLE 5.300 ARSON REWARD*
Be it ordained by the city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas, that the City of Atlanta, Texas, hereby offers a
reward of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to anyone who furnishes information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person or persons found guilty of arson committed within the corporate limits of the City of
Atlanta, Texas. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the City of Atlanta,
Texas. The city council shall be the sole, exclusive and final judge in determining eligibility for said reward.
(Ordinance 413 adopted 4/5/93)
ARTICLE 5.400 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.401 Definitions
Fireworks. Any composition or device that is designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation that is classified as Division 1.3G and Division 1.4G explosives by the
United States Department of Transportation in 49 C.F.R. Part 173.
Fireworks stand or stand. Any location from which fireworks are sold at retail or proposed to be sold at retail or
have previously been sold at retail.
Sec. 5.402 Permit Required for Retail Sales of Fireworks
No person, firm, corporation, association, or other entity shall sell fireworks at retail in the city without first
obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this article.
Sec. 5.403 Application for Permits
Every application for a permit for the sale at retail of fireworks as defined by this article within the city shall:
(1) Be made to the city secretary.
(2) Be made no later than the 10th day of May for the July 4th selling period, and the 10th day of November
for the New Year’s Eve selling period.
(3) Be accompanied by a valid state fireworks license.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/301
(4) Be accompanied by a state sales tax permit.
(5) Be in writing, signed by the applicant, or in the case of a corporation, a duly authorized officer thereof
and contain the telephone number and address to which notice of the granting or denying of the application
may be made.
(6) Be accompanied by a signed statement from the property owner, when other than the applicant, stating
permission is given to place the fireworks stand on the property.
(7) Be accompanied by the application fee of $100.00 per location per event.
(8) Describe the proposed location from which the fireworks will be sold and include an accurate diagram
showing the existing streets, property lines, buildings, other structures, parking areas, barrier lines and
distances to each.
Sec. 5.404 Fireworks Stand Requirements
Fireworks stands shall be in compliance with the following minimum requirements:
(1) Stand Location. Fireworks stands shall only be located on property that is zoned for commercial or
industrial use.
(2) Set-up. Stand cannot be placed on the site more than ten (10) days prior to the selling period.
(3) Stand Setbacks.
(A) Minimum clearances for the location of a stand shall be:
(i) Twenty (20) feet from any structure to the back or side of the stand;
(ii) Forty (40) feet from any structure to the front of the stand;
(iii) Five (5) feet from a property line to the side or rear of the stand;
(iv) Twenty (20) feet from a property line to the front of a stand; and
(v) One hundred feet from any area where flammable or combustible liquids, or propane are
stored, handled or dispensed.
(B) Barricades or ropes shall be provided to prevent vehicles from coming within twenty (20) feet of
the back and sides of the stand, and forty (40) feet of the front of the stand.
(C) No weeds, trash, or other combustible materials shall be allowed within twenty (20) feet of the
back and sides of the stand, and forty (40) feet of the front of the stand.
(4) Parking. An off-street parking area shall be provided which shall have not less than ten (10) parking
spaces located at least twenty (20) feet from the stand.
(5) Site Cleanup. All trash and debris must be removed daily. Fireworks stands and all remaining trash or
other debris shall be removed from the site no later than July 14th for the Fourth of July selling period, and
January 11th for the New Years Eve selling period.
Sec. 5.405 Inspections; Permits
(a) Site Inspection. Upon the receipt of an application for a fireworks stand permit, the fire marshal and/or his designee,
shall investigate the proposed site and determine if such location is suitable under the International Fire Code, this article
and applicable state and federal laws relating to fireworks. The fire marshal and/or his designee shall issue a permit with or
without conditions, or deny a permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/301
(b) Insurance. The applicant will, at the time of receipt of a permit, deliver to the city secretary a certificate of insurance
evidencing that the applicant is the named insured in a policy of liability insurance containing a minimum limit of
$50,000/$500,000 for bodily injury liability for each person/occurrence, and $50,000 for property damage liability for each
occurrence, and in which the city is named as an additional insured.
(c) Notification of Permit Approval; Denial. Applicants shall be notified by telephone or in writing through the regular
mail service of the granting or denying of a permit. Such notification shall be made not later than June 10th for the Fourth
of July selling period, and December 10th for the New Years Eve selling period.
(d) Non-Transferability of Permits. All permits shall be non-transferable and shall be limited to the location set forth in
the permit.
Sec. 5.406 Penalties
(a) Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for ordering the immediate closure of the stand
and/or revoking any permit issued hereunder.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 5.407 Liability for Damages
This article shall not be construed to hold the city, or any officer or employee thereof, responsible for any
damages to persons or property by reasons of certification, inspection, or non-inspection of any building,
equipment or property.
(Ordinance 2008-02 adopted 7/7/08)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH & SANITATION*
ARTICLE 6.100 LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE
Sec. 6.101 Storage Prohibited
All persons, firms or corporations who may, from and after the effective date of this article, install or equip any
residence, business house or apartment house, or any other building located and situated within the corporate
limits of the City of Atlanta, Texas, with any installation or equipment designed to use as a fuel any form of
manufactured or liquefied petroleum gases, shall use in any such installation, whether for domestic or industrial
use, only a standard grade of pipe or piping, and all appliances used in connection with any such installation
shall be a standard grade and type of equipment. Any system which uses any form of manufactured or liquefied
petroleum gases must bear the label of approval or listing of the Underwriters’ Laboratories. The storage of any
liquefied petroleum gases in any individual customer size of container, either above ground or underground, is
prohibited inside of or underneath any building in the corporate limits; and no equipment using liquefied
petroleum gases shall be permitted within the fire limits as defined by article; and no equipment used for the
purpose of storing wholesale quantities of such gases shall be permitted within the corporate limits. (Ordinance
155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 1)
Sec. 6.102 Permit to Store
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/301
(a) Gasoline service station owners or operators may apply for and be granted a permit by the governing body of the city
to install liquefied petroleum gas containers and equipment outside of the Fire Limits for the purpose of servicing motor
vehicles which are equipped to use such gas as a fuel to propel such vehicles under the following conditions: (1) The
storage tank and equipment and the installation thereof must meet the requirements of the other sections of this article, as
well as the requirements and specifications contained in Division IX and other applicable provisions of Liquefied
Petroleum Gas Docket No. 1 of the Railroad Commission of Texas, Published under date of June 1, 1954, as may be
amended from time to time; (2) No such installation shall be placed into operation until it has been inspected and approved
by the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Division of the Railroad Commission of Texas; (3) Prior to the beginning of installation of
such containers and equipment a permit shall be applied for and granted by the governing body of this city; and the water
capacity of such containers shall not exceed 500 gallons. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 2)
(b) The term “standard grade” as used herein shall mean that grade of article which is accepted by dealers in such
equipment and recognized as complying with all fire law regulations. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 3)
(c) Any such equipment as provided for shall be installed, or repaired, in a workmanlike manner which shall comply
with all laws and the regulations of the city, the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the regulations
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 4)
(d) When any such equipment is installed as herein provided, same shall not be placed in operation or used unless and
until said installation has been approved, as complying with this article, by the city fire marshal. (Ordinance 155, adopted
3/7/55, Section 5)
Sec. 6.103 Approval of Fire Marshal
Any person, firm or corporation installing any such equipment as herein provided shall secure the approval of
same as complying with the requirements of this article by the city fire marshal as herein provided for, and shall,
upon requesting such inspection for approval, pay an inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in
the appendix of this code, for each piece of equipment, to cover cost of inspection. (Ordinance 155, adopted
3/7/55, Section 6)
Sec. 6.104 Tank Trucks
(a) All tank trucks and tank trailers used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases within the city shall be so
constructed and operated as to comply with the regulations for the design, construction and operation of automobile tank
trucks and tank trailers for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases as approved by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters and the National Fire Protection Association Any person, firm, or corporation who shall operate or cause to
be operated any tank truck or tank trailer used for the purpose of transporting liquefied petroleum gas within the corporate
limits of the city shall keep any such equipment in good condition at all times, and upon the development of any defect that
would create a hazard to persons or property, said tank truck or tank trailer shall be removed from the streets of the city
until such defects have been repaired, or faulty equipment replaced; and any such tank trucks and tank trailers shall be
subject to inspection by the proper authorities at any time. No tank truck or tank trailer shall be parked, stored or operated
upon any street within the fire limits; nor shall they be stored or repaired inside or outside of any building within the fire
limits as defined by article. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 7)
(b) No tank truck or tank trailer used for the transportation or sale of liquefied petroleum gases within the city shall be
parked, stored or operated upon any street within the fire limits, nor shall they be stored or repaired inside or outside of any
building within the fire limits as defined by article. No liquefied petroleum gases shall be sold or dispensed within the fire
limits as defined by article, either from trucks or tanks or any container whatsoever. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55,
Section 8)
Sec. 6.105 Hours of Unloading
The unloading of gasoline or liquefied petroleum gases within the corporate city limits at any time between the
hours of sunset and sunrise is hereby prohibited, unless, in case of emergency, a written permit for such
unloading is first obtained from the city fire marshal, which shall specify the time and place for such unloading
and the emergency which necessitates such unloading. At all times during the unloading of gasoline or liquefied
petroleum gases within the corporate limits, whether during day or night, an attendant for the truck or tank trailer
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/301
from which such unloading is done, must be at all times in attendance on and within twenty-five (25) feet of
such truck or tank trailer. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 9)
Sec. 6.106 Malodorants
All liquefied petroleum gas sold within the city shall be treated with a malodorant in such quantities as required
by state law to create an odor easily detected in case of leaks in piping or equipment. (Ordinance 155, adopted
3/7/55, Section 10)
Sec. 6.107 Penalty for Violations
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction for violation thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found
in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 11)
ARTICLE 6.200 LITTER AND WEEDS*
Sec. 6.201 Short Title
This article shall be. known and cited as the City of Atlanta, Texas, Litter and Weed Ordinance. (Ordinance 460,
adopted 11/20/95, Section 1)
Sec. 6.202 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein set forth:
Brush. Scrub vegetation and decaying remains of said vegetation.
City. City of Atlanta, Cass County, Texas.
Garbage. Kitchen refuse, ordinarily including only food stuffs or related material.
Handbill. Any commercial, printed or written advertising material, any sample or device, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, booklet or any other printed material or literature distributed free of charge.
Litter. Any garbage, refuse or rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material which creates a potential
danger to public health safety and welfare if not deposited in an authorized receptacle.
Nonaesthetic Tree. A woody perennial plant having one (1 ) or more main stems less than two (2) inches in
diameter.
Person. As used herein shall include the singular and plural and shall also mean any individual, firm,
corporation, association, family, group, occupant, owner’s agent, lessee or tenant.
Private Receptacle. A garbage can, garbage bag or dumpster used to collect and store litter until removed by the
authorized garbage service.
Public Place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is
not limited to streets, highways and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops. All other property is considered private property.
Refuse. All solid waste (except body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
and solid market and industrial wastes.
Rubbish. All solid waste consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste including but not limited to paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/301
materials.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
highway including but not limited to devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Weeds. Herbage in excess of twelve (12) inches tall.
(Ordinance 460, adopted 11/20/95, Section 2)
Sec. 6.203 Weeds
It shall be unlawful to permit grass, weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a greater height than
twelve (12) inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion upon any property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to fail to keep any lot or tract of land within the city free from weeds, brush or
nonaesthetic trees as defined by this article. (Ordinance 460, adopted 11/20/95, Section 3)
Sec. 6.204 Litter
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit litter in or upon any public or private properly
within the city, except in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner to permit any litter to remain or accumulate on private property, regardless of
the means such litter was deposited on the property. (Ordinance 460, adopted 11/20/95, Section 4)
Sec. 6.205 Litter and Waste on Construction Sites
Property owners and the prime contractor in charge of construction site shall furnish authorized private
receptacles for construction, building material and workmen’s litter. All litter from construction, building or any
related activity shall be properly placed or deposited in the authorized private receptacles at the end of each day.
(Ordinance 460, adopted 11/20/95, Section 5)
Sec. 6.206 Burning, Dumping and Burying of Litter or Waste
It shall be unlawful to burn, dump, bury or dispose of litter or waste of any kind within the city limits of the City
of Atlanta, Texas, by any other means than as provided for by this article, except as might be designated by the
city. (Ordinance 460, adopted 11/20/95, Section 6)
Sec. 6.207 Notice to Remove or Remedy Conditions
(a) In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, situated within the corporate limits of
the City of Atlanta shall fail to comply with Section 6.201 of this article, then the city shall give notice to such person
setting forth the noncompliance with this article. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served upon such person in
any one or more of the following ways:
(1) Personally given to the owner; or
(2) Addressed to the owner by letter to the owner’s post office address; or,
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or if the owner’s post office address, may be given by publication
at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days in the city’s official newspaper or by posting the notice on or
near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates or by posting the notice on a
placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
(b) In the notice herein provided for, the city shall have the right to inform the property owner that if he or she commits
another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may,
without further notice, correct the violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/301
(c) Should the violation consist of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are deemed by the city to
be an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person, the city may immediately abate said nuisance with no
notice to the property owner.
Sec. 6.208 Failure to Take Required Action
Should any owner of any lot or lots with the City of Atlanta, Texas, who shall allow weeds, rubbish, brush, or
any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to grow or accumulate thereon, fail and/or refuse to cut
down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, brush, or unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter, as the case may
be, within ten (10) days after notice to said owner to fail and/or refuse to drain and/or fill the same lot or lots or
remove filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter, as the case may be, to do so, in writing, or by
letter addressed to owner at his post office or within ten (10) days after notice by publication as many as two (2)
times within ten (10) consecutive days in any newspaper of general circulation in the City of Atlanta, may do
such cutting down and/or removing such weeds, rubbish, brush, and any other unsightly, objectionable or
insanitary matter, or cause the same to be done and may pay therefore and charge the expense incurred in doing
such work or having such work done or improvements made at the expense of the City of Atlanta, Texas, which
such expense was incurred.
Sec. 6.209 Statement of Lien
The mayor or city administrator of the City of Atlanta shall file a statement of such expense incurred under
Section 6.207 or under Section 6.208 of this article, as the case may be, giving the amount of such expense, the
date on which said work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk of Cass County, Texas: and the
City of Atlanta, Texas, shall have a privileged lien on such lot or lots or real estate upon which said work was
done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of said
Article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for
street improvements; and said amount shall bear ten percent (10%) interest from the date said statement was
filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditures, and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and
recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the City of Atlanta, Texas; and the statement of
expense so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for
such work or improvements.
Sec. 6.210 Penalties
Any person, firm or individual who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
Section 1.106 of this code. And each and every day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense, in case the
owner or occupant of any lot, lots or premises under the provision of this article shall be a corporation, and shall
violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or any
manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 6.300 COUNTY FOOD ORDER ENFORCEMENT
The Cass County Health Department is the regulatory authority for the enforcement of the Food Order passed by
the commissioners court of Cass County and that the Food Order of Cass County shall apply within the
municipality of the City of Atlanta, Texas. (Ordinance 471, adopted 10/7/96)
CHAPTER 7
OFFENSES & NUISANCES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/301
ARTICLE 7.100 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sec. 7.101 Controlled Substances Prohibited*
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, carry, consume, or use any controlled substances within any city
properties, facilities, easements, and/or right-of-ways.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term “controlled substance” is used as defined in the Texas Controlled Substances
Act.
(Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 1)
Sec. 7.102 Alcohol Prohibited†
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, carry, consume, or use any alcoholic beverage within any city
properties, facilities, easements, and/or right-of-ways.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term “alcoholic beverage” is used as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code.
(Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 2)
Sec. 7.103 Firearms Prohibited**
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, carry, or discharge any firearm, air-rifle spring-gun, bow and arrow,
sling, or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical and dangerous to human life within any city properties, facilities,
easements, and/or right-of-ways.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the preceding subpart that:
(1) The person was a peace officer of the city in the performance of his/her official duties;
(2) The person was a certified or licensed security guard engaged for the purpose of providing security for
an event/function occurring within any city property, facility, easement, and/or right-of-way. The use of a
certified or licensed security guard in a city property, facility, easement, and/or right-of-way, employed by a
group/organization other than the city must be authorized in writing by the city manager and/or his/her
designee not less than 72 (seventy-two) hours prior to the occurrence of the event/function;
(3) The person was a member of the armed forces of the United States or State of Texas engaged in the
performance of his/her duties or the conduct of a patriotic or ceremonial event.
(4) The person holds a permit to carry a firearm.
(5) The person holds a security officer commission issued by the Texas Board of Private Investigators and
Private Security Agencies if:
(A) he is engaged in the performance of his duties as a security officer or traveling to and from his
place of assignment;
(B) he is wearing a distinctive uniform; and
(C) the weapon is in plain view.
(Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 3; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.104 Damage of City Property Prohibited
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/301
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage, or destroy any building, structure, recreational
equipment, furniture, fixture, or other property of the city located in or upon any city property, facility, easement, and/or
right-of-way.
(b) The preceding subsection shall not apply to:
(1) An employee of the city acting within the scope of his/her official duties;
(2) A contractor or other person with who the city has an agreement to remove, alter, modify, or destroy any
such building, structure, recreational equipment, furniture, fixture, or other property of the city located in or
upon any city property, facility, easement, and/or right-of-way.
(Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 4)
Sec. 7.105 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use abusive, indecent, profane, or vulgar language within any city property,
facility, easement, and/or right-of-way which by its utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to fight with another within any city property, facility, easement, and/or right-ofway.
(Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 5)
Sec. 7.106 Penalty and Violation
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article or rule promulgated pursuant to this article shall
be deemed guilty of a Class “C” misdemeanor in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section
1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 420, adopted 8/6/93, Section 6)
ARTICLE 7.200 NOISE NUISANCES*
(a) Any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of normal
nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living, in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is hereafter prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration, which substantially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of private homes by persons of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereafter prohibited.
(c) The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but said enumerations
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, to-wit:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such volume,
particularly during the hours between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence.
(2) The use of any stationary loud-speaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs persons of
normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living in the immediate vicinity
thereof; the use of any stationary loud-speaker or amplifier operated on any day between the hours of 7 p.m.
and 7 a.m.
(3) The keeping of any animal or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort and repose of any person of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits and modes of
living in the immediate vicinity.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus,
street car or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; the creation by means of any such signal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/301
device of any unreasonably loud or harsh devise for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(6) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced.
(7) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work on any building between the
hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public safety
and convenience, and then only by permit from the city council, which permit may be renewed by the council
during the time the emergency exists.
(8) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning while
the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institutions, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that.
(9) The use of any drum, loud-speaker or other instrument or devise for the purpose of attracting attention
by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise.
(d) The word “person” as used in this article shall be construed to impart the singular and plural as the case demands,
and shall include corporations, companies, societies, associations and churches.
(e) Should the noise in question be the result of a necessary part of a city-sponsored activity, it shall be excepted from
the foregoing regulations.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 7.300 TRESPASS
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to go to, on or near the premises or private residence of any other person, without
the consent of the head of the family or person in charge of such private residence, and peep or look through any door,
window or other opening in said residence for the purpose of peeping or spying into said residence for said purpose; or to
go into or near said residence for the purpose of eavesdropping, or listening to the conversations of the occupants of said
private residence And it shall be unlawful for any person to peep through the windows of the private residence of any other
person for the purpose of spying or looking upon or at the inhabitants of said residence. (Ordinance 265, adopted 8/2/65,
Section 1)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor child to knowingly permit such child to go upon the
premises of another person or to go around the premises or private residence of another person, for the purpose of peeping
or looking into the private residence of another as above set forth, after such person or parent or guardian of any minor
child has been requested by the person in charge of said premises, or the local law enforcement officer acting on behalf of
any person or acting upon his own knowledge as violations herein, not to permit said child to go thereon. (Ordinance 265,
adopted 8/2/65, Section 2)
(c) Any person, violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 265, adopted 8/2/65, Section 4)
ARTICLE 7.400 FISHING
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from any public bridge, or within ten (10) feet from the pavement’s edge of
any road, street or highway located within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 380, adopted 4/6/87, Section 2)
(b) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall
be liable to a fine, and upon conviction of such violation, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 380, adopted 4/6/87, Section 3)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/301
ARTICLE 7.500 FIREARMS*
Sec. 7.501 Discharge Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm of any description within the
corporate limits of the city, except in the case of urgent necessity; provided, however, this prohibition shall not
apply to:
(1) Persons operating a public or private shooting gallery under an unrevoked permit issued by the chief of
police;
(2) Owners, or their authorized agents, discharging firearms on tracts or parcels of land containing ten (10)
acres, or more, under an unrevoked permit issued by the chief of police.
(Ordinance 373, adopted 2/17/86, Section 2)
Sec. 7.502 Permits to Discharge
(a) The chief of police may issue permits to:
(1) Bona fide persons desiring to establish or maintain public or private shooting galleries, such permits to
be for one (1) year and to remain in force for yearly periods thereafter, unless revoked by the chief of police.
(2) Bona fide owners, or their agents, of tracts or parcels of land containing ten (10) acres, or more, such
permits to be for one (1) year and to remain in force for yearly periods thereafter, unless revoked by the chief
of police.
(Ordinance 373, adopted 2/17/86, Section 3)
(b) Before any permit is issued by the chief of police to any person, he shall determine that such person is of good moral
character, and that such person shall maintain entirely safe and non-hazardous conditions on or about the premises in
question as the chief of police may reasonably prescribe. (Ordinance 373, adopted 2/17/86, Section 4)
Sec. 7.503 Penalty for Violations
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be liable to a fine, and upon
conviction of any such violation, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 373, adopted 2/17/86, Section 5)
Sec. 7.504 BB and Pellet Guns
Except as provided in Section 7.501 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
discharge any BB gun, pellet gun, air gun, sling shot or bow and arrow of any description within the corporate
limits of the city, except under the direct supervision of an adult. (Ordinance 407 adopted 8/3/92)
ARTICLE 7.600 CURFEW
Sec. 7.601 Purposes & Findings
(a) Purposes. The purposes of this article are to:
(1) protect minors from criminal activity that occurs after the curfew hour;
(2) protect minors from improper influences that prevail after the curfew hour;
(3) protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed after the curfew hour; and,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/301
(4) help parents, guardians, custodians, or other responsible persons, in carrying out their responsibility to
exercise reasonable supervision of the children entrusted to their care.
(b) Findings. Based on statistical information maintained by the city police department, the number of juveniles
involved in crime and juveniles who are victims of crime represent a substantial threat to the health, safety and peace of the
community which constitutes a compelling governmental interest for initiating this article.
(Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article I)
Sec. 7.602 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section:
Curfew Hours. Means:
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. the following
day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and,
(3) 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
Emergency. Means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate
action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Minor. Shall mean any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Operator. Means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or
conducting any establishment, including the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
Parent. Shall mean a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent, or the step-parent of a person. As used
herein, “parent” shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or
older and authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and
custody of a person.
Premises. Means the structure within which the establishment is housed.
Public Place. Means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes,
but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment house, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
(Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article II)
Sec. 7.603 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to intentionally or knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or
upon any public place in the City of Atlanta, Texas, during curfew hours.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the parent of a minor to knowingly permit, or by inefficient control to allow such minor to
remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the City of Atlanta, Texas during curfew hours.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/301
The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in that parent’s legal custody.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person to induce, encourage or assist a minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride
about, in or upon any public place in the City of Atlanta, Texas during curfew hours.
(d) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to enter
or to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article III)
Sec. 7.604 Exceptions & Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 7.602 of this article that, at the time of the act that otherwise would
constitute an offense:
(1) the minor was accompanied by his or her parent;
(2) the minor was accompanied by an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or older designated by his or her
parent;
(3) the minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency;
(4) the minor was attending a school, religious activity, or government sponsored activity, or going to or
coming from a school, religious, or government sponsored activity:
(5) the minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or volunteer work at a recognized charity
institution, or going to or coming from such activity without detour or stop;
(6) the minor was attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the City of Atlanta, Texas, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Atlanta, Texas, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(7) the minor was, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel, beginning, ending
or passing through Atlanta, Texas:
(8) the minor was on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, without any detour or stop;
(9) the minor was on the property or the sidewalk directly adjacent to the place where such minor resides or
the place immediately adjacent thereto if the owner or occupant of the adjacent building does not communicate
an objection to the minor and the police department;
(10) the minor was attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First and
Fourteenth Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, including, but not limited to the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly;
(11) the minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code;
(12) the minor was following the direction of a peace officer;
(13) with respect to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. only, that the offense occurred during the
school summer vacation break period of the school in which the minor is enrolled or on a holiday observed by
the closure of classes in the school in which the minor is enrolled or that the minor has graduated from high
school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or,
(14) in a prosecution under Section 7.603, the owner, operator or employee of the place of business
promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the business during the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/301
curfew hours and refused to leave.
(b) Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations, are severable, as hereinafter provided but
reemphasized here.
(Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article IV)
Sec. 7.605 Supplemental Effect
The provisions of this article are supplemental and shall be cumulative with all other laws and ordinances
applicable in any manner to juveniles. (Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article V)
Sec. 7.606 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in Section 7.603 is present. (Ordinance 443, adopted 1/18/95, Article VI)
Sec. 7.607 Penalties
(a) A minor who violates section 7.602(a) of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may be subject to appropriate action by a juvenile
court in accordance with sections 51.03 and 51.08 of the Texas Family Code and section 8.07 of the Texas Penal Code.
(b) A parent of a minor who violates section 7.603(b) of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(c) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during the
violation is committed, continued or permitted.
(d) In assessing punishment for either a parent or a minor, the municipal court judge may consider a community service
or teen court program.
(Ordinance 2014-007 adopted 12/1/14)
ARTICLE 7.700 ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 7.701 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Abandoned Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended
on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a
period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or
person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way
of a designated county, state, or federal highway within this state for more than 48 hours or for more than 12
hours on a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority.
Demolisher. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to
otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or
establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of a motor vehicle.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/301
Junked Vehicle.
(1) A motor vehicle as defined in section 1, chapter 42, General Laws, Acts of the 41st Legislature, 2nd
called session, 1929 (article 6701d-11, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes):
(A) Is inoperative; and
(B) Does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle
safety inspection certificate, that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or that
remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than 30 days.
(2) A motorized boat, or a boat that is intended to be operated with a motor, whether or not a motor is
attached, that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, or that is in a condition that is obviously
not seaworthy or usable for its intended and designed use.
(3) All sailboats, or other boats that are not motor driven or intended to be operated with a motor, fourteen
(14) feet in length or longer.
(4) A trailer of any type that is designed to be pulled or pushed by the use of a motorized vehicle that is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, or that is in a condition that is obviously not usable for
its intended and designed use.
(5) A motorized farm implement, or a farm implement that is intended to be operated with a motor, whether
or not a motor is attached, that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, or that is in a condition
that is obviously not usable for its intended or designed use, or that remains inoperable for a continuous period
of more than 45 days.
(Ordinance 2005-06 adopted 7/18/05)
Storage Facility. A garage, parking lot or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing,
storing, or parking of motor vehicles.
Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (article 6687-1, Vernon’s
Texas Civil Statutes), except that for purposes of this article, it shall also mean a motorboat, outboard motor, or
vessel subject to registration under chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code.
Antique Auto. A passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or a passenger car or truck that
is at least thirty-five (35) years old.
Special Interest Vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer’s specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Collector. The owner of one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Sec. 7.702 Abandoned Motor Vehicles to be Taken into Custody
The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property.
The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store
an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody.
Sec. 7.703 Notice to Owner and Lien Holders
(a) Upon the impoundment of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall notify within ten (10)
days thereof, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lien holders of
record that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model, and vehicle
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/301
identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor
vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later
than the twentieth day after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner or lien
holders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner
and lien holders of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor
vehicle at a public auction.
(b) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for the
owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lien holders, notice by
one (1) publication in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the city is sufficient notice under this article. The notice
by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be published within the time requirements
prescribed by certified mail, and shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail.
(c) The police department, or in the event the police department hires as its agent persons, equipment, and
facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody, is entitled to
reasonable storage fees for a period of not more than ten (10) days beginning on the date the department takes
custody and continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section, and a period
beginning on the day after the day the department mails notice and continuing through the day any accrued
charges are paid and the vehicle is removed.
Sec. 7.704 Sale of Abandoned Vehicles; Proceeds
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided above, the police department shall sell the
abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given. The purchaser
of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall
receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a
certificate of title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall
reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle that
resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred, if
any. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder
for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of
auction, towing, preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another
abandoned vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned motor vehicle are insufficient to
meet these expenses and costs.
Sec. 7.705 Garagekeepers and Abandoned Motor Vehicles
A motor vehicle left for more than ten (10) days in a storage facility operated for commercial purposes after
notice is given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to any lien holder of
record to pick up the vehicle or under any of the other circumstances of Section 5.05(a), Article 4477-9a,
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, shall be subject to the provisions of said Section 5.05.
Sec. 7.706 Disposal to Demolishers
Any person, firm, corporation, or unit of government on whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle and a person who is the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost,
or destroyed, may apply to the state department of highways and public transportation for authority to sell, give
away, or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher. The application shall be governed by Section 5.06, Article
4477-9a, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, as amended.
Sec. 7.707 Junked Vehicles as Public Nuisance; Penalty; Abatement
A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or a public right-of-way is
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites
vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/301
minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight, adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance. Any person, firm, or corporation
maintaining a public nuisance as defined above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject
to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code for each offense,
and each and every day the maintenance of such public nuisance shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense. Upon conviction in the municipal court of the City of Atlanta, Texas, the court shall order
removal and abatement of such public nuisance.
Sec. 7.708 Procedures for Abating Nuisance
(a) Upon complaint or upon its own initiative, the police department may initiate appropriate official action to
remove and abate a public nuisance in the nature of a junked vehicle. Upon initiation of the action, the owner
or occupant of the private premises (or the owner or occupant of the public premises or the owner or the
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way) whereupon the public nuisance exists, together
with the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle and any lien holder of record, shall be notified
by a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the City of Atlanta, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt
requested, that the nuisance exists, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days of the receipt of such
notice or that a request for hearing must be made by said owner or occupant before the expiration of the ten-day
period from the receipt of notice. If the notice is returned undelivered by the post office, further official action
to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(b) Upon request by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or the owner or occupant
adjacent to the public right-of-way, a public hearing shall be held before the municipal court of the City of
Atlanta for determination of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance and for the purpose of
entering an order requiring the removal of the same if found to be so. The judge of the municipal court shall be
the designated official to make such determination, and upon the finding that the vehicle is a junked vehicle and
constitutes a public nuisance, he shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or a part thereof. Said
order must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if the information is available at the site.
(c) When the junked vehicle is declared a public nuisance by the municipal judge and is ordered to be
removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(d) Notice shall be given to the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation not later than the fifth
day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part which was removed.
(e) The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or a part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle
part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle
dealer or junk yard, or an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the
collector’s property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a
health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other
appropriate means.
(f) The procedures of this article shall be carried out and enforced by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the City
of Atlanta, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be done by any other duly authorized
person, including persons with whom the city may at the time of the passage of this article or hereafter have a valid
contract for the removal of such vehicles.
Sec. 7.709 Disposal of Junked Vehicles
A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site
operated by the city or county for processing as scrap or salvage.
Sec. 7.710 Authority to Enforce
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/301
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this article may enter private property for the
purposes specified herein to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the
vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as defined herein. The
judge of the municipal court of the City of Atlanta may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures of this
article.
Sec. 7.711 Vehicles Obstructing Traffic
No provision of this article shall affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a
vehicle left on public property.
Sec. 7.712 Non-applicability of State Law Regarding Vehicle Storage Facilities
The city council of the City of Atlanta hereby determines and provides by this section that the provisions of
Article 6687-9a, the Vehicle Storage Facility Act, and the rules adopted under such article by the Texas
Department of Labor and Standards shall not apply inside the limits of the City of Atlanta.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 7.800 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES*
(a) No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle in a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway, whether public
or private property, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that
the sound is plainly audible at a distance of thirty or more feet from the vehicle.
(b) Sound amplification system. Means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, or other electronic
device used for the amplification of sound.
(c) Plainly audible. Means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle, which clearly
can be heard at a distance of thirty feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based on direct
line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be
stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, on either public or private
property.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from
operating the sound amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
(1) The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous
road condition;
(2) The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
(3) The vehicle was owned and operated by a public utility company, including the City of Atlanta, Texas;
or
(4) The system or vehicle was used in an authorized public activity such a parade, fireworks, sporting event,
musical production, or other activity which has the approval of the city council or a department of the city
authorized to grant such approval.
(e) Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in
the municipal court of the city shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of
this code. Each day of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance 97-10, adopted 1/8/98)
ARTICLE 7.900 SMOKING
Sec. 7.901 City-Owned Buildings
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/301
(a) Definitions.
(1) City-owned buildings are those buildings or facilities that are operated, owned or managed in part or
whole by the city.
(2) Public service areas are those areas of a city-owned building that are generally accessible to the public.
(b) Prohibition. A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product
in the public service area of any city-owned building.
(c) Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the city-owned building, facility, or property in or on
which the offense takes place does not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking is prohibited or
that the building, facility, or property is a tobacco free zone.
(d) Penalty. Violation of any provisions hereof shall be a misdemeanor and subject to the general penalty provisions of
Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2007-04 adopted 7/2/07)
ARTICLE 7.1000 SEX OFFENDERS
Sec. 7.1001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning described to them in
this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Child or Children. An individual younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child Safety Zone. Public parks, private and public schools, public libraries, amusement arcades, video arcades,
indoor and outdoor amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semiprivate swimming
pools, child-care facilities, child-care institutions, public or private youth soccer or baseball fields, crisis centers
or shelters, skate parks or rinks, public or private youth centers, movie theaters, bowling alleys, scouting
facilities, offices for child protective services, and any other place where children regularly congregate.
Day-Care Facility. Includes “child-care institution,” a “day-care center” and/or a “group day-care home” as
those terms are defined by section 42.002, Human Resources Code.
Loiter. Whether on foot, on bicycle, or in a vehicle wandering or remaining idle in essentially one location,
including sitting, lounging, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or repeatedly frequenting the same location, or
repeatedly circling or driving by on a bicycle or in a motor vehicle.
Minor. A person younger than seventeen years of age.
Park. Public parks, public recreation facilities and ball fields, school athletic facilities and playgrounds, and
youth centers whether public or private where children are known to regularly congregate.
Permanent Residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
Sex Offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for sexual offense
involving a child for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under Chapter 62, Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure.
Temporary Residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) days or
more in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person’s permanent address, or place where
the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive
days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent residence.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/301
Sec. 7.1002 Residence
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of
a school, day-care facility, or park.
(b) The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the
sex offender’s residence to the closest boundary line of the school, day-care facility, or park.
(c) Exceptions.
(1) A person, required to register as a sex offender, established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and residency has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the sex
offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
(2) A person, required to register as a sex offender, established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and residency has been consistently maintained and the school, day-care facility, or park is newly
constructed or located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sex offender’s residence.
(3) A person, required to register as a sex offender, is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under
guardianship who resides with a parent or guardian.
Sec. 7.1003 Entering or Loitering Around a Child Safety Zone
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to loiter within three hundred (300) feet of a child safety zone when a child is
present.
(b) It is an offense for a sex offender to enter a child safety zone when a child is present.
(c) The distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the sex offender’s location to the
closest boundary line of the child safety zone.
(d) Exceptions.
(1) The person, required to register as a sex offender, is accompanying a child and is the parent or legal
guardian of said child.
(2) The person, required to register as a sex offender, is dropping off or picking up a child registered at the
facility and is the parent or legal guardian of said child.
(3) The person, required to register as a sex offender, is in active transit in a motor vehicle on a public street
that is a direct route between two locations at which the person had legitimate business.
Sec. 7.1004 Culpable Mental State Not Required
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article.
Sec. 7.1005 Penalty
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article or rule promulgated pursuant to this article shall
be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section
1.106 of the code.
(Ordinance 2008-01 adopted 3/17/08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/301
CHAPTER 8
PERSONNEL & ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 8.100 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT*
(a) Each council-appointed employee shall be required to live within the corporate limits of the city during his or her
tenure in said office or position of employment. However, it is specifically provided that the holders of such offices or
positions of employment need not, when appointed, be residents of the city. The residency requirement shall not apply to
current holders of such positions who reside outside the city limits, but shall apply to those currently living in the city
limits.
(b) In order to ensure prompt response to a civil emergency, all department heads shall hereafter be required to live
within fifteen minutes of the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.200 HOSPITAL AUTHORITY
Sec. 8.201 Creation
It is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority to be comprised of the
territory included within the boundaries of the city, and said hospital authority is hereby created and the same
shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of Atlanta Hospital Authority, which is hereby designated
as the name by which said authority shall be known.
Sec. 8.202 Board of Directors
The Atlanta Hospital Authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of nine (9) members; and
each of said directors shall, unless other provisions are made in the bond resolution or indenture in connection
with the issuance of bonds as provided in the aforementioned act, serve for a term of two (2) years. The city
council shall appoint four (4) directors and the Atlanta Hospital Authority shall appoint five (5) directors. Each
of the directors herein appointed shall qualify by executing oath of office required of appointed officials of the
state.
(Ordinance 2014-01 adopted 2/3/14)
ARTICLE 8.300 POLICE RESERVE FORCE*
Sec. 8.301 Appointment and Service
Members of the reserve force shall be appointed at the discretion of the chief of police; that members of the
police reserve force shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. (Ordinance 342,
adopted 4/21/80, Section I)
Sec. 8.302 Qualifications
The city council shall establish qualifications and standards for training of the members of the police reserve
force. (Ordinance 342, adopted 4/21/80, Section II)
Sec. 8.303 Carrying Weapons
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/301
No person appointed to the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he
has been approved by the city council. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief
of police, and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. (Ordinance 342, adopted
4/21/80, Section III)
Sec. 8.304 Police Chief to Command
Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into
service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and
enforce the law. (Ordinance 342, adopted 4/21/80, Section IV)
Sec. 8.305 Supplementary Role
Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case
assume the full time duties of regular police officers without further complying with all requirements for such
regular police officers. (Ordinance 342, adopted 4/21/80, Section V)
Sec. 8.306 Special Police Force Not Affected
This article does not limit the power of the mayor to summon into service a special police force as may
otherwise be authorized by law. (Ordinance 342, adopted 4/21/80, Section VI)
ARTICLE 8.400 SOCIAL SECURITY FUND
(a) The city council acting for and on behalf of the City of Atlanta shall enter into all necessary agreements with the
State Department of Public Welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the above mentioned acts.
(b) Hon. F. P. Ellis, mayor, is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary
agreements and instruments for and in behalf of said city council and city.
(c) The city secretary Eula Aken, is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections,
payments, and reports, as required by the State Department of Public Welfare.
(d) A sufficient sum of money be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of the above mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be know as the City of Atlanta Social
Security Fund, which funds shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository.
(Ordinance 240 adopted 10/1/51)
ARTICLE 8.500 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 8.501 Firefighters Relief and Retirement Fund
(a) The city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas, on behalf of said city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the
city and all of the employees of all departments now existing, with the exception of those employees covered under the
Firemen’s Relief and Retirement Fund, and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System
as provided in the TMRS Act. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section 1)
(b) The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that
the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system. (Ordinance 409, adopted
10/5/92, Section 2)
(c) Each person who becomes an employee of a participating city on or after the effective date of participation of such
city whose position shall require more than 1,000 hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System as a condition of their employment. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section 3)
(d) In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement
System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/301
of (5%) of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section 4)
(e) Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed “prior service credit” (as defined in Section 853.101 of
the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of the “base credit” of such member, calculated in the manner
prescribed in Section 853.101 of said act. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section 5)
(f) For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of Texas
Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the
time of his or her retirement, a sum that is 100% of such member’s accumulated deposits for such month of employment;
and said sum shall be contributed from the city’s account in the municipality accumulation fund. (Ordinance 409, adopted
10/5/92, Section 6)
(g) The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at
its office in Austin, Texas, the city contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the
compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said Board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said
official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this city the prior service rendered
to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and
certifications which may be required of the city under provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section
7)
Sec. 8.502 Supplemental Death Benefits Fund
(a) The city hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System for the purpose of providing inservice death benefits for each of the city’s employees who are members of said
system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment was
as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Sections 852.004, 854.601 through 854.605,
855.314, 855.408, and 855.502 of Title 110B, Title 8 of the Government Code, as amended. (Ordinance 409, adopted
10/5/92, Section 8)
(b) The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this article, and of the
participation of the city in said fund. (Ordinance 409, adopted 10/5/92, Section 9)
Sec. 8.503 Authorization of Updated Service Credits
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, as amended, (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the
system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in
the employment of the city (hereinafter called the “city”) and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with
the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section
853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible
for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current
service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing
member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance shall be credited with updated service
credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to
the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this article.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated service credit” of
the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special
prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1994, subject to approval
by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/301
this article ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such
subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the
TMRS Act.
(f) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be
made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated
from and after the effective date of this article on the full amount of such person’s compensation as an employee of the
city.
(Ordinance 427, adopted 12/20/93, Section 1)
(g) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this article shall be and become effective on the 1st day of
January, 1994. (Ordinance 427, adopted 12/20/93, Section 2)
Sec. 8.504 Increase in Retirement Annuities
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 854.203 and 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as
amended (hereinafter referred to as the TMRS Act), the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the
increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased
employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to
the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same
person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service
annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of
the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately
preceding the effective date of the person’s retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of the
increase under this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in
the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will
not be changed hereunder.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an
obligation of the city and of is account in the Municipality accumulation fund of the System.
(f) The initial increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1999, subject to approval by the
Board of Trustees of the System. An increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each
subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided
that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the System has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of
Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, and provided further that, as to such subsequent year, the city has an ordinance in effect
that provides for a simultaneous increase in updated service credits as that term is used in the TMRS Act.
(g) Subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the System, this section shall be and become effective on the 1st day
of January 1999.
(Ordinance 98-03 adopted 8/3/98)
(h) Authorization of Restricted Prior Service Credit.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government
Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the TMRS Act), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter referred to as the system) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of the city
shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the
entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that:
(A) The person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/301
(B) The service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305; and
(2) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for
retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and
may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits; and
(3) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action
required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 4/20/09)
Sec. 8.505 Additional Rights Authorized – 2002
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended,
which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the City of Atlanta, Texas, adopts the following
provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to
as the “System”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service
retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or
more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has:
(A) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and
(B) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter
551, Texas Government Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in
force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 2002-09 adopted 12/16/02)
ARTICLE 8.600 EMPLOYEE INDEMNIFICATION
Sec. 8.601 Definitions
For purposes of this article the term, “officer” shall include any elected or appointed official of the city, and the
term “employee” shall include all employees of the city, including firemen and policemen. (Ordinance 412,
adopted 3/15/93, Section 1)
Sec. 8.602 Indemnification
Any officer or employee who is liable for the payment of any claims or damages, excluding punitive damages,
arising out of the course and scope of employment shall be entitled to indemnification by the city provided that
the acts or omissions resulting in such liability were done in good faith and without malicious or felonious
intent. For the purposes of this article, the term “arising out of the course and scope of employment” shall not
include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside
employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city. Whether the acts were done in
good faith, without malicious or felonious intent, and within the course and scope of employment shall be
determined by the city. If, upon a trial on the merits, the city determines that the officer or employee was acting
in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent and within the scope of employment, the indemnification
hereunder shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. The
city shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the city
reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient.
Payments under this provisions of this article may not exceed $100,000 to any one person or $300,000 for any
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/301
single occurrence in the case of personal injury or death or $10,000 for a single occurrence of property damage.
(Ordinance 412, adopted 3/15/93, Section 2)
Sec. 8.603 Representation in Action
The city shall have the right and duty to provide legal representation through the city attorney, or in its discretion
through the selection of outside legal counsel, to any officer or employee sued in connection with any claim for
damages or other civil action against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment, provided
that such officer or employee is entitled to indemnification as set forth in this article. Such legal representation
shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee, and any officer or employee may have his or her own
counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the officer or employee. The officer or employee shall
cooperate fully with the city in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall waive
such officer’s or employee’s right to representation and indemnity under this article. (Ordinance 412, adopted
3/15/93, Section 3)
Sec. 8.604 City’s Defenses
Nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the city’s defense of governmental immunity to it or its
employees or officers in any action brought against the city or such officer or employee. For any suit or claim
arising under the Texas Tort Claims Act, the indemnity provided by this article shall be limited to the statutory
limits applicable to the city provided in said act, as amended. (Ordinance 412, adopted 3/15/93, Section 4)
Sec. 8.605 Notice
The provisions of this article shall apply only where the city has been given notice of the action brought against
any city officer or employee within ten (10) days of service or process upon the office or employee. (Ordinance
412, adopted 3/15/93, Section 5)
Sec. 8.606 Disciplinary Actions
Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from taking disciplinary action against any officer or employee for
conduct defended or indemnified by the city under this article, either before or after conclusion of a civil suit.
(Ordinance 412, adopted 3/15/93, Section 6)
Sec. 8.607 Suits in Behalf of City
Nothing in this article shall require the city to indemnify any officer or employee for recoveries made against
him or her in suits by or on behalf of the city. The city council may, however, authorize the city attorney to
represent any officer or employee in a suit brought by a taxpayer in behalf of the city against the officer or
employee. (Ordinance 412, adopted 3/15/93, Section 7)
ARTICLE 8.700 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Sec. 8.701 Creation
Under the provisions of Vernon’s Civil Statutes, Article 5190.6, Section 4B, the Development Corporation Act
of 1979, the establishment of the Section 4B Atlanta Economic Development Corporation is hereby authorized
and authority to make application to the Secretary of State for Articles of Incorporation for a non-profit
corporate charter is granted. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 1)
Sec. 8.702 Board of Directors
(a) The board of directors of the corporation shall consist of seven (7) directors who shall be appointed by the city
council for two-year terms of office. A director may be removed without cause by the city council at any time. Three (3)
directors shall be persons who are not employees, officers, or members of the city council of Atlanta. (Ordinance 2010-02
adopted 3/1/10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/301
(b) The mayor, city manager, and city attorney may serve as advisory directors or ex-officio members of the board
without voting powers. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 3)
Sec. 8.703 Quorum; Officers
A majority of the entire membership of the board of directors shall constitute a quorum. The board of directors
shall conduct each of its meetings within the boundaries of the city. The board shall elect from among its
members a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and shall adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules
and regulations governing its proceedings as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be
inconsistent with the laws of the State of Texas nor Ordinances of the city, subject to approval by the city
council. The board shall appoint a secretary who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary
shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 4)
Sec. 8.704 Budget
The board shall prepare an annual budget and timely submit such budget to the city council for approval The
finance department of the city shall maintain all funds of the corporation and shall provide the corporation with
accounting services as may be directed by the city council. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 5)
Sec. 8.705 Studies by Board
The board shall from time to time make general studies related to the needs and requirements for the promotion
and development of new and expanding business enterprises as provided in the act, included, but not limited, to
streets, drainage and sidewalks, demolition of existing structures, general improvements for municipally owned
property, and any other improvements as may be determined to be contributing to the promotion or development
of new and expanding business enterprises. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 6)
Sec. 8.706 Financial Interests of Board Members
Any member of the board of directors who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of
ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the corporation, or in the sale of any land, material,
supplies or services to the corporation or to a contractor supplying the corporation shall make known that
interest to the board and the city council, and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his
capacity as a director in the making of such sale or in the awarding or performance of such contract. (Ordinance
454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 7)
Sec. 8.707 Board to Serve Without Compensation
Members of the board of directors shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of such board, when
authorized by the city council. (Ordinance 454, adopted 7/18/95, Section 8)
CHAPTER 9
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE 9.100 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE RETAINED
The City of Atlanta Subdivision Ordinance, as adopted by Ordinance 289 of January 18, 1971, is included as
Exhibit “A” to this chapter. Due to the technical nature of this ordinance, it has been printed for inclusion herein
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/301
exactly as adopted and subsequently amended, and is specifically saved from repeal. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT “A”
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES, REGULATIONS, AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR
DEVELOPMENT OF SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS, OR WITHIN AN
AREA WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS: AND CREATING A
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR SAID CITY AND DEFINING SUBDIVISIONS AND CREATING
CERTAIN MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS WHICH MUST BE PERFORMED AND COMPLIED WITH BY
DEVELOPERS AND SUBDIVIDERS BEFORE ANY PLAT OF ANY SUBDIVISION WILL BE ACCEPTED
OR APPROVED BY THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS, AND SETTING SPECIFICATIONS AND
BUILDING RESTRICTIONS WHICH MUST BE COMPLIED WITH BEFORE ANY SUBDIVISION WILL
BE ACCEPTED BY THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS, AND REQUIRING FULL COMPLIANCE WITH
THIS ORDINANCE AND THE TERMS HEREIN BEFORE ANY CITY OWNED UTILITIES WILL BE
CONNECTED TO ANY SUBDIVISION OR HOUSE OR RESIDENCE THEREIN AND PROVIDING A
PENALTY FOR ANY VIOLATION OF THE TERMS OF SAID ORDINANCE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA, TEXAS
SECTION 1. Authority.
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including
particularly chapters 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter
amended (compiled as Article 974a, V.T.C.S.), and the provisions of Section 4 of the Municipal Annexation Act
as heretofore or hereafter amended (compiled as Article 970a, V.T.C.S.). This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to
the provisions of section 2.09 of the Charter of the City.
SECTION 2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the
City and within the area surrounding the City and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the community.
SECTION 3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section:
A. Alley: A minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is
used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
B. Building Setback Line: The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and
the adjacent street line.
C. City: The City of Atlanta, Texas
D. Commission: The Planning Commission of the City.
E. Crosswalk Way: A public right-of-way, 6 feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian
circulation.
F. Cul-de-sac: A street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/301
G. Dead-end street: A street other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
H. Engineer: A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or
hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
I. Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be
offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is
identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record.
J. Pavement Width: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between
the face of curbs.
K. Person: Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision.
L. Shall, May: The word “shall” is always mandatory. The word “may” is merely directory.
M. Street: A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land.
(1) An “arterial street” primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the City.
(2) A “collector street” primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor
streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
(3) A “marginal access street” is a street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which
primarily provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4) A “minor street” is one used primarily for access to abutting residential property.
N. Subdivider: Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as
that term is defined herein. In any event, the term “subdivider” shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable
owner or authorized agent of such owner of equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided.
(Ordinance adopted 1/18/71)
O. Subdivision: A Subdivision of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within one (1) mile of such
limits, in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any Subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any Town
or City, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for
public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. Subdivision includes
resubdivision, but it does not include the division of land for agriculture purposes in parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or
more and not involving any new street, alley, or easement of access. (Ordinance 328, adopted 5/77)
P. Surveyor: A licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Public Surveyor, as authorized by the State statutes to
practice the profession of surveying.
Q. Utility Easement: An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility
corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon
with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities.
R. Any office referred to in this Ordinance by title means the person employed or appointed by the City in that position,
or his duly authorized representative.
S. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal
planning and engineering practices.
SECTION 4. Special Provisions.
A. No permit shall be issued by the City for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision for which a
final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained
herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/301
B. No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a
subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a
subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
C. The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for
which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to
herein have not been complied with in full.
D. The City shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity, or sewerage service within a subdivision for which a final
plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not
been complied with in full.
E. In behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect
to any violation thereof which occurs within the City, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as such jurisdiction
as determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
F. If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained, herein or
referred to herein have not been complied with in full, and the City Council of the city shall pass a resolution reciting the
fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of paragraphs
A, B, C, and D of this Section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the City Secretary shall, when directed by
the City Council of the City cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the
Deed Records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat
approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the Deed
Records of such county or counties stating that paragraphs A, B, C, and D no longer apply.
G. Provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for
any lots upon which a residence building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this subdivision ordinance, nor to
prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last
recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this Ordinance was by metes and bounds and/or any subdivision, or lot
therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was inexistence prior to the passage of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. Variances. The Planning Commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in
its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the Commission
shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the
findings herein below required, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the
land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the
proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public
health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Commission
finds:
A. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the
provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and
B. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
C. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other
property in the area; and
D. That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the
area in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such findings of the Commission, together with the specific facts
upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Commission meeting at which
such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
SECTION 6. Preliminary Conference. Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider should
consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the Planning Commission or its designated
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/301
representative for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the City for
the subdivision of land.
SECTION 7. Preliminary Plat and Accompanying Data.
A. General. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a surveyor or engineer in accordance with
this Ordinance.
B. Time for Filing and Copies Required. The subdivider shall file 6 blue or black line copies of the plat together with
the original, with the Commission at least 10 days prior to the date at which formal application for the preliminary plat
approval is made to the Commission.
C. Filing Fees. Such plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $5.00 per plat, plus $0.50 per lot. The fee shall be
$2.00 per acre for multiple dwelling area, commercial or industrial districts, and other areas not subdivided into lots. No
action by the Commission shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded should the
subdivider fail to make formal application for preliminary plat approval or should the plat be disapproved.
D. Formal Application. Formal application for preliminary plat approval shall be made by the subdivider in writing to
the Commission at an official meeting.
E. Form and Content. The plat shall be drawn on sheets 22 inches wide and 3 inches long, with a binding margin of not
less than 2 inches on the left side of the sheet and margins on the other three sides of not less than 2 inches. The plat shall
be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one (1) inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an
index sheet showing the entire subdivision at any appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. The plat shall show the
following:
(1) Names and addresses of the subdivider, record owner, engineer and/or surveyor.
(2) Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar
to the name of any other subdivision located within the City or within five (5) miles of the City.
(3) Names of contiguous subdivisions and the owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, and an
indication of whether or not contiguous properties are platted.
(4) Description, by metes and bounds, of the subdivision.
(5) Primary control points or descriptions, and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred.
(6) Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the computed acreage of the subdivision.
(7) Existing sites as follows:
(a) The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys,
reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous
with its boundaries or forming such boundaries.
(b) The exact location, dimensions, description and name of all existing or recorded residential lots,
parks, public areas, permanent structures and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision.
(c) The exact location, dimensions, description, and flow line of existing water courses and drainage
structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts.
(8) The exact location, dimensions, description, and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage
structures, parks, other public area, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites
within the subdivision.
(9) Date of preparation, scale of plat and north arrow.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/301
(10) Topographical information shall include contour lines on a basis of 5 vertical feet in terrain with a
slope of 2 per cent or more, and on a basis of 2 vertical feet in terrain with a slope of less than 2 per cent. Any
tract of 2 acres or less shall not require topographical information.
(11) A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block.
(12) Front building setback lines on all lots and sites. Side yard building setback lines at street intersections
and crosswalk ways.
(13) Location of city limits line, the outer border of the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, and zoning district
boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision, or are contiguous to
such boundary.
(14) Vicinity sketch or map at a scale of not more than 2000 feet to an inch which shall show existing
subdivision, streets, easements, rights-of-way, parks and public facilities in the vicinity, the general drainage
plan and ultimate destination of water, and possible storm sewer, water, gas, electric and sanitary sewer
connections by arrows.
F. Processing of Preliminary Plat.
(1) The Planning Commission or its designated representative shall check the preliminary plat as to
conformity with the master plan, major street plan, land use plan, zoning districts and the standards and
specifications set forth herein or referred to herein.
(2) The Planning Commission shall forward the preliminary plat data to the City Council with their
suggestions as to modifications, additions or alterations of such plat data.
(3) Within thirty (30) days after the preliminary plat is formally filed, the City Council shall conditionally
approve or disapprove such plat or conditionally approve it with modifications. if it is conditionally
disapproved or conditionally approved with modifications, the City Council shall inform the subdivider, in
writing, of the reasons at the time such action is taken.
(4) Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the Council shall be deemed an expression of approval of
the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other
required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or record plat. Conditional approval of a
preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat.
(5) Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for two years unless review by the
commission in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the
preliminary plat. if the commission should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, it shall so inform
the council. The council shall inform the subdivider in writing.
(6) If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed plat after two years of effective
approval the council may, upon the application of the subdivider, extend the approval one year.
SECTION 8. Final Plat
A. Form and Content.
(1) The final plat and accompanying data shall conform to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved
by the Council incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions
imposed by the Council.
(2) The plat shall be drawn on sheets 22 inches wide and 3 inches long, with a binding margin of not less
than 2 inches on the left side of the sheets and margins on the other three sides of not less than 2 inches. The
plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one (1) inches. Where more than one sheet is necessary to
accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be
attached to the plat.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/301
(3) Three copies of the final plat shall be submitted and shall contain all of the features required for
preliminary plats in Section 7 above and it shall be accompanied by site improvement data bearing the seal of
an engineer and detailed cost estimates.
(4) The final plat and the accompanying site improvement data and detailed cost estimates shall be
approved by the Council.
(5) In addition to the various requirements for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall also include the
following:
(a) The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys,
reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous
with its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and
radii, area, and central angle, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where
appropriate.
(b) The exact location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage
structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and
other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, area,
and central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where appropriate.
(6) When filed, the final plat shall be accompanied by the following site improvement data. All plans and
engineering calculations shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer.
(a) Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks. Crosswalk Ways & Monuments - - copies of plans and profiles of all
streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalk ways, and monuments, and copies of detailed cost estimates.
(b) Sanitary Sewers.
1. Three (3) copies of the proposed plat, showing 2 foot contours and the proposed location and
dimensions of existing sanitary sewer lines.
2. Three (3) copies of plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer lines, indicating depth and
grades of lines.
3. When a separate sewer system or treatment plant is proposed, three (3) copies of proposed
plans and specifications.
4. One copy of detailed cost estimates.
(c) Water Lines.
1. Three (3) copies of the proposed plat showing 2 foot contours and the location and size of
existing water lines and fire hydrants.
2. Three (3) copies of plans and profiles of all proposed water lines and fire hydrants, showing
depths and grades of the lines.
3. When a separate water system is planned, or when connections is proposed to a water system
other than to the City water system, 3 copies of the plans, including fire hydrants, of the proposed
system.
4. Three (3) copies of detailed cost estimates.
(d) Storm Drainage.
1. Three (3) copies of the proposed plat, indicating 2 foot contours. All street widths and grades
shall be indicated on the plat, and runoff figures shall be indicated on the outlet and inlet side of
all drainage ditches and storm sewers, and at all points in the street at changes of grade or where
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/301
the water enters another street or storm sewer or drainage ditch. Drainage easements shall be
indicated.
2. A general location map of the subdivision showing the entire watershed (a U.S.G.S.
quadrangle is satisfactory.)
3. Calculations showing the anticipated storm water flow, including watershed area, per cent
runoff, and time of concentration. When a drainage ditch or storm sewer is proposed, calculations
shall be submitted showing basis for design.
4. When a drainage channel or storm sewer is proposed, complete plans, profiles, and
specifications shall be submitted, showing complete construction details.
5. When conditions upstream or downstream from a proposed channel or storm sewer do not
permit maximum design flow, high water marks based on a twenty-five year frequency, shall be
indicated based on existing conditions.
6. Three (3) copies of detailed cost estimates.
7. The final plat shall also include the following:
(a) Owner’s Acknowledgment:
State of Texas
County of _______________
I (we) the undersigned, owner (s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the
__________________________ subdivision to the City of Atlanta, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto,
hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and
public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed.
_________________________________
Owner
State of Texas
County of ______________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared _____________, known to me to be the
person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the
same for the purposes and considerations therein states.
Given under my hand and seal of office this _______ day of _____________19___.
Notary Public, ____________County, Texas
(b) Certification by the City Manager
I, the undersigned, City Manager, of the City of Atlanta, Texas hereby certify that this subdivision
plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which his
approval is required.
________________________________
City Manager
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/301
(c) Approval of the Council of the City:
This plat ________________________ has been submitted to and considered by the Council of the City of
Atlanta, Texas, and is hereby approved by such Council.
Date this _______ day of ______________, 19___.
BY: _____________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
_________________________________
Secretary
(d) Certification of the surveyor responsible for surveying the subdivision area, attesting to its
accuracy:
State of Texas
County of _________________
I, the undersigned, a (registered professional engineer/public surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that
this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision
on the ground.
(Engineer or _______________________________
Surveyor’s Seal) Registered Professional Engineer
or
Registered Public Surveyor
(e) A certificate by the engineer responsible for the preparation of the final plat and supporting
data, attesting to its accuracy:
State of Texas
County of ______________
I, the undersigned, a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering
consideration has been given this plat.
________________________________
Registered Professional Engineer
(Engineer’s Seal)
B. Processing of Final Plat.
(1) If desired by the subdivider and approved by the council, the final plat may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop. However, such portion shall
conform to all the requirements of this Ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/301
(2) As soon as practical after the subdivider is notified of the approval of the preliminary plat, his engineer
shall submit to the council at an official meeting the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof.
(3) No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been submitted. However, if an approved
plat has been duly recorded and the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining two or
more lots or by combining one lot with a portion of the adjacent lot in such manner that no portion of a lot
remains smaller than the original lots, no preliminary plat will be necessary.
(4) A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the Council within
two years of the date of approval of preliminary plat, otherwise the approval of the Council shall become null
and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Council.
(5) When the final plat is filed with the council for approval, it shall be accompanied by the following fees:
(a) $5.00 per plat, plus $0.25 per lot.
(b) For multiple dwelling areas, commercial and/or industrial districts and other areas not subdivided
into lots the fee shall be $2.00 per acre.
(6) Within thirty (30) days after the final plat is formally filed, the Council shall approve or disapprove such
plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the Council shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons at the
time such action is taken.
(7) After the final plat has been finally approved and the subdivider has constructed all the required
improvements and such improvements have been approved, and a maintenance bond filed as hereinafter
provided; or after the plat has been finally approved and the subdivider has filed the security and maintenance
bond, hereinafter provided, the Council shall cause the final plat to be recorded with the County Clerk or
clerks in the county or counties in which the subdivision lies. The Council shall also cause the check or checks
for the recordation fee or fees deposited at the time the final plat was filed for approval to be delivered with the
final plat to the County Clerk. No plat shall be filed for record without written consent of the subdivider. If the
subdivider fails to give such written consent within 90 days of the date of final approval of the plat, the
Council may at any time thereafter cancel such approval.
(Ordinance 329 adopted 1/18/71)
SECTION 8.1 Additional Notice and Hearing Requirements for Certain Replats
A. Notification Requirement for Certain Replats. Where any of the area to be resubdivided or replatted was, within the
immediate preceding five (5) years, limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more
than two dwelling units per lot, or if any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not
more than two residential units per lot, then the following additional procedures shall apply:
1. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in Cass County.
2. Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owners (according to the most recently
approved ad valorem tax roll) of all lots that are within the original subdivision and that are within 200 feet of
the lots to be replatted, together with a copy of Section 212.01 5(c) in the Local Government Code for the
State of Texas.
3. If the proposed replat is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must receive, in
order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present of the City Planning
Commission and/or City Council, as applicable. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners
of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed
replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the
municipal authority responsible for approving the replat, prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing
this percentage of land area, the area of streets and alleys shall be included within the adjacent lots.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/301
4. Compliance with subsection 3 above is not required for approval of a replat of part of a preceding plat, if
the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single or two-family residential use, by
notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
SECTION 8.2 Exception to Plat Requirements
The plat preparation requirements contained herein shall not be applicable in those cases where the land being
divided into parts is greater than five (5) acres and each part has access and no public improvements are being
dedicated. (Ordinance adopting Code)
SECTION 9. Guarantee of Performance.
A. Approval of any such plan, plat or replat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedication and shall not
impose a duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper
authorities of the City shall have made actual appropriation of the same by entry, use and improvement. Unless and until
any such plan, plat or replat shall have been first approved in the manner and by the authorities provided for in this
ordinance, it shall be unlawful within the area covered by said plan, plat or replat of any officials of the City of Atlanta to
issue any building permits or to serve or connect said land or any part thereof, or for the use of the owners or purchasers of
said land or any part thereof, with any public utility which may be owned or controlled or distributed by the City of
Atlanta.
B. No final plat shall be approved by the City Council or the Planning Commission until all requirements and
conditions of this Ordinance have been complied with in full by all subdividers and developers and no city-owned utilities
shall be extended to or connected to any subdivision, tract, or lot or parcel of land or house thereon not shown on a
recorded and approved plat and no city-owned utilities shall be extended to or granted to any subdivision, subdivider or
developer or to any land or lot or house or residence in any subdivision until said subdivision and/or developer complies
with all the necessary requirements, conditions and rules and regulations of this Ordinance.
C. All construction under this Ordinance shall be inspected by the appropriate city official so designated by the City
Council and must be approved by the City Manager and/or the designated official of the City. A certificate by such official
stating that the construction conforms to the specifications and restrictive covenants herein must be presented to the City
Council prior to approval of the final plat.
SECTION 10. Standards and Specifications.
No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the Council and no completed improvements shall be accepted
by the City Manager unless they conform to the following standards and specifications:
A. General.
(1) Conformity with comprehensive plan. The subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the
City of Atlanta and the parts thereof.
(2) Provision for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots,
such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets.
(3) Reserve strips prohibited. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or
intended to be dedicated to public use.
B. Streets.
(1) Street layout. Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider and the arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade, and location of each shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the City and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and
convenience, and their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The
street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/301
(2) Relation to adjoining street system. There necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in
adjoining areas shall be continued, and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment
therewith.
(3) Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the
subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas.
(4) Street jogs. Whenever possible, street jogs with center line offsets of less than 130 feet shall be avoided.
(5) Half-streets or adjacent streets. In the case of collector, minor or marginal access streets, no new
halfstreets shall be platted.
(6) Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due
regard to terrain and topography.
(7) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion.
(8) Cul-de-sacs. In general, cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length, and shall have a turnaround of
not less than 100 feet in diameter in residential areas, and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and
industrial areas.
(9) Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision has frontage on an arterial street, there shall be provided a
marginal access street on both sides or on the subdivision side of the arterial street, if the arterial street borders
the subdivision, unless the adjacent lots back up to the arterial street, or unless the Council determines that
such marginal access streets are not desirable under the facts of a particular case for adequate protection of the
lots and separation of through and local traffic.
(10) Streets on comprehensive plan. Where a subdivision embraces a street as shown on the comprehensive
plan of the City, such street shall be platted in the location and of the width indicated by the comprehensive
plan.
(11) Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic.
(12) Pavement widths and rights-of-way. Pavement widths and rights-of-way shall be as follows:
(a) Minor streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 40 feet and a pavement width of at least 20 feet.
(b) Nonresidential marginal access streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 40 feet and a
pavement width of at least 2g feet.
(c) Residential marginal access streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 40 feet and a
pavement width of at least 20 feet.
(13) Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision
(adjacent) shall be as follows:
(a) The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way of 50 feet in width for new adjacent arterial streets,
and 30 feet of such right-of-way shall be paved.
(b) New adjacent collector, minor or marginal access streets shall conform to Paragraph B(12) of this
Section.
(c) Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half-street that does not conform
to Paragraph B(12) of this Section, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full
right-of-way width conform to such paragraph, and there shall be paved so much of such right-of-way as
to make the full pavement width comply with such paragraph. Before any pavement is laid to widen
existing pavements, the existing pavement shall be cut back 2 feet to assure an adequate sub-base and
pavement joint.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/301
(14) Curbs. Curbs shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets, and on the
subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision.
(15) Street Names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing
streets, unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names
of existing streets shall be used.
(16) Street lights and street sign installation shall be the responsibility of the City.
C. Alleys
(1) Width and paving. Alleys of not less than 20 feet in right-of-way width and pavement width shall be
installed by the subdivider in all business and industrial areas. In residential areas, alleys not less than 20 feet
in right-of-way width, with paved surface of not less than 16 feet in width, shall be optional. All alley paving
shall be done in accordance with City Standards. Alleys shall be approximately parallel to the frontage of the
street.
(2) Intersecting alleys or utility easements. Where two alleys or utility easements intersect or turn at a right
angle, a cutoff of not less than 10 feet from the normal intersection of the property or easement line shall be
provided along each property or easement line.
(3) Dead-end Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted.
(4) Alleys which do not connect on a straight course. If alleys are not themselves straight within each block,
or if the same do not connect on a straight course with the alleys of adjoining blocks, then an easement shall be
provided for the placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or deviating
rights-of-way of alleys.
D. Utility easements.
(1) Each block that does not contain an alley as provided for in Paragraph C of this Section shall have a
utility easement at the rear of all lots reserved for the use of all public utility lines, conduits, and equipment.
These utility easements shall be 16 feet in width, taking 8 feet from each lot where the rear of two lots abut
each other, and shall be continuous for the entire length of the block. These easements shall parallel as closely
as possible the street line frontage of the block. Such easement shall not be considered a part of the lot area for
purposes of minimum lot-size requirements of this Ordinance.
(2) Normal curb exposure shall be required where utility easements intersect streets.
(3) Where utility easements are not themselves straight within each block, or if the same do not connect on
a straight course with the utility easements of adjoining blocks, then an additional easement shall be provided
for the placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or deviating rights-ofway
or alleys.
E. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed as follows: (At the option of the developer.)
(1) On the subdivision side of all arterial streets adjacent to the subdivision and not paralleled by a marginal
access street;
(2) On the subdivision side of all collector streets adjacent to the subdivision if no adequate sidewalk exists
on the opposite side of the street;
(3) On the residence side of all marginal access streets whether adjacent to the subdivision or internal;
(4) On both sides of all internal arterial streets not paralleled by a marginal access street;
(5) On the north or east side of all internal collector streets;
(6) As deemed necessary by the council in commercial, industrial, public, multi-family areas; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/301
(7) Such additional sidewalks as the subdivider may desire.
F. Water Installations.
(1) Water supply and distribution. All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply and water
distribution systems approved by the City Manager. See Appendix I.
(2) Fire hydrants. Standard fire hydrants shall be installed as part of the water distribution system per
specifications of the Fire Chief of the City and of the State Board of Insurance. See Appendix I.
G. Sewers.
(1) All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewage disposal system. See appendix II.
(2) Connection with the sanitary sewer systems shall be required except where the Council
determines that such connection will require unreasonable expenditure when compared with other
methods of sewage disposal. Where septic tanks are installed, the subdivider shall conduct percolation
tests acceptable to the Texas State Health Department in order to determine the adequacy of proposed lot
sizes. If a sanitary sewage disposal system is to be installed, the plans for such system must be approved
by the Texas State Health Department, prior to approval of the final plat by the Council.
H. Utility Lines. All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved.
When it is necessary that utility lines pass under the street or alley pavement, they shall be installed to a point at least 3 feet
beyond the edge of the pavement.
I. Monuments.
(1) Monuments shall be located at the intersection of a line 3 feet north from and parallel to the north line
of each block with a line 3 feet east from and parallel to the east line of the block, unless such point of
intersection occurs within the limits of street paving. In such a case, alternate monument locations shall be
approved by the City Manager.
(2) Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures, or other conditions, the view is obstructed
between any two adjacent monuments, intermediate monuments shall be so set as to assure a clear view
between adjacent monuments.
J. Drainage.
(1) Easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, natural channel or stream,
there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such water course,
plus additional width to accommodate future needs.
(2) Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed as specified by the City
Manager. See Appendix III
K. Blocks. Block lengths shall not exceed 2000 feet, nor be less that 220 feet.
L. Crosswalk ways. Crosswalk ways 6 feet in width shall be dedicated where deemed necessary by the Commission to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, and transportation and other community facilities,
or to provide pedestrian circulation within the subdivision. Crosswalk ways shall be provided with a concrete sidewalk six
(6) feet wide.
M. Lots.
(1) Sewered Lots. Where off-lot sewerage is provided, each residential lot shall have an area of at least
5,000 square feet, shall be at least 100 feet deep and shall be at least 50 feet wide. In case of irregularly shaped
lots, the minimum width shall be measured at the front building line.
(2) Unsewered lots. Where off-lot sewerage is not required and is not provided, residential lots shall have
an area of at least 12,000 square feet, shall be at least 120 feet deep, and shall be at least 100 feet wide. Where
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/301
the result of the percolation test prescribed in Paragraph G of this Section, the Director of Public Works deems
the minimum lot area insufficient, the Council shall require additional area sufficient to accommodate the
sanitary facilities deemed necessary by the City Manager. In case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum
width shall be measured at the front building line.
(3) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be at least 60 feet wide. Lots abutting on crosswalk ways shall be treated
as corner lots.
(4) Frontage. Each lot shall front upon a public street. Lots of irregular shape shall not be allowed unless
they have a street frontage of at least 40 feet.
(5) Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines and radial to
curved street lines.
(6) Minimum setback lines. Minimum front building setback lines shall be required of at least 20 feet.
Where a corner lot is a key lot (where lots face the frontage street and other lots face the side street), the corner
lot shall have at least the minimum building setback line on both streets. Where a corner lot is not a key lot, it
shall have a minimum building setback line in the side street of at least 10 feet. Lots abutting a crosswalk way
shall be treated as corner lots.
(7) Rear yards. Minimum rear yard depths shall be required of at least 25 per cent (25%) of the depth of the
lot, however, the depth need not exceed 50 feet from the centerline of the alley or rear utility easement.
(8) Side yards. Minimum side yards on each side of buildings on interior lots and on the building side of
corner lots, shall be required of at least 10 per cent (10%) of the width of the lot, or 5 feet, whichever is
greater. Lots abutting on crosswalk ways shall be treated as corner lots.
(9) Extra depth and width in certain cases. Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad right-ofway,
a high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, an arterial street, an industrial area, or other land use which has a
depreciating effect on the residential use of property, and where no marginal access street or other street is
provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required by the Council. In no case shall a depth in
excess of 175 feet be required. Where a lot sides to any of the above, additional width shall be required by the
Commission, but in no event shall a width in excess of 150 feet be required.
SECTION 11. Responsibility for Payment of Installation Costs.
A. The subdivider or developer shall be required to construct, at his expense all streets, alleys, sanitary sewers, sewage
lift stations, or other sewer facilities, water mains and water systems, drainage culverts, storm sewers, bridges and other
appurtenances in strict accordance with the construction standards of the City of Atlanta, necessary and required to
adequately serve the subdivision or addition to be developed by him.
B. All streets, utilities and other appurtenances constructed by the developer shall become the property of the City of
Atlanta upon completion and acceptance by the City Manager.
C. Upon passage of this ordinance, it will be the policy of the City of Atlanta to participate with the developer in the
cost of construction of such facilities where sizes and capacities of facilities are required to service urban development of a
larger area than that being subdivided or areas extending beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; but-the city
reserves the right to consider each facility on its own merit.
SECTION 12. Parks and Other Public Use Areas.
The location, size and shape of any proposed park, playground or other public use area shall be in accordance
with the master plan of the City of Atlanta as amended or supplemented, as approved by the planning and zoning
commission and finally accepted by the city council.
SECTION 13. Where subdivision is unit of a Larger Tract.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/301
Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider, which is intended to
be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and final plats shall be
accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks, drainage,
water sewerage, and other improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if approved by the Commission,
shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the City
Manager. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such approved overall
layout, unless changed by the Council. However, except where the subdivider agrees to such change, the Council
may change such approved overall layout only when the Council finds:
(1) That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other
land in-the area in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance; or
(2) That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety
or welfare, or will be injurious to other property in the area.
SECTION 14. Authority of the City Manager. See Appendix I - II- III
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules, regulations, standards and
specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, street lights,
street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and
water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities, and
crosswalk ways. He shall file same with the City clerk at least 10 days before they become effective. No such
rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with this or any other ordinances of the City of
Atlanta, Texas. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the
subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications.
SECTION 15. Conflict with Other Ordinances.
Whenever the standards and specifications in this Ordinance conflict with those contained in another ordinance,
the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern.
SECTION 16. Separability Clause.
Should any portion or part of this Ordinance be held for any reason invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not
be construed to affect any other valid portion hereof, but all valid portions hereof shall remain in full force and
effect.
SECTION 17. Penal Provisions.
Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, Texas,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding two hundred
dollars ($200.00). Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction
under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall be effective from and after its passage or from and after the 18th day of January , 1971.
PASSED AND APPROVED This the 18th day of January A. D 1971 with an effective date of January 18th,
1971.
SIGNED:
/s/ W. R. Alexander
Mayor W.R. Alexander
ATTEST
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/301
/s/ Charles A. Long
City Secretary, Charles Long
Appendix I
Installation of water pipe shall be slip joint or mechanical joint cast iron class 150 or asbestos cement class 150
pipe.
ARTERIAL MAINS: Arterial mains and secondary feeders shall extend through all built-up areas to supply
minor distributors in the local areas. They shall be spaced at approximately 300 feet intervals, looped and valved
so that no length greater than 1/4 mile will be affected by a single break. No area shall be dependent upon a
single arterial main for supply capacities of arterial mains shall be sufficient to deliver required rates of fire
flows and consumption demand to all areas served.
MINOR DISTRIBUTORS: Mains smaller than 6 inch in size and 6 inch dead-end mains are not considered
satisfactory for supplying fire hydrants. A distribution system shall be grid ironed with minimum size 6 inch
mains at intervals not to exceed 600 feet where intervals between cross-connecting mains shall exceed 600 feet
or where dead end must exist, 8 inch or larger main shall be installed. Eight inch and larger mains shall be
installed in high value areas ( business and industrial districts ) with minimum size 4 inch intersecting mains in
each streets. The size and arrangement of all mains shall be adequate to supply required fire flows and
consumption demands in the areas served.
VALVES: All mains shall be equipped with gate valves located so that the maximum length of main that must be
removed from service for repairs, connections or breaks will not exceed 500 feet in high value-districts (
business and industrial areas) no more than 500 feet elsewhere.
HYDRANTS: Proper hydrant distribution is dependent upon the rate of fire flows required for protection of the
areas served and may vary from an average of one hydrant per 120.000 square feet of area served in residential
areas of moderate fire potential to an average of one hydrant per 40,000 square feet of area served in the high
value areas of city where the major fire potentials exist. The necessary lengths of hose lay shall be taken into
consideration in selecting hydrant. Locations, street intersections, are considered preferable. Location. Spacing a
fire hydrant should not exceed 500 feet in residential districts. The concentrations of hydrant shall be increased
in high-value mercantile, industrial and other areas in accordance with the fire potential or required flow.
Hydrants should be of a design having at least two (2) inch outlets and large pumper connections with national
standard hose threads. Hydrant valve open shall be a minimum 5-inch and hydrant shall be of a type that the
valve will remain closed when the barrel is broken. All connection from mains to hydrants shall be minimum
size 6-inch, and all connections should be valved. Valves in hydrant connection to arterial mains are of particular
importance.
TESTING WATER LINE: The pipe line shall be tested by raising the pressure to twice the rated class of the pipe
( for instance class 150 lbs. to 300 lbs. for a period of two hour without a pressure drop of one pound per inch
per diameter of pipe being tested).
Appendix II - Sanitary Sewers
The design of each system shall be considered individually, however, the following minimum standards shall be
met in all cases:
1. The design shall be based on the population anticipated for a 50 year period.
2. The design average daily flow shall be 100 gal. per day per capita.
3. Materials and submains shall be designed at full flow for 400 gal. per day per capita.
4. Mains, trunks and outfall lines shall be designed at full flow for 250 gal. per day per capita.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/301
5. Minimum size of sewers for untreated sewage shall be 6 inch diameter laid on a grade not less than 1%.
6. Minimum size of street sewers shall be 8 inch diameter.
7. Minimum slope shall be sufficient to give mean velocity of 2 feet per second when flowing full or half full.
8. Maximum slope shall be sufficient to give a velocity no greater than 15 feet per second at average flow.
9. Manholes shall be located at the end of each line, at changes in grade, size and alignment, and no more than
500 feet apart along straight sections.
10. Materials of construction shall conform to accepted engineering standards.
Appendix III - Storm Drainage
Each installation will be considered independently, however, the following minimum standards shall be met in
all cases:
1. Minimum size of storm sewers shall be 8 inch diameter.
2. Slopes of sewers shall provide velocities no less than 2 feet per second when flowing full or half full and no
greater than 15 feet per second at average flow.
3. Manholes shall be provided at the end of each line, all changes in grade, size and alignment and at no more
than 500 foot intervals.
4. Open channel drainage systems shall be designed to prevent erosion.
CHAPTER 10
TRAFFIC CONTROL
ARTICLE 10.100 PARKING*
Sec. 10.101 Restrictions Generally
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to park any automobile, motor truck, or any other
vehicle in front of or within ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant within the City of Atlanta. (Ordinance 170, adopted
11/2/42, Section 1)
(b) It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to drive any vehicle over any fire hose, whether the
same be charged with water or empty, or for any such person, firm or corporation to interfere with, molest or hinder the fire
department in fighting any fire within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta. (Ordinance 170, adopted 11/2/42, Section
2)
(c) Any person found guilty of violating either of the foregoing sections of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 170, adopted 11/2/42,
Section 3)
(d) In addition to all other peace officers authorized to make arrests within the City of Atlanta the fire chief and the
assistant fire chief and the fire marshal are authorized to make arrests for violation of either of the foregoing sections.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/301
(Ordinance 170, adopted 11/2/42, Section 4)
(e) Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any part of any sidewalk, street, alley or
thoroughfare for the purpose of parking, placing or standing of any automobile, truck, wagon, carriage, hack or any other
vehicle of like or similar character, when same is not temporarily parked during an interval of actual bona fide use for
driving purposes on the date of such parking, placing or standing. (Ordinance 230, adopted 9/2/35, Section B)
(f) Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any part of any sidewalk, street or ally within
the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, for the purpose of repairing, washing or greasing any automobile or vehicle or
for the purpose of merchandising or conducting any trade or business on said streets, sidewalks or alleys. (Ordinance 230,
adopted 9/2/35, Section C)
(g) From and after the passage and publication of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership,
firm or corporation to park any kind of vehicle, horse drawn, mechanical or otherwise, on Cameron Street from the west
curb line of North Louise Street west to the main gate of Pine Crest Cemetery. (Ordinance adopted 8/7/44, Section 7)
(h) Any person, persons, partnership, firm or corporate violating this act shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code and each
day any vehicle shall remain parked on said Cameron Street shall constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly.
This article shall be cumulative of all other parking and traffic ordinances now in effect. (Ordinance adopted 8/7/44,
Section 8)
Sec. 10.102 Louise Street
(a) The following described section of U. S. Highway 59 (Louise Street) be designated as no parking zone and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park said vehicle within said no parking zone being more fully described as
follows:
On the East side of U. S. Highway 59 (Louise Street) from the Atlanta north city limit to a point 1,022 feet South of said
North city limit.
(Ordinance 176, adopted 8/18/69, Section 1)
(b) Parking in the hereinabove described zone constitutes a hazard to present and future traffic and the elimination of
parking in said zone is reasonable and safe. (Ordinance 176, adopted 8/18/69, Section 2)
(c) The Texas Highway Department is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking zone as hereinabove designated.
(Ordinance 176, adopted 8/18/69, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 176, adopted
8/18/69, Section 4)
Sec. 10.103 Polk Street
(a) No persons shall park a motor vehicle in the public right-of-way at any time on either side of Polk Street on that
portion of Polk Street lying between Brown Street and Hodge Street within the City of Atlanta. (Ordinance 444, adopted
1/18/95, Section 1)
(b) “Motor vehicle” as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character. (Ordinance 444, adopted 1/18/95, Section 2)
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance. (Ordinance 444, adopted 1/18/95, Section 3)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/301
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 444, adopted 1/18/95, Section 4)
Sec. 10.104 Two Hour Parking Zones
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any time in any one parking space between the hours of 7:00
A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on any day of the week except Sundays and public holidays on the streets and within the areas in the
City of Atlanta, described as follows:
(1) The north and south sides of East Main Street between the intersections of East Street and Williams
Street.
(2) The east and west sides of North Williams Street from the intersection of North Main Street north to the
alley behind the north side of the 100 block of East Hiram Street.
(3) The north and south sides of East Hiram Street between the intersections of East Street and Starkey
Street.
(4) The east side of East Street between the intersections of Baker Street and East Main Street.
(5) It being the intent to describe any street within the City of Atlanta, Texas, which is desginated a twohour
parking zone by appropriate signs and no part of this article shall be held invalid because the particular
street or location is not particularly described if same is marked with a two-hour parking sign then all persons
shall obey said two-hour parking sign in accordance with the terms of this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(d) “Vehicle”, as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck tractor or any type tractor, truck, car, or any
other type vehicle of any kind of character. (Ordinance 397, adopted 3/5/90, Section 2)
(e) No person shall park a vehicle in any one parking space for a period of more than two hours on the above described
streets and within the above described area within said city between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on any day of
the week except Sundays and public holidays and all restrictive parking areas shall be marked by the City of Atlanta, with
parking sings which indicate and show that the area is restricted to two-hour parking. (Ordinance 397, adopted 3/5/90,
Section 3)
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley within the official fire zone in the central business
district except when such vehicle is actually being used for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(Ordinance 397, adopted 3/5/90, Section 4)
(g) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city, a parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on
designated streets, it shall by the duty of the city manager of the City of Atlanta, to see that appropriate signs giving notice
thereof are erected in the area which is restricted to two-hour parking. (Ordinance 397, adopted 3/5/90, Section 5)
(h) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 397, adopted 3/5/90, Section 6)
Sec. 10.105 Allday Street
(a) The area to be affected by the provisions of this article shall be that portion of Allday Street situated between North
Louise Street and Buckner Street in the City of Atlanta. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section I)
(b) Parallel parking only shall be permitted on that portion of Allday Street as designated above. (Ordinance 2, adopted
11/19/73, Section II)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/301
(c) No person shall park a vehicle on the north side of that portion of Allday Street as designated above, between the
hours of 6:00 o’clock A.M. and 6:00 o’clock P.M. on any day of the week except Sundays and National Holidays.
(Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section III)
(d) The Atlanta Police Department shall have the privilege of reserving one or more parking spaces on the south side of
that portion of Allday Street as designated above, for its exclusive use and that those spaces so reserved shall be clearly
marked or otherwise identified. Any unauthorized person parking a vehicle in the space or spaces so reserved, shall be in
violation of this article and be subjected to penalties set forth herein. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section IV)
(e) “Vehicle”, as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except, devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck tractor or any type tractor, truck, car, or any
other type vehicle of any kind or character. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section V)
(f) That the Atlanta Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away
by commercial towing service, at the owner’s expense, any vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parking
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section VI)
(g) It shall be the duty of the city manager of the City of Atlanta, to see that appropriate signs giving notice of the
prohibition and restrictions set forth in this article are erected in the areas designated herein. (Ordinance 2, adopted
11/19/73, Section VII)
(h) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section VIII)
(e) “Vehicle”, as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except, devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck tractor or any type tractor, truck, car, or any
other type vehicle of any kind or character. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section V)
(f) The city police department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, at the owner’s expense, any vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parking
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section VI)
(g) It shall be the duty of the city manager of the city, to see that appropriate signs giving notice of the prohibition and
restrictions set forth in this article are erected in the areas designated herein. (Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section VII)
(h) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2, adopted 11/19/73, Section VIII)
Sec. 10.106 Allday Street Right-of-Way
(a) No persons shall park a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way at any time on either side of Allday Street on that
portion of Allday Street lying between Polk Street and U. S. Highway 59 within the city. (Ordinance 451, adopted 4/17/95,
Section I)
(b) “Motor vehicle” as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character. (Ordinance 451, adopted 4/17/95, Section II)
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance. (Ordinance 451, adopted 4/17/95, Section III)
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/301
of this code. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 451, adopted 4/17/95, Section IV)
(e) Parking on the south side of Allday Street, between Carney Street and Thompson Street, is permitted on
Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and on Wednesdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
9:30 p.m. (Ordinance 2009-05 adopted 9/8/09)
Sec. 10.107 Dual Wheel or Three-Axle Vehicles
(a) At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any dual wheeled or three axle vehicle to remain parked on any public right
of way except in compliance with the directions of a police officer as otherwise provided by law. (Ordinance 343, adopted
6/2/80, Section I)
(b) “Vehicle” as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except, devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracts, and shall also include any motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, car, truck, truck tractor, semi-trailer, trailer or
semi-trailer in combination with a towing vehicle, or any other type vehicle of any kind or character. (Ordinance 343,
adopted 6/2/80, Section II)
(c) “Dual Wheeled” as referred to herein shall mean any vehicle with more than two (2) wheels on any one axle of said
vehicle. (Ordinance 343, adopted 6/2/80, Section III)
(d) “Three axled” as referred to herein shall mean any vehicle with three (3), or more, axles attached thereto. (Ordinance
343, adopted 6/2/80, Section IV)
(e) The Atlanta Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, at the owner’s expense, any such vehicle illegally parked where such parking constitutes a
violation of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 343, adopted 6/2/80, Section V)
(f) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 343, adopted 6/2/80, Section VI)
Sec. 10.108 Mill Street
(a) No persons shall park a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way at any time on either side of Mill Street on that
portion of Mill Street lying between East Hiram Street and Baker Street within the city.
(b) “Motor vehicle” as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character.
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2005-09 adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 10.109 U.S. Hwy 59
(a) No persons shall park a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way at any time on either side of U.S. Hwy 59 on that
portion of U.S. Hwy 59 lying between its intersection with U.S. Hwy 77 and Allday Street within the city.
(b) “Motor vehicle” as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/301
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character.
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty
of the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2006-01 adopted 5/16/06)
Sec. 10.110 Cameron Street
(a) No person shall park a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way at any time on either side of Cameron Street on that
portion of Cameron Street lying between North Louise Street and the Pinecrest Cemetery entrance gate within the city.
(b) Motor vehicle as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character.
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of the city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall by the duty of
the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2009-02 adopted 6/15/09)
Sec. 10.111 Reed Street
(a) No persons shall park a motor vehicle on the public right-of-way at any time on either side of Reed Street within the
city limits.
(b) Motor vehicle as referred to herein shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and shall also include a motor vehicle, school bus, automobile, truck or other type tractor, truck, car, or any other
type vehicle of any kind or character.
(c) Whenever by this or any other ordinance of the city, parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall by the duty of
the city manager to see that appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in the area which is affected by such
ordinance.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2009-04 adopted 7/13/09)
ARTICLE 10.200 TRAFFIC SIGNALS*
Sec. 10.201 Obedience Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor or other vehicle, or rider of any motorcycle, bicycle, or any animal
drawn vehicle, or for any pedestrian to cross any street against a red light, that is, when the red light is displayed on the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/301
electrical signal installed at the street intersection
(b) Traffic shall move only against the green light, or when the green light on the electrical signal facing the traffic is
displayed.
(c) No traffic shall move against the amber light, or when the amber light is displayed; except the fire department, police
officers in the discharge of duty, and ambulances on call; the amber signal being a warning to prepare to move forward,
only.
(d) Right turns and left turns shall be lawful when the green light is displayed.
(e) Right turns, on red light, shall be lawful provided said driver or rider take the curb lane and come to a complete stop
before making the turn.
(Ordinance 255, adopted 9/6/37, Section 1)
(f) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction in the corporation court of the City of Atlanta, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code, and in cases where pleas of guilt are entered, the court at its discretion may remit the
costs of prosecution. (Ordinance 255, adopted 9/6/37, Section 3)
(g) All traffic control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the City of Atlanta shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Street and Highways, Volumes I and II (hereafter called the manual). Article 6701d) Vernon’s
Civil Statues states; all signs, signals and markings erected or used by the City of Atlanta shall be uniform and be located
as far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. All existing traffic control devices
and those erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law and this article shall be official traffic
control devices. (Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 1)
(h) The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal, shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device,
signal or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by the ordinance. (Ordinance
329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 2)
Sec. 10.202 Emergency Vehicles*
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term “authorized emergency vehicle” is defined by state law,
when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this or any ordinance;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction or movement or turning in specified directions.
(c) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of Section 124 V. C.S. 6701d (Uniform Act Regulating Traffic
on Highways), except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from the front of the vehicle.
(d) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of reckless
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/301
disregard for the safety of others.
(e) Provisions of this article applicable to drivers upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the State of Texas, or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the
state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this article with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 3)
Sec. 10.203 Unauthorized Signals
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized signs,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic
sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets, or
alleys or signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.
(Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 4)
Sec. 10.204 Defacing Signals
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any
official traffic control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any part thereof. (Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 5)
Sec. 10.205 Erection of Signals
(a) The city council of the City of Atlanta shall by ordinance direct that the city manager shall have the duty of erecting
or installing upon, over, along, or beside any highway, street or alley signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be
erected, installed or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the manual. Said traffic control devices shall
be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific devise, sign or signal can be procured.
(b) Whenever the city manager has erected and installed any official traffic control device, signal or sign at any location
in the City of Atlanta, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this article and the manager
shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing and signed officially by the city manager, stating the type of
traffic control device, sign or signal, and when and where the same was erected and installed. The city secretary shall file
and maintain such report of the city manager among the official papers of the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section 6)
(c) It being unlawful for any person other than the city manager, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or
cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of
pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this article or any traffic
ordinance of the City of Atlanta, that any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the city manager pursuant to the authority of this article
and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal or marking. (Ordinance 329, adopted 8/1/77, Section
7)
Sec. 10.206 Ratification of Existing Devices
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/301
A listing of all existing devices shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and all such devices
are hereby ratified and specifically saved from repeal. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 10.300 SPEED REGULATIONS*
Sec. 10.301 Boggie Street
(a) The following prescribed section of Farm to Market Road 1841 (Boggie St.) as indicated on the attached plan
marked “Exhibit A” is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall
be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to drive said vehicle within said section in the direction stated at a speed in
excess of the following:
(1) For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on Farm to Market Road 1841 (Boggie Street):
(A) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from the intersection of FM 249 (Main St.) and FM 1841 (Boggie
St.) to a point 0.752 miles south, said point being 120 feet south of SH 77;
(B) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from a point 0.752 miles south of the intersection of FM 249 (Main
St.) and FM 1841 (Boggie St.), south for a distance of 0.178 miles, to a point 0.930 miles south of the
intersection of FM 249 (Main St.) and FM 1841 (Boggie St.), said point being the south city limits of
Atlanta.
(2) For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on Farm to Market Road 1841 (Boggie Street):
(A) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from the south city limits of Atlanta, to a point 0.232 miles north,
said point being 165 feet north of SH 77;
(B) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 0.232 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta,
north for a distance of 0.698 miles to a point 0.930 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, said
point being the intersection of FM 249 (Main St.) and FM 1841 (Boggie St.).
(Ordinance 322, adopted 7/6/76, Section 1)
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of Farm to Market
Road 1841 (Boggie St.) in the direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie
speed limits therefor. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is
for the immediate preservation of public safety-and-general welfare, requires that this article take effect immediately from
and after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 322, adopted 7/6/76, Section 2)
(c) The State Department of Highways and Public Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits
herein designated. (Ordinance 322, adopted 7/6/76, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 322, adopted
7/6/76, Section 4)
Sec. 10.302 Louise Street
(a) The following prescribed sections of State Highway 43 (Louise St.) as indicated on the attached plan marked
“Exhibit A” are regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to drive said vehicles within said section in the direction stated in a speed in
excess of the following:
(1) For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on State Highway 43 (Louise St.):
(A) Fifty (50) miles per hour from the intersection of SH 43 and US Highway 59 in the City of
Atlanta to a point 0.817 miles south, said point being 327 feet south of Red Bluff Road;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/301
(B) Forty (40) miles per hour from a point 0.817 miles south of the intersection of SH 43 and US 59
in the City of Atlanta, for a distance of 0.512 miles, to a point 1.329 miles south of the intersection of
SH 43 and US 59 in the City of Atlanta, said point being 259 feet north of Miller Street (East);
(C) Thirty-Five (35) miles per hour from a point 1.329 miles south of the intersection of SH 43 and
US 59 in the City of Atlanta, for a distance of 0.412 miles, to a point 1.741 miles south of the
intersection of SH 43 and US 59 in the City of Atlanta, said point being 67 feet south of Taylor Street;
(D) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 1.741 miles south of the intersection of SH 43 and US
59 in the City of Atlanta, for a distance of 0.693 miles, to a point 2.434 miles south of the intersection of
SH 43 and US 59 in the City of Atlanta, said point being 390 feet south of SH 77;
(E) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from a point 2.434 miles south of the intersection of SH 43 and US
59 in the City of Atlanta, for a distance of 0.309 miles, to a point 2.743 miles south of the intersection of
SH 43 and US 59 in the City of Atlanta, said point of termination also being the south city limit of
Atlanta.
(2) For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on US Highway 43 (Louise St.):
(A) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from the south city limit of Atlanta to a point 0.478 miles north,
said point being 502 feet north of SH 77;
(B) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 0.478 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta,
for a distance of 0.524 miles, to a point 1.002 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, said point
being 67 feet south of Taylor Street;
(C) Thirty-Five (35) miles per hour from a point 1.002 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta,
for a distance of 0.412 miles, to a point 1.414 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, said point
being 259 feet north of Miller Street (East);
(D) Forty (40) miles per hour from a point 1.414 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, for a
distance of 0.512 miles, to a point 1.926 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, said point being
327 feet south of Red Bluff Road;
(E) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 1.926 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, for a
distance of 0.817 miles, to a point 2.743 miles north of the south city limit of Atlanta, said point of
termination also being the intersection of SH 43 and US 59 in the City of Atlanta.
(Ordinance 310, adopted 12/1/76, Section 1)
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated portions of State Highway 43
(Louise St.) in the direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie speed
limits therefor. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is for the
immediate preservation of public safety and general welfare, requires that this article take effect immediately from and
after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 310, adopted 12/1/76, Section 2)
(c) The State Department of Highways and Public Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits
herein designated. (Ordinance 310, adopted 12/1/76, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 310, adopted
12/1/76, Section 4)
Sec. 10.303 FM 251
(a) The following prescribed section of Farm to Market Road 251 as indicated on the attached plan marked “Exhibit A”
is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any motor vehicle to drive said vehicle within said section in the direction stated at a speed in excess of the
following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/301
(1) For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on Farm to Market Road 251:
(A) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from the north city limits of Atlanta to a point 1.442 miles south,
said point being 1,202 feet north of the intersection of FM 251 and FM 785 in the City of Atlanta, except
for that portion from a point 1.323 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta south for a distance of
0.119 miles to a point 1.442 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta the speed shall be thirty-five
(35) miles per hour when school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation;
(B) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 1.442 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta,
south for a distance of 1.174 miles to a point 2.616 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta, said
point being 206 feet north of East Miller Street;
(C) Thirty-Five (35) miles per hour from a point 2.616 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta
south for a distance of 0.476 miles to a point 3.092 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta, said
point being 230 feet north of Haw Creek Bridge.
(D) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 3.092 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta,
south for a distance of 0.483 miles to a point 3.575 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta said
point being 325 feet south of the intersection of SH 77 and FM 251 in Atlanta.
(E) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from a point 3.575 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta
south for a distance of 1.265 miles to a point 4.840 miles south of the north city limits of Atlanta, said
point being south city limits of Atlanta.
(2) For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on Farm to Market Road 251:
(A) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from the south city limits of Atlanta to a point 1.390 miles north,
said point being 336 feet north of the intersection of SH 77 and FM 251 in Atlanta.
(B) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 1.390 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta
for a distance of 0.358 miles north, to a point 1.748 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, said
point being 230 feet north of Haw Creek Bridge.
(C) Thirty-Five (35) miles per hour from a point 1.748 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta,
for a distance of 0.476 miles north, to a point 2.224 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, said
point being 206 feet north of East Miller Street;
(D) Forty-Five (45) miles per hour from a point 2.224 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta
for a distance of 1.274 miles north to a point 3.498 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, said
point being 1,730 feet north of the intersection of FM 251 and FM 785 in the City of Atlanta, except for
that portion from a point 3.379 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, north for a distance of
0.119 miles to a point 3.498 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, the speed shall be thirty-five
(35) miles per hour when school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation.
(E) Fifty-Five (55) miles per hour from a point 3.498 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta,
for a distance of 1.342 miles north to a point 4.840 miles north of the south city limits of Atlanta, said
point being the north city limits of Atlanta.
(Ordinance 341-B, adopted 8/6/79, Section 1)
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of Farm to Market
Road 251 in the direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima speed limits
therefor. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is for the
immediate preservation of public safety and general welfare, requires that this article take effect immediately from and
after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 341-B, adopted 8/6/79, Section 2)
(c) The State Department of Highways and Public Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits
herein designated. (Ordinance 341-B, adopted 8/6/79, Section 3)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/301
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 341-B, adopted
8/6/79, Section 4)
(c) The state department of highways and public transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits
herein designated. (Ordinance 341-B, adopted 8/6/79, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 341-B, adopted
8/6/79, Section 4)
Sec. 10.304 Highway 59
(a) The following prescribed section of U.S. 59 as indicated on the plan attached to Ordinance 2007-02, marked “Exhibit
A” is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for
the driver of any motor vehicle to drive said vehicle within said section in the direction stated at a speed in excess of the
following:
(1) For Traffic Traveling in a South-Westerly Direction on U.S. 59:
(A) Fifty (50) miles per hour from the north city limits of Atlanta also being the south city limits of
Queen City (MP 11.376–Cont. 218-03), south and west for a distance of 3.091 miles, to a point 170 feet
west of a residential street.
(B) Sixty (60) miles per hour from a point 3.091 miles south and west of the north city limits of
Atlanta, southwesterly for a distance of 0.500 miles, to a point 3.591 miles south and west of the north
city limits of Atlanta, said point also being the point of termination.
(C) Sixty-five (65) miles per hour from a point 3.591 miles south and west of the north city limits of
Atlanta, southwesterly for a distance of 0.731 miles to a point 4.322 miles south and west of the north
city limits of Atlanta, said point being the west city limits of Atlanta (MP 15.698 Cont. 218-04). The
speed limit on this section to be adopted by the state transportation commission as required by state
traffic law.
(2) For Traffic Traveling in a North-Easterly Direction on U.S. 59:
(A) Sixty-five (65) miles per hour from the west city limits of Atlanta (MP 15.698–Cont. 218-04)
northeasterly for a distance of 0.731 miles. The speed limit on this section to be adopted by the state
transportation commission as required by state traffic law.
(B) Sixty (60) miles per hour from a point 0.731 miles northeast of the west city limits of Atlanta,
northeasterly for a distance of 0.500 miles to a point 170 feet west of a residential street, said point being
1.231 miles northeast of the west city limits of Atlanta.
(C) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 1.231 miles northeast of the west city limits of Atlanta, east
and north for a distance of 3.091 miles to a point 4.322 miles east and north of the west city limits of
Atlanta, said point being the north city limits of Queen City (MP 11.376 Cont. 218-03) said point also
being the point of termination.
(Ordinance 2007-02, sec. 1, adopted 4/2/07)
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of U.S. 59
in the direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits
therefor. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is for
the immediate preservation of public safety and general welfare, requires that this section take effect
immediately from and after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 2007-02, sec. 2, adopted
4/2/07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/301
(c) The state department of transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits herein designated.
(Ordinance 2007-02, sec. 3, adopted 4/2/07)
(d) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined in accordance with Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 2007-02, sec. 4, adopted 4/2/07)
Sec. 10.305 FM 785
(a) The following prescribed section of Farm to Market Road 785 is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling
thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive said vehicle within said
section in the direction stated at a speed in excess of the following:
(1) For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on FM 785:
(A) That portion from a point 1.079 miles south of the north city limit of Atlanta south for a distance
of 0.160 miles to a point 1.239 miles south of the north city limit of Atlanta, the speed limit shall be
thirty (30) miles per hour when so signed for school speed zone.
(2) For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on FM 785:
(A) That portion from a point 0.596 miles north of the intersection of FM 785 and FM 249 north for a
distance of 0.160 miles to a point 0.756 miles north of the intersection of FM 785 and FM 249, the speed
limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour when so signed for school speed zone.
(Ordinance 401, adopted 8/5/91, Section 1)
(b) The hereinabove speed for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of Farm to Market
Road 785 in the direction herein specified by and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits
therefor. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, created an emergency which is for the
immediate preservation of public safety and general welfare, requires that this article take effect immediately from and
after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 401, adopted 8/5/91, Section 2)
(c) The State Department of Highways and Public Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits
herein designated. (Ordinance 401, adopted 8/5/91, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 401,
adopted 8/5/91, Section 4)
Sec. 10.306 SH 77
(a) The following prescribed section of SH 77 as indicated on the attached plan marked “Exhibit A” is regulated as to
the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor
vehicle to drive said vehicle within said section in the direction stated at a speed in excess of the following:
(1) For traffic traveling in an easterly direction on SH 77:
(A) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from the west city limits of Atlanta, east for a distance of 0.580
miles, said point being the west intersection of US 59 and SH 77;
(B) Forty-five (45) miles per hour from the east intersection of US 59 and SH 77, east for a distance
of 0.880 miles, said point being 1,284 feet east of the intersection of SH 77 and SH 43;
(C) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 0.880 miles east of the intersection of US 59 and SH 77,
east for a distance of 0.618 miles, to a point 1.498 miles east of the east intersection of US 59 and SH
77, said point being 1140 feet east of the intersection SH 77 and FM 251;
(D) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from a point 1.498 miles east of the east intersection of US 59 and
SH 77, east for a distance of 0.586 miles, to a point 2.084 miles east of the east intersection of US 59
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/301
and SH 77, said point of termination being the east city limits of Atlanta.
(2) For traffic traveling in a westerly direction on SH 77:
(A) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from the east city limits of Atlanta, west for a distance of 0.586
miles, said point being 1,140 feet east of the intersection of SH 77 and FM 251;
(B) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 0.586 miles west of the east city limits of Atlanta, west for a
distance of 0.618 miles, to a point 1.204 miles west of the east city limits of Atlanta, said point being
1,284 feet east of the intersection of SH 77 and SH 43;
(C) Forty-five (45) miles per hour from 1.204 miles west of the east city limits of Atlanta, west for a
distance of 0.880 miles, to a point 2.084 miles west of the east city limits of Atlanta, said point being the
east intersection of US 59 and SH 77;
(D) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from the west intersection of US 59 and SH 77, west for a distance
of 0.580 miles, said point being the west city limits of Atlanta, said point of termination being the west
city limits of Atlanta.
(Ordinance 458, adopted 9/18/95, Section 1)
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of SH 77 in the
direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits therefor. The fact
that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is for the immediate preservation
of public safety and general welfare, requires that this article take effect immediately from and after its passage and it is
accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 458, adopted 9/18/95, Section 2)
(c) The Texas Department of Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits herein designated.
(Ordinance 458, adopted 9/18/95, Section 3)
(d) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of misdemeanor and shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 458, adopted
9/18/95, Section 4)
Sec. 10.307 Indian Hills Subdivision
(a) The following prescribed section of the Indian Hills Subdivision is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles
traveling thereon, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive said vehicle in said Subdivision at a speed
in excess of the following:
For traffic traveling in any direction on Caddo Drive, Choctaw Drive, Chickasaw Circle, Apache Street, Tejas,
Cherokee Street and Coushatta Street; twenty (20) miles per hour.
(b) The above speed for vehicular traffic traveling upon the herein above designated roads within the Indian Hills
Subdivision is hereby found to be the reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit therefor.
(c) The State Department of Highways and Public Transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limit
herein designated.
(d) Any person violating the provision of this section shall upon conviction shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions found in section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 97-09, adopted 12/4/97)
Sec. 10.308 New City Park
(a) The following prescribed section of the new city park located north of Holy Street and west of FM 785 is regulated
as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive said
vehicle in said city park at a speed in excess of the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/301
(1) for traffic traveling in any direction on any city park street and parking areas; twenty (20) miles per hour.
(b) The above speed for vehicular traffic traveling upon the herein above designated roads within the new city park is
hereby found to be the reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit therefor.
(c) The Texas Department of Transportation and the City of Atlanta is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed
limit herein designated.
(d) Any person violating the provision of this section shall upon conviction shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 99-06 adopted 5/17/99)
Sec. 10.309 Leslie Lane
(a) The following prescribed section of Leslie Lane is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon, and
it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive said vehicle on said Leslie Lane at a speed in excess of the
following:
For traffic traveling in any direction on Leslie Lane between Main Street (FM249) and Kinsey Lane; twenty (20)
miles per hour.
(b) The above speed for vehicular traffic traveling upon the herein above designated road is hereby found to be the
reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit thereof.
(c) The Texas Department of Transportation and the City of Atlanta is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limit
herein designated.
(d) Any person violating the provision of this section upon conviction shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 99-09 adopted 7/19/99)
Sec. 10.310 FM 249
(a) The following prescribed section of FM 249 as indicated on the plan attached to Ordinance 2010-10, marked exhibit
A is regulated as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling thereon in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any motor vehicle to drive said vehicle within said section in the direction stated at a speed in excess of the
following:
(1) For traffic traveling in an easterly direction on FM 249:
(A) Forty-five (45) miles per hour from the intersection of US 59 east for a distance of 0.887 miles to
a point 269 ft. east of Howe St.
(B) Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from a point 269 ft. east of Howe St. east for a distance of 0.460
miles to a point 121 ft. west of Sheilia St.
(C) Forty (40) miles per hour from a point 121 ft. west of Sheilia St. east for a distance of 0.399 miles
to a point 164 ft. east of FM 785.
(D) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 164 ft. east of FM 785 east for a distance of 0.626 miles to
a point 5 ft. west of Lane St.
(E) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from a point 5 ft. west of Lane St. east for a distance of 0.551 miles
to the east city limits.
(2) For traffic traveling in a westerly direction on FM 249:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/301
(A) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour at the east city limits west for a distance of 0.551 miles to a point 5
ft. west of Lane St.
(B) Fifty (50) miles per hour from a point 5 ft. west of Lane St. west for a distance of 0.626 miles to a
point 164 ft. east of FM 785.
(C) Forty (40) miles per hour from a point 164 ft. east of FM 785 west for a distance of 0.399 miles to
a point 121 Ft. west of Sheilia St.
(D) Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from a point 121 ft. west of Sheilia St. west for a distance of 0.460
miles to a point 269 ft. east of Howe St.
(E) Forty-five (45) miles per hour a point 269 ft. east of Howe St. west for a distance of 0.887 miles to
the intersection of US 59.
(b) The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of FM 249 in the
direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima facie speed limits therefor. The fact
that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates an emergency which is for the immediate preservation
of public safety and general welfare, requires that this section take effect immediately from and after its passage and it is
accordingly so ordained.
(c) The state department of transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits herein designated.
(d) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ordinance 2010-10 adopted 9/7/10)
ARTICLE 10.400 SCHOOL BUSES
(a) The driver of a vehicle within the city limits of the city of Atlanta, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction,
any school bus stopped on the traveled portion of any street in the city limits for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school children shall come to a complete stop and may not proceed until:
(1) the school bus resumes motion;
(2) the operator is signaled by the driver to proceed; or
(3) the visual signal is no longer actuated.
(Ordinance 227, adopted 2/2/70, Section 1; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly
visible sign containing the words “School Bus” in letters not less than eight inches in height. (Ordinance 227, adopted
2/2/70, Section 2)
(c) The driver of a vehicle upon a city street that said school bus is stopped in plainly marked words, or shall be
equipped with flashing lights reading “Stop” in addition to the regular stop lights required by the state law, such special
devices indicating that the bus is being stopped shall be operated only when the school bus is being stopped for the purpose
of receiving or discharging school children. (Ordinance 227, adopted 2/2/70, Section 3)
(d) The term “Vehicle” is defined as that term is defined in Art. 6701d of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, 1925, as
amended. (Ordinance 227, adopted 2/2/70, Section 5)
(e) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city of Atlanta, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 227, adopted 2/2/70, Section 8)
(f) It shall be the duty of the operator of every school bus to take the license number of any vehicle violating the
provisions of this Act and report said violation, the date, time and place, to the chief of police of the City of Atlanta, and to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/301
appear in court and testify to such violation. (Ordinance 227, adopted 2/2/70, Section 9)
ARTICLE 10.500 STREET AND HIGHWAY SAFETY MAINTENANCE
Sec. 10.501 Exercise of Police Power
This article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City of Atlanta under the authority of
the laws of the State of Texas, and it’s charter, for the purpose of public safety, comfort, and to protect the health,
life, general welfare of the citizens of said city and the general public using the streets and highways within the
city limits; all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishments of that purpose. (Ordinance
291, adopted 2/2/70, Section I)
Sec. 10.502 Maintenance Department Powers
From and after the passage of this article the Maintenance Department of the City of Atlanta, and the Texas
Highway Department and/or the contractors of said city or Highway Department when performing surveys,
maintenance, repairs, construction, and/or reconstruction in, under, over, across, or upon the highways and
streets or adjacent thereto, situated within the city limits of the City of Atlanta are hereby authorized and
empowered as follows:
(1) To place, to erect, or cause to be placed or erected, barricades and/or warning signs on all approaches, on
such streets or highways, including side streets, to areas or sections where maintenance repair; construction
and/or reconstruction is being carried on, at a distance from such areas sufficient to warn the operators of
motor vehicles of such areas and danger.
(2) To place or erect, or cause to be placed or erected such other warning signs, devices, as well as signs of
instructions in and along such constructions route and area calculated to warn traveling motorists, operators of
motor vehicles of any danger.
(3) To place or erect or cause to be placed or erected, signs designated speed zones to the approach and
through the area where the construction or work is being carried on, such speed zones to be determined under
engineering studies calculated to expedite traffic at a safe speed. In no case shall such speed zones exceed the
prima facie maximum speed limit normally in effect.
(4) To place or erect or cause to be erected “No Parking Signs” in and along the route where maintenance
repairs, construction and/or reconstruction is being conducted on and/or detour routes when it is determined by
the said city or the Texas Highway Department whichever such work is being conducted under and that
parking will interfere with the work and/or the safety flow of the traffic the “No Parking Signs” may contain a
specified time period during which the restrictions are in effect.
(5) To use flagmen on the approaches and in, and about the construction area for the purpose of controlling
traffic; when flagmen are utilized they are hereby authorized to direct, control, to stop and instruct operators
of. motor vehicles to proceed, with full authority as though said flagman was a law enforcement officer of the
City of Atlanta.
(6) To take any and all steps deemed necessary to protect the lives, health and property of both the
workman, the operators of motor vehicles utilizing said street or highways including re-routing such traffic
across and upon other adjacent streets within the city limits of the City of Atlanta.
(7) Where the work is being carried on by a contractor or subcontractor of either the City of Atlanta or the
Texas Highway Department, such contractor and/or sub-contractor shall exercise the authorization herein
granted subject to the approval and regulation of the City of Atlanta, or the Texas Highway Department,
whichever one the work is being conducted under.
(8) The determination by the City of Atlanta or the Texas Highway Department, whichever the work is
being conducted by or under their supervision, as to the size, location, and/or arrangement of the signs,
barricades, and/or the flagmen, authorized herein shall be discretionary,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/301
(Ordinance 291, adopted 2/2/70, Section III)
Sec. 10.503 Warning Signs and Barricades
It shall hereinafter be unlawful for any driver or operator of any motor vehicles in, across and upon the streets or
highways of the City of Atlanta within said city limits to disobey any warning signs, barricades in and along and
about any area where maintenance, repair, construction and/or reconstruction is being conducted in, under, over,
across and upon the streets or highway within the city limits of the City of Atlanta.
(1) The operator or driver shall operate his vehicle at a speed not to exceed the temporary posted prima facie
maximum speed limit.
(2) Such operator of motor vehicles shall obey the direction of all flagmen on duty in such areas, stop when
signaled to do so and proceed in a safe and prudent manner with signal to proceed.
(3) (A) When “No Parking” signs are posted or displayed no person or persons shall stop, park, or
leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended along or upon any street or highway where
maintenance, repairs, construction and/or reconstruction is being carried on, or along any street or
highway that is being used as a detour route, whether men are working or not;(Unless the “No Parking”
signs states a specific time period that such restriction is in effect).
(B) This parking restriction shall not apply to any vehicle being used in the repairs, construction
and/or reconstruction operations or any vehicle being used or operated by persons in a supervisory
capacity or operating in any official capacity in connection with the work being carried on.
(Ordinance 291, adopted 2/2/70, Section IV)
Sec. 10.504 Penalty for Violations
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106
of this code. In the case of a parking violation said fine may be imposed in addition to the wrecker and storage
charges. (Ordinance 291, adopted 2/2/70, Section V)
ARTICLE 10.600 TRUCK TRAFFIC
(a) A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a bob-tail truck, transit-mix truck, truck-tractor, semitrailer, pole
trailer, or other commercial trailer upon Louise Street between U.S. Highway 59 and Louise St. and Main St. except for
expeditious delivery or pick-up material upon the designated portion of Louise Street. (Ordinance 390, adopted 11/20/89,
Section 1)
(b) The operator of a bob-tail truck, transit-mix truck, truck-tractor, semitrailer, pole-trailer, or other commercial trailer
may operate such vehicle on the designated portion of Louise Street when it is necessary to reach a truck terminal or to
load or unload merchandise or conduct business at locations situated along the designated portion of Louise Street.
(Ordinance 390, adopted 11/20/89, Section 2)
(c) A person operating a bob-tail truck, transit-mix truck, truck-tractor, semitrailer, pole trailer or other commercial
trailer upon the designated portion of Louise Street shall have in his possession for the inspection of police officers, his
logbook, delivery slip, or other evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the vehicle on the
designated portion of Louise Street. (Ordinance 390, adopted 11/20/89, Section 3)
(d) The city manager shall erect appropriate signs and marking advising motorists of the truck travel prohibited by this
article. (Ordinance 390, adopted 11/20/89, Section 4)
(e) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be liable to a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 390, adopted 11/20/89, Section 5)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/301
ARTICLE 10.700 TRUCK ROUTES
(a) This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the State of Texas, and of the City of Atlanta for the
public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of said city, and all of the provisions hereof shall
be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(b) The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this subsection.
(1) Passenger Vehicle. Vehicles normally used for private use and carrying less than ten passengers,
commonly referred to as automobiles.
(2) Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and
ambulances and emergency vehicles of the City of Atlanta departments or public service corporations as are
designated or authorized by the mayor.
(3) School Bus. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the
transportation of children to or from school.
(4) Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for the primary purpose of drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle or load so drawn.
(5) Road tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed
as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of the vehicle or load so drawn.
(6) Truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property,
but not including that group or class of vehicles commonly referred to pickup trucks, whose rating in tonnage
is one (1) ton or less.
(7) Pickup truck. Vehicles commonly referred to as such with the tonnage rating of one (1) ton or less.
(8) Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests
upon the towing vehicle.
(9) Semi-trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(10) Poletrailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached
to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for the transporting of long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, timber, pipes
or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting
connections.
(11) Utility trailers. Every vehicle without motive power equipped with either two (2) or four (4) wheels
designed to carry light loads and to be drawn by a passenger vehicle or pickup truck that is used primarily in
and about private residences, and not normally used as a commercial vehicle.
(12) Residential goods. Materials and goods that are intended for use and are used in or about the residence,
and are not being stored at that location for later transfer or transport for to another location for commercial
gain or profit.
(13) Driveway. A private road connecting a building or property to a street.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a truck tractor, road tractor, truck, or pull a trailer, semitrailer
or pole trailer in or upon the public streets of the City of Atlanta, except such street or streets that are herein declared and
designated as “truck routes” or such street or streets that may hereafter be declared and designated as “truck routes” by the
City Council of the City of Atlanta; or except under the conditions and provisions hereinafter set out in subsection (e).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/301
(Ordinance 98-05 adopted 8/17/98)
(d) The following routes and roads are declared and designated as “truck routes” within the city limits of Atlanta, Texas:
(1) US Highway 59;
(2) F.M. Road 249, except that portion from the intersection of US Highway 59, State Highway 77 and F.M.
Road 249 to the intersection of F.M. Road 1841 and F.M. Road 249;
(3) F.M. Road 251, except that portion from the intersection of F.M. Road 251 and State Highway 77 to the
intersection of F.M. Road 251 and F.M. Road 785;
(4) State Highway 77,
(5) F.M. Road 1841;
(6) F. M. Road 995;
(7) F.M. Road 785 except that portion from the intersection of F.M. Road 785 and F.M. Road 249 to the
intersection of F.M. Road 785 and F.M. Road 251; and
(8) State Highway 43, except that portion of said highway lying between the intersection of said State
Highway 43 and State Highway 77 to the intersection of State Highway 43 and US Highway 59 (and
remaining subject to the terms and conditions and restrictions of Article 10.600, and nothing herein shall be
construed to conflict with Article 10.600.
(Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 2/7/05)
(e) Under the following conditions trucks and truck tractors may enter those streets not declared and designated as
“truck routes:”
(1) This article is not to be understood to apply to the following vehicles and, unless otherwise regulated,
that they are specifically exempt:
(A) Authorized emergency vehicles, as described in this article;
(B) Vehicles making delivery or pickup of any residential goods in such restricted area;
(C) Utility trailers, as defined in this article, except that such utility trailers shall not be left parked
upon the public streets or sidewalks overnight;
(D) Pickup trucks as defined in this article;
(E) School buses; and
(F) Vehicles participating in an official parade sanctioned by the city.
(f) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be liable to a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provisions found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(g) The owner and the operator of each truck or truck tractor, individually and together shall be financially responsible
for any and all damages to streets, culverts, drains, ditches, water or sewer lines and any other municipal property, caused
by the weight, size or careless handling of such vehicles.
(Ordinance 98-05 adopted 8/17/98)
ARTICLE 10.800 ONE-WAY STREETS*
Sec. 10.801 Mill Street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/301
(a) The section of Mill Street between East Hiram Street and Baker Street is hereby designated as a one-way street for
motor vehicles limiting travel to northbound traffic only on all days and at all hours.
(b) The city manager is directed to install signs that conform with the state Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
to enforce this article.
(Ordinance 2005-10 adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 10.802 Reserved
Editor’s note–Former section 10.802 designating Fort Worth Street as a one-way street and deriving from Ordinance 2010-03 adopted
May 11, 2010, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 2013-02 adopted June 17, 2013.
ARTICLE 10.900 COMPRESSION BRAKES
(a) No person shall operate or use any vehicle engine compression brake or “jake brake” within the corporate limits of
the city.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) The state department of transportation is authorized to install signs at each city limit advising drivers of this article.
(Ordinance 2006-02 adopted 6/5/06)
CHAPTER 11
UTILITIES & SOLID WASTE
ARTICLE 11.100 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
Sec. 11.101 Water Rates
That the monthly rates for water usage shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this
code.
Sec. 11.102 Sewer Rates
That the monthly rates for sanitary sewer service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in the
appendix of this code.
(Ordinance 2003-09 adopted 9/22/03)
Sec. 11.103 Industrial Rates
Industrial water and sanitary sewer service shall be set on a negotiated basis. An industrial user shall be defined
as a “user which requires water in its manufacturing process, or produces a large volume of discharge into the
sanitary sewer system.” Rate negotiations shall be conducted between the user and a committee consisting of the
city manager as chairman, city engineer, Atlanta Economic Development Corporation Executive Director, city
attorney and the chairperson of the water rate committee. Such industrial rates shall be subject to approval by the
city council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/301
Sec. 11.104 Billings
(a) The water department shall determine and designate the accounts for water and sewer service furnished by the city
together with the billing date therefore, all of which shall be due and payable at the City Hall, 310 North Louise Street,
Atlanta, Texas.
(b) Such rates and charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid by the customers of the waterworks and sanitary
sewer system to the water department and such bills and accounts shall be due and payable on or before the 10th day
following the billing date and shall become delinquent on, the 11th day after such billing date and a ten percent (10%)
penalty shall be added to the amount due and unpaid.
(c) Customers requesting accounts to be placed on “Vacation” must do so in writing by applying for such consideration
at the water department in city hall. Accounts will not be placed on vacation for a period of time less than 4 weeks.
(d) When the billing of an account for water/wastewater is disputed by the customer and re-read of the account is
requested, the customer shall be liable for a fee, as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, per
re-read to be assessed on the next months billing if the meter reading is found to be accurate.
Sec. 11.105 Deposits
(a) Each customer shall, at the time of making application for water and sewer service, pay a deposit to the water
department as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) The charges for water and sewer service furnished shall be a valid lien and legal charge against the deposit made by
the customer. The deposit shall bear no interest. Upon termination of the service, the deposit shall be refunded to the
customer, less any amount or amounts of unpaid balances due the city for water, sewer or trash collection services.
(c) The city manager may waive the payment of additional deposit when an additional account location is added to an
existing established account which has been satisfactorily maintained in good standing for a period of one year.
Sec. 11.106 Disconnection of Services
(a) If a customer shall fail to pay in full for water or sewer service rendered by the city before the expiration of ten (10)
days after the date upon which such bill becomes delinquent, the water service of the customer shall be disconnected, and
such service shall not be restored until the customer shall have paid the delinquent water and sewer bill in full, together
with a re-connection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code. In the event service is
discontinued for nonpayment, the customer’s deposit shall be applied to the unpaid balance of the account.
(b) Prior to the restoration of service to a customer whose service has been discontinued for nonpayment, the customer
must pay all amounts due and make the residential or commercial deposit required by this article.
(c) In the event water service is terminated for nonpayment or theft of services, the fee for resuming service shall be
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, which fee must be paid at the water department prior to
the restoration of water service.
(1) Water service shall not be restored to any residential or commercial customer unless a responsible person
is present at the premises when such restoration of services is made.
(2) Restoration of services shall be during business hours of 8:00 o’clock a.m. until 4:30 o’clock p.m.
(3) In the event the customer or other responsible person is not present at the premises for re-connection
purposes, an additional trip fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, shall be
paid by the customer.
(d) All water customers are required to maintain a sanitary sewer system in good order. Failure to satisfactorily maintain
the customer’s sewer system or to make improvements as directed by the city may result in the cut off of city water service
to the location. Any improvements required by the city will be for sanitary or health reasons only.
Sec. 11.107 Special Provisions for the Payment of Delinquent Accounts
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/301
(a) The city manager is designated as the due process hearing officer for water and sewer accounts and as such shall hear
and determine matters of hardship, illness or disability which would justify a payment schedule other than that fixed by
this article.
(b) Customers desiring special consideration with regard to the payment of accounts as established by the ordinance
must make an affidavit showing the circumstances upon which they request a variance of the established payment
schedule. Such affidavit shall be delivered to the city manager who may act solely upon the affidavit or may set a hearing
date and request the customer to be present for the purpose of answering, under oath, questions concerning the request for
a variance in payment of the customer’s account. Any determination by the city manager may be appealed to the city
council at its regularly scheduled meeting.
(c) Any person making untrue or false statements in an affidavit for the purpose of gaining a variance or exception with
regard to the payment of an account shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
Sec. 11.108 Insufficient Check Policy
The city manager shall establish a written policy with regard to the processing of insufficient or other returned
checks given in payment of water and sewer accounts. The city manager is authorized to charge a fee, as
provided for in the fee schedule found in the appendix of this code, for each occasion upon which a check is
dishonored by the bank upon which it is written. In the event a customer’s check should be dishonored two
times, then the account shall be declared past due and water service to the customer shall be discontinued as
provided herein. In the event a customer has six checks returned from the bank, the city will then place that
customer on a “cash only” no check payment system, and will no longer accept checks from that customer for
payment of water/wastewater/trash collection accounts.
Sec. 11.109 Damaged Meters
The customer shall have the sole responsibility for safeguarding the water meter on his premises. Should the
water meter be damaged in any way, the customer may be charged for the price of a new meter, plus an amount
equal to the costs of one hour’s labor charge required to replace the meter.
Sec. 11.110 Hours for Restoring Water Service
It shall be the policy of the water department to commence or terminate water service during normal business
hours of 8:00 o’clock a.m. until 4:30 o’clock p.m., Monday through Friday. The city manager is authorized to
establish reasonable procedures through which a customer may request restoration. The city manager is
authorized to make reasonable charges related to special services made at the request of a customer.
Sec. 11.111 Tapping Fee
(a) A tapping fee for connecting new customers to the water land sanitary sewer system shall be provided in the fee
schedule found in the appendix of this code.
(b) Commercial water for lines larger than 3/4" or commercial sewer taps for lines larger than 6" will be charged on
actual cost of material, labor and equipment used to make the tap. No dual connections being more than one customer on a
single line, shall be permitted. The city manager is hereby given authority to place a second water tap for the purpose of
irrigating lawns. The meter will cost $50.00 with a 1000 gallon rate, no minimum charge, no sewer charge.
Sec. 11.112 Fully Metered System
The water system shall be operated on a fully metered basis.
Sec. 11.113 Private Water Wells
A resident of the City of Atlanta who has a private water well will be required to install check valves to prevent
back flow of water from the well to cross connect into the city’s water distribution system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/301
(Ordinance 00-05 adopted 9/18/00)
ARTICLE 11.200 TAMPERING PROHIBITED
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to do, commit, or assist in committing any of the following
things or acts in the City of Atlanta, Texas:
(1) To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or
others from private connections on premises, without notifying the city secretary of such device or
arrangement.
(2) To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the water works system,
or to turn on or use the water of said system, without first obtaining a permit therefore from the city secretary
of said City of Atlanta.
(3) To make or permit to be made any connection with the sewer lines of said city without first obtaining a
permit therefore from the city secretary.
(4) To remove or in any manner change, interfere with, or tamper with any water meter installed or placed
by the City of Atlanta.
(5) To put into the city sewer lines directly or indirectly, any offal, refuse or waste matter reasonably
calculated to stop up or clog said lines.
(6) To go upon ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of the water
works system, except by permission of the superintendent of the water works of said city.
(7) To trespass in any manner, or to tamper in any manner with the water works system, including the
pumping stations and houses of said water works, or with the sewage disposal unit or any of the water or sewer
lines of the City of Atlanta without permission from the water works superintendent.
(Ordinance 276, adopted 5/3/48, Section 1)
(b) From and after the date of the publication of this article any person, firm, partnership, association of persons, or
corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the rules and regulations or provisions of this
article, or any part of it or portion thereof, by any act either of omission or commission, or cause the same to be done shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. (Ordinance 276, adopted 5/3/48, Section 2)
ARTICLE 11.300 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTION
(a) Every residence, place of business, or other building or place where persons reside, congregate, or are employed, and
which is situated on a lot or tract of land which abuts a street, alley, or utility easement in which there public sanitary
sewer, shall be connected to the sewer by the owner or agent at the expense of the owner or agent of the premises in the
most direct manner possible, and with a separate connection for each house, building, or place; except under the following
conditions:
(1) Where said connection would require boring under a roadway maintained by the United States, The
State of Texas or the County of Cass; or,
(2) Where said connection is to serve a facility in existence prior to the availability of sanitary sewer
installation and such facility can not be served by gravity flow. This exception is not available to any facilities
constructed subsequent to the installation of sanitary sewer in a street, alley, or easement abutting the property;
or,
(3) Where the distance of said connection is greater than 250 feet from the public sanitary sewer line.
(Ordinance 447, adopted 1/18/95, Section II)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/301
(b) Except as provided in (a)(1), (2) and (3), each house, building, or place, shall be connected to the public sanitary
sewer within ninety (90) days from the date on which the city accepts the public sanitary sewer line as being operational.
(Ordinance 447, adopted 1/18/95, Section III)
(c) Except as provided in (a)(1), (2) and (3), owner or occupant of each such house, building, or place, shall be charged
the minimum sanitary sewer fee (whether functionally connected to the public sanitary sewer line or not) beginning ninety
(90) days after the city accepts the public sanitary sewer line as being operational. (Ordinance 447, adopted 1/18/95,
Section IV)
(d) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or cause or permit anyone to violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each and every day that any such violation of this article or any part thereof
shall occur shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such. (Ordinance 447, adopted
1/18/95, Section V)
ARTICLE 11.400 WATER CONSERVATION
Sec. 11.401 Approval of the Plan
The city council hereby approves and adopts as the City’s Water Conservation Plan, and the Water
Conservation/Drought Contingency Plan, as retained on file in the office of the city secretary, to be included in
full as a part of this article as if recited verbatim herein. The city commits to implement the program according
to the procedures set forth in the adopted plan. (Ordinance 426, adopted 11/1/93, Section 1)
Sec. 11.402 Reports to Water Development and Board
The city shall report to the Texas Water Development Board annually on the implementation and effectiveness
of the Plan in accordance with the outline set forth in the Plan. (Ordinance 426, adopted 11/1/93, Section 2)
Sec. 11.403 Guidelines for Enforcement
(a) In regards to implementation and enforcement of the Conservation/Drought Contingency Plan the city manager is
designated as the official responsible for implementation and enforcement, and the following guidelines are adopted:
(1) Mild drought occurs when:
(A) Average daily water consumption reaches 90% of production capacity, and
(B) Consumption at 90% of production capacity has existed for a period of three (3) days, and
(C) Long, cold, or dry weather periods are predicted.
(2) Moderate drought conditions are reached when:
(A) Average daily water consumption reaches 100% of rated production capacity for a three-day
period.
(B) Weather forecasts indicate mild drought conditions will exist five (5) days or more.
(C) One (1) ground storage tank, one (1) elevated storage tank, or one (1) clear well is taken out of
service during mild drought period.
(D) Storage water level is not being maintained during period of 100% rated production period.
(E) Existence of any one (1) listed condition for a duration of 36 hours.
(3) Severe drought classification is reached when:
(A) Average daily water consumption reaches 110% of production capacity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/301
(B) Average daily water consumption will not enable storage levels to be maintained.
(C) System demand exceeds available high service pump capacity.
(D) Any two (2) conditions listed in moderate drought classification occurs at the same time for a 24-
hour period.
(E) Water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally. Severe condition is reached
immediately upon detection.
(F) Water system fails - from acts of God (tornadoes, hurricanes) or man. Severe condition is reached
immediately upon detection.
(b) In the event severe classification conditions persist (Item 3 above) for an extended period of time, the city may ration
water usage and/or terminate service to selected users of the system in accordance with the following sequence: 1)
recreational users, 2) commercial users, 3) industrial users, 4) school users, 5) residential users, 6) hospitals, public health
and safety facilities.
(Ordinance 426, adopted 11/1/93, Section 3)
Sec. 11.404 Penalties
Users of city water except the city, that do not comply with Section 11.403 of this article shall be subject to a
penalty and fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 426, adopted 11/1/93, Section 4)
ARTICLE 11.500 GARBAGE COLLECTION
Sec. 11.501 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
City. The City of Atlanta, Texas or its authorized agents.
Contractor. The person, firm or corporation which may from time to time perform waste collection and disposal
services under contract with the city.
Bin. A metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use at Commercial and Industrial
Units.
(Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 1)
Residential Container, Can or Bag. Container is the 95-gallon polycart provided each customer by the city; bag
or plastic sack designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by
the tip; total weight of each bag or sack not to exceed thirty-five (35) lbs. (Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 8/5/13)
Residential Unit. A dwelling occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families.
A condominium dwelling consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single family units, shall be treated as
a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling unit receiving separate water billing shall also be
billed separately for waste collection and disposal service.
Residential Refuse. All garbage and rubbish generated by a customer at a residential unit
Commercial and Industrial Unit. All premises, locations or entities, public or private, requiring refuse collection
and not falling within the definition of a residential unit.
Hazardous Waste. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be “hazardous” as that term is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/301
defined by or pursuant to federal or state law.
(Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 1)
Sec. 11.502 City Landfill Closed
As of the fifteenth day of August, 1988, the city operated landfill shall be permanently closed and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or deposit any sort of waste material or debris therein.
(Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 2)
Sec. 11.503 Contractors Exclusive License/Trash Services Required/Unlawful Disposal
(a) The contractor has been granted by the city the exclusive license to provide all waste and refuse collection and
disposal service within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in such activity unless
written authority has been obtained from the city.
(b) Each resident and every commercial or industrial account is required to have a solid waste account with the city. It
shall be unlawful for any resident, business or industrial account to fail to, or refuse to, subscribe to a sanitation account.
(c) It is hereby declared and made unlawful for any person to deposit trash, garbage, or refuse of any type in or in close
proximity to any trash or garbage container, bin or receptacle located within the city limits unless the person is the owner
or lessee of the container, bin or receptacle or unless the person is the owner, lessee, tenant, or person in control of the
property upon which the container or receptacle is located or is the agent of such person or persons. It is further unlawful
for any person to dump or dispose of private household or commercial waste or trash in any receptacle or bin owned or
leased by the city which may be located on public property.
(d) Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be
liable to a fine, and upon conviction of such violation, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision
found in section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 2016-002 adopted 4/18/16)
Sec. 11.504 Residential Collection
(a) Curbside services will be provided for residential refuse to each residential unit once per week. All refuse must be
placed at curbside by no earlier than 5:00 p.m. a day before the designated collection day, and no later than 7:00 a.m. on
the designated collection day. Carts must be removed from the curb and stored behind the front building line not later than
7:00 a.m. the day following the designated collection day.
(b) All customers are required to utilize the 95-gallon cart provided by the city as the primary means of pickup. Carts
lids are required to be closed. No bags are authorized to be set by the curb unless the cart is full.
(c) No more than a combined total of three (3) bags of refuse or bundles of limbs or brush described in Section 11.506
may be placed outside the container. All bags shall be closed and sealed. Customers who regularly generate more than
three extra bags outside the cart shall be required by the city manager to receive and be billed for an additional cart. It is
prohibited to set bags or bundles outside the cart when the cart is not full.
(d) The schedule for such collection days will be announced from time to time by the city in the newspapers and on
radio. Backdoor collections shall only be made in those instances wherein occupants provide the city manager medical
certification that the occupants are unable physically to place refuse containers at curbside due to illness, age, infirmity or
other specifically described inability. Approval or disapproval of such requests shall reside in the city manager.
(e) Residential customers whose cart is damaged, destroyed or lost shall be assessed a replacement fee on their monthly
utility bill. The fee shall be $60.00.
Sec. 11.505 Commercial and Industrial Unit Collection
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/301
All premises, locations or entities, public or private, requiring refuse collection and not classed as a residential
unit shall be deemed to be a commercial or industrial unit. Such units which generate 95 gallons or more per
week shall be required to either order up to one additional cart service per week or use bin service provided by
the contractor. The frequency or collection for commercial and industrial units shall be agreed between the
customer and city, taking into account the quantity of refuse generated, the service desired and the rates for
collection and disposal. In any event, the decision of the city manager shall be final.
(Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 8/5/13)
Sec. 11.506 Brush and Trash Collection
All customers shall keep garbage or industrial waste separate from brush or trash. All tree trimmings, large
hedge trimmings, shrubs and trees not exceeding three (3) inches in diameter shall be cut in lengths not
exceeding fifty (50) inches in length and shall be bundled securely in sizes not exceeding forty (40) lbs. and
shall be placed at curbside. (Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 6)
Sec. 11.507 Hazardous Waste
No collection or disposal will be made of hazardous waste. (Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 7)
Sec. 11.508 Fees and Payment for Collection and Disposal Service
The fees for the collection and disposal of all solid waste, brush and trash from residential units and for
commercial and industrial units are set forth separately in Annex “A”, as provided for in the fee schedule found
in the appendix of this code. Such fees shall become effective on the first day of August, 1988, and may be
changed from time to time by the city by resolution or ordinance of the city council. (Ordinance 385, adopted
7/18/88, Section 8)
Sec. 11.509 Collection and Payment of Fees
(a) The charges for the collection of solid waste, garbage, trash and refuse as provided herein shall be billed monthly by
the city along with water and sewage service to each customer; the charge for collection and disposal of refuse shown
separately. All charges for services levied hereunder shall be payable at the office of the City Water and Sewer Department
at the city hall.
(b) Failure to pay charges assessed under the terms of this article within thirty (30) days after rendition of a bill shall be
considered notice to the Customer that the city will discontinue water and refuse collection service and that the Customer’s
deposits in the Water and Sewer Department will be applied to satisfy the amount of the unpaid and past-due bill. Prior to
reconnection of water and the resumption of refuse collection service, the Customer shall make a new deposit and shall pay
such fees as are current for the reconnection service.
(Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 9)
Sec. 11.510 Waste from Building and Construction
All rock, waste, scrap building material or other trash resulting from construction or major remodeling, and all
trees, brush and debris cleared from property in preparation for building or construction shall not be classified as
garbage, refuse or brush under the terms
of this article. The removal of such material shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or contractor of the
project. (Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 10)
Sec. 11.511 Accumulation of Garbage, Brush and Industrial Waste
No person, firm or corporation shall permit to accumulate on its premises garbage, brush, trash, refuse, debris or
solid industrial waste, whether such waste is accumulated in covered containers or by other methods. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be or remain in upon any premises private or public any animal,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/301
vegetable or mineral matter, or any compositions or residue thereof which is in an unsanitary condition or
injurious to public health as may be determined by the city health officer. (Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88,
Section 11)
Sec. 11.512 Dumping and Burying of Waste
It shall be unlawful to dump, bury or dispose of waste of any kind within the city limits of the City of Atlanta by
any other means than as provided for by this article except as may be designated by the city. (Ordinance 385,
adopted 7/18/88, Section 12)
Sec. 11.513 Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with, resists the enforcement of or
violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 385, adopted 7/18/88, Section 13)
Sec. 11.514 Convenience Waste Station
(a) The fees will be as provided in the fee schedule in the appendix of this code.
(b) The monies collected are to be used for maintaining service and providing labor at the delivery site.
(c) Prohibited Items to be Placed at This Site: Tires, batteries, paints, solvents, thinners, pesticides or other chemicals,
animal carcasses, brush or limbs exceeding eight inched (8") diameter, tree stumps and all wood must be free of metal such
as: nails, fence wire, etc.
(Ordinance 2003-07 adopted 8/18/03)
ARTICLE 11.600 STREET, POLE AND PIPE RENTAL
(a) All persons, associations, organizations, and corporations using or maintaining any telegraph, electric light or other
poles, gas pipe lines, in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other places within the corporate limits of
the city of Atlanta, Texas, shall on the 1st days of February, May, August and November of each and every year beginning
on August 1st, 1941, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the business conducted by
such persons, associations, organizations and corporations within the corporate limits of the said city for the preceding
quarter year. (Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 1)
(b) The city council may when it may see fit have the books and records of the person, association, organization, or
corporation rendering the statement required in (a) of this section examined by a representative of the city to ascertain
whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the
facts by any other method. (Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 2)
(c) Upon the 1st days of February, May, August, and November of each and every year, every person, association,
organization, or corporation occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, or other public places in
the City of Atlanta, Texas, with poles, pipes, and for other fixtures shall as a condition to such further occupancy pay to the
city quarterly for such privileges a rental equal of four(4%) per cent for gas pipe lines and two (2%) per cent for all other
utilities (except telephones), of the gross receipts received by such person, association, organization, or corporation from
its business conducted in the corporate limits of the city of Atlanta, Texas, for the preceding quarter which sums shall be
paid to the City of Atlanta, Texas, such amounts to be computed for the quarter years ending March 31st; June 30th;
September 30th and December 31st, respectively of each year, the extra month being allowed to make such reports and
payments. (Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 3)
(d) Upon receipt of the above rentals by the city, the city secretary shall deliver to the person, association, organization,
or corporation paying the same a receipt for such rental, which said receipt shall authorize such person, association,
organization, or corporation to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the
city in carrying on its business for three (3) months from the ending of the last calendar year quarter. (Ordinance 200,
adopted 12/1/41, Section 4)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/301
(e) The rental for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements, and public places of the City of Atlanta
provided for in this article is not charged as a tax, but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by such
persons, associations, organizations, and corporations, of using the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways of the
city in the conduct of their respective businesses; and such charges are additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and
to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against the persons, associations, organizations or corporations mentioned herein.
(Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 5)
(f) Nothing herein is intended to relieve any person, association, organization, or corporation of any condition,
restriction, or requirement, imposed by any law or ordinance of the said City of Atlanta, Texas. (Ordinance 200, adopted
12/1/41, Section 6)
(g) This article does not grant a franchise to any utility or person, association, organization or corporations to use streets,
easements, alleys, or other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the
right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. (Ordinance 200, adopted
12/1/41, Section 7)
(h) The City of Atlanta hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the
erection and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes, and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and other public
ways of the said city and from time to time to require such poles, pipes, wires, and other property equipment and fixtures
as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city may deem proper.
(Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 8)
(i) Every person, association, organization, and corporation who shall operate any business without the payment of the
rentals provided for herein shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section
1.106 of this code for each and every day that person, association, organization, or corporation shall conduct such business
using and occupying the streets, easements, alleys, or other public ways of the City of Atlanta without the payment of the
said rentals which said sum may be recovered by the City of Atlanta in a court of competent jurisdiction by a suit filed
therein. (Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 9)
(j) Every person, association, organization, and corporation and the local manager or agent of every such person,
organization or corporation failing or refusing to make the report required by subsection (a) of this article, or failing or
refusing to allow the examination provided for in subsection (b) herein, shall upon conviction in the city court of the City
of Atlanta, Texas, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code.
(Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 10)
(k) The city marshal, electrical inspector, city police officers, and such other persons designated by the city, shall have
power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect form tine to time all telegraph, electric light or other poles, gas pipe
line, pipes and other fixtures in the public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and
suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the
person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe suitable condition.
(Ordinance 200, adopted 12/1/41, Section 11)
ARTICLE 11.700 GREASE TRAPS
Sec. 11.701 Required
Traps shall be required for all food service establishments not specifically exempted. The following food service
establishments are exempt:
(1) Grocery stores, except those utilizing deep fat frying units with two-quart or greater capacity for food
service;
(2) Churches;
(3) Clubs;
(4) Day Care Centers;
(5) Snow Cone stands;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/301
(6) Confectionery stores;
(7) Mobile Units;
(8) Produce Markets
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section I)
Sec. 11.702 Definitions
Food Service Establishments. Any commercial establishment which conducts preparation and handling of
unpackaged food. The term includes every place regardless of whether consumption is on or off premises.
Grocery Store. Any commercial establishment which sells prepackaged potentially hazardous and nonpotentially
hazardous foods. It may also sell any or all of the following: coffee, slushes carbonated beverages,
ice cream, popcorn.
Club. Any commercial establishment licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission which serves
drinks only.
Day Care Centers. A food service establishment, including those operated by a church, licensed by the State of
Texas as a day care which has a license capacity of sixty (60) or less children.
Confectionery Store. Any commercial establishment which sells exclusively unpackaged sweets, confections,
nuts, ice cream, yogurt and variety food items.
Mobile Unit. Any food service establishment in a vehicle or trailer designed to be readily moveable and which
remains in one location for less than thirty (30) days.
Produce Market. Any commercial establishment which sells fresh fruits and vegetables.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section II)
Sec. 11.703 Trap Size
Trap sizes will be determined as follows:
(1) Grease Trap Small. Establishments where food is prepared and served to customers on premises or carry
out and the occupancy rating is for 50 or fewer persons shall have a grease trap with dimensions sized per
Exhibit “A” (Grease Trap Small) or equivalent.
(2) Grease Trap Intermediate. Food service establishments where food is prepared and served to customers
on premises or carry out and the occupancy rating is for 51-100 persons shall have grease trap with layout and
dimensions sized per Exhibit “B” (Grease Trap Intermediate) or equivalent.
(3) Grease Trap Large. Food service establishments where food is prepared and served on premises or carry
out and the occupancy rating is for 101-300 persons shall have a grease trap with layout and dimensions sized
per Exhibit “C” (Grease Trap Large) or equivalent.
(4) Larger Traps. Food service establishments where food is prepared and served on premises or carry out
and the occupancy rating is over 300 persons shall have a grease trap with layout and dimensions sized by the
building official.
(5) Sampling Station.
(A) Any food service establishment which only uses microwave ovens on the premises in the
preparation of food may elect to install a sampling station in the waste line leading from sinks, drains or
other plumbing fixtures in lieu of a grease trap.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/301
(B) The sampling station shall be installed at occupant’s or tenant’s cost to provide accessibility to the
cover for sampling purposes and means for servicing and maintaining the station in working condition.
(C) The city shall take three (3) tests per month during normal hours of business operation for analysis
at the expense of the food service establishment. The test shall consist of a single grab sample taken
from the effluent at the sampling station. A test result over 100 milligrams per liter shall be prima facie
evidence that an unsatisfactory amount of grease is entering the sewer system. If any two (2) tests
exceed 100 milligrams per liter within a one hundred eighty (180) day period, the food service
establishment shall install grease trap in accordance with the provisions of this article within forty-five
(45) days.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section III)
Sec. 11.704 Other Trap Specifications
(a) All liquid waste lines, except for sewage lines carrying human waste and lines from disposals shall empty into a
grease trap and must pass through a sampling station.
(b) All traps described in this article shall be constructed to provide a two-way clean out on each side.
(c) All traps described in this article shall be constructed to have a sampling station, as shown on Exhibit “D” or
equivalent.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section IV)
Sec. 11.705 Trap Cleaning Requirements
(a) All traps described in this article shall be kept clean and accessible for inspection by the occupant or tenant of the
premises.
(b) All establishments covered by this article are required to comply with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission’s “Municipal Solid Waste Management Regulations” providing for handling, processing or disposal of waste
from grease traps. Owner or managers or responsible companies’ designee shall have maintained on the premises
verification of the location and identity of the type of trap. Unless otherwise allowed by the city, such verification shall be
provided by the commercial firm performing the cleaning. Verification records shall be kept available for city inspection
for a minimum of three (3) years.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section V)
Sec. 11.706 Enzyme Treatments
Dilution of unacceptable wastes by increased use of process water or the introduction of biodegradable parasites,
or by other methods, will not be acceptable as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment. (Ordinance
435, adopted 7/5/94, Section VI)
Sec. 11.707 Enforcement Powers
Authorized city personnel bearing credentials and identification shall be permitted to gain access to such
properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing,
calibration and examining records in accordance with provisions of these regulations. Properties to which such
access must be granted include, but are not limited to effluent sources, pretreatment systems, monitoring
facilities, flow meters, control manholes, and any areas where records are kept to satisfy federal, state or local
requirements to assure compliance with Pretreatment Standards. The city, or the Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission shall also have a right to install such devices upon a user’s property as are necessary
to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or local requirements to assure compliance with
treatment standards. The city or the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission shall also have a right to
install such devices upon a user’s property as necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/301
and/or metering operations. All verification records covered by this article shall be available for inspection upon
the premises by authorized city, state, and federal authorities. (Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section VII)
Sec. 11.708 Procedures in Event of Violation
(a) Any person discovered to be in violation of this article shall be served by the city with written notice of the violation.
Except in an emergency as defined in Section “Emergency Procedures”, the city shall not terminate water and/or sewer
service without due process of law.
(b) The required notice of violation shall describe the nature the violation and thirty (30)day time limit for its correction.
The city may also require the person to report the cause of the violation and to submit a schedule for its correction.
(c) The city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief against violators of this article in such city, county state or
federal courts as may be deemed appropriate where such action is necessary to achieve compliance. Injunctive relief may
include:
(1) Specific performance of the ordinance with respect to discharge standards reporting requirements,
payment of user charges, access to industrial properties, repair of private sewer leaks, or other provisions;
(2) Termination of service where necessary for compliance; and/or,
(3) Liquidated damages for any illegal discharges which result in:
(A) Damage to sewage works, including stoppages in lines and manholes;
(B) Excessive treatment costs; or
(C) Fines for stream pollution or by-pass stoppages.
(d) Such injunctive relief may be taken against persons falling in the following categories:
(1) Willful violators of any provisions of this article;
(2) Persons refusing access or placement equipment under this article;
(3) Persons not complying promptly with duly issued notices to correct violation;
(4) Persons discharging pollutants which can:
(A) Cause structural damage to the sewage works;
(B) Obstruct the collection lines;
(C) Interfere with the treatment process;
(D) Create fire or explosion hazards; or
(E) Cause a violation of stream standards.
(5) Persons not complying with emergency notices issued by the city under Section title “Emergency
Procedures”.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section VIII)
Sec. 11.709 Emergency Procedures
(a) The city shall take immediate action to stop any actual or imminent discharge of corrosive, flammable, toxic, organic
or other substances which can cause:
(1) Rapid deterioration of the sewage works;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/301
(2) Major fire or explosion hazards; and/or
(3) Severe danger to the health or welfare of persons.
(b) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city from exercising any of its rights to suspend or take corrective action
against any person or persons.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section IX)
Sec. 11.710 Penalties
(a) If any person violates any provision of this article, thereby violating a state or federal statute or injunction, the city
may seek prosecution of that person in the appropriate state of federal court, and may seek such penalties as are prescribed
by that statute or injunction.
(b) If any person violates any provision of this article, and the violation is not punishable in state or federal courts that
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction in the city court. Each offense shall be punished by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code. Each day of such violation shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section X)
Sec. 11.711 Compliance/Appeals
(a) All trap cleaning requirements shall be in effect upon the passage of this article.
(b) Occupants, tenants or designated agents of establishments existing prior to the passage of this article shall have until
the 11th day of July, 1995, to bring their existing grease traps, if any, in to compliance. Requests or appeals for extension
of time to comply with this article must be made before the 11th day of October, 1994. Requests or appeals must be made
through the office of the city manager and thereafter appealed directly to the city council. Any decision of the council shall
be final subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity.
(c) Occupants, tenants, or designated agents of establishments existing prior to the passage of this article, who feel that
this article is not applicable to their establishment or cannot physically meet construction requirements, or feel that
construction requirements are excessive or unduly onerous, may appeal to the city manager and thereafter to the city
council. Any decision of the council shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at
law or in equity.
(Ordinance 435, adopted 7/5/94, Section XI)
ARTICLE 11.800 INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Sec. 11.801 Purpose
On and after the adoption of this article any person, firm of corporation seeking approval to discharge industrial
wastes into the public sewers within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, Texas, or within its jurisdiction
shall be required to comply with the requirements hereof before such approval may be granted, to-wit.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 1)
Sec. 11.802 Definition of Terms
For the purpose of interpreting this article, certain words used herein are defined as follows:
Shall. The word “shall” wherever used in this article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; “may” is
permissive.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/301
City. The word “city” shall be the City of Atlanta, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies.
City Council. The words “city council” shall be the duly elected governing body of the City of Atlanta, Texas,
Administrative Officers. Any officer referred to in this article by title, i. e., city manager, city attorney, city
secretary, city engineer, director of public works, etc., shall be the person so retained in this position by the city,
or duly authorized representative.
Engineer. The word “engineer” shall be the city engineer of the City of Atlanta, Texas, the city’s consulting
engineer, or their duly authorized representatives.
Person. The word “person” shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm,
company, industry, municipal or private corporation, association, society, governmental agency or other entity
and agents, servants or employees.
Permittee. The word “permittee” shall mean that person applying for a permit to construct a sanitary sewer or to
connect to an existing sanitary sewer.
Approving Authority. The words “approving authority” shall mean the city engineer (or other official designated
by the city manager) of the City of Atlanta, or his duly authorize deputy, agent or representative.
Hearing Board. The words “hearing board” shall mean that board appointed according to the provisions of
Section 11.811.
Sewage. The word “sewage” shall mean a combination of water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as
may be present.
Domestic Sewage. The words “domestic sewage” shall mean waterborne wastes normally discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and
institutions free from storm surface water and industrial wastes.
Normal Domestic Sewage. The words “normal domestic sewage” shall mean normal sewage for the City of
Atlanta, Texas, in which concentration of suspended materials and five (5)-day 20 deg. C B. O. D. is established
at 240 parts per million each, by weight, on the basis of the normal daily contribution of twenty hundredths (0.
20) pounds per capita, per 100 gallons.
Industrial Wastes. The words “industrial wastes” shall mean all water borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes
resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development
of any natural resources, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distance from normal
domestic sewage.
Garbage. The word “garbage” shall mean solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Properly Shredded Garbage. The words “properly shredded garbage” shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
Slug. The word “slug” shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during the normal operation.
Unpolluted Water or Waste. The words “unpolluted water of waste” shall mean any water or waste containing
none f the following: Free or emulsified grease or oil, acid or alkali phenols, or other substances imparting taste
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/301
and odor in receiving water; toxic poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or
odorous gasses. It shall contain not more than ten (10) parts per million each of suspended solids and B.O.D.
The color shall not exceed 150 Jackon Turbidity Units.
Sewer. The word “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
Public Sewer. The words “public sewer” shall mean either sanitary or storm sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties shall have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
Sanitary Sewer. The words “sanitary sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Sewage Works. The words “sewage works” shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
Sewage Treatment Plant. The words “sewage treatment plant” shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures for treating sewage.
Storm Sewer or Storm Drain. The words “storm sewer or stormdrain” shall mean a sewer which carries storm
and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
Storm Water Run-Off. The words “storm water run-off” shall mean that portion of the rainfall that is drained into
the storm sewers.
Sewerage. The word “sewerage” shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
Building Drain. The words “building drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building
and convey to the building sewer beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building Sewer. The words “building sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to the sewer or
other place for disposal.
Natural Outlet. The words “natural outlet” shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body or surface or ground water.
Watercourse. The word “watercourse” shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
on intermittently.
Parts Per Million. The words “parts per million” shall mean a weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8. 345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
pH. The letters “pH” shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen concentration of a
solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in “Standard Methods”.
B.O.D.. The letters “B.O.D.” (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 deg. C,
expressed in parts per million. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in “Standard Methods”.
Suspended Solids. The words “suspended solids” shall mean solids, that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative
determination or suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/301
Standard Methods. The words “Standard Method” shall mean the examination and analytical procedures act set
forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis of “Standard Methods” for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater” as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
Sewer Service Charge. The words “sewer service charge shall mean the charge made on all users of the public
sewerage system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative
or normal sewage.
Surcharge. The word “surcharge” shall mean the charge in addition to the published water and sewer rates. The
basis for surcharges on industrial wastes is a capital and operating cost for suspended solids, B. O. D. and
chlorine demand exceeding “normal domestic sewage”.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 2)
Sec. 11.803 Admission of Industrial Wastes into Public Sewer
(a) Approval Required. Review and acceptance of the approving authority shall be obtained prior to the discharge into
the public sewers of any wastes and waters having the following:
(1) A 5 day 20 deg. Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.) greater than 240 ppm (parts per
million).
(2) Suspended solids content greater than 240 ppm.
(3) Chlorine demand greater than 5 ppm.
(b) Pretreatment. Where required, in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are
harmful to structure process or operation of the sewage disposal works, the person shall provide, at his expense, such
preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render his wastes acceptable for
admission to the public sewer.
(c) Submission of Information. Design calculations, plans, specification and other pertinent information relating to
proposes industrial waste pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for approval or disapproval by the
approving authority prior to start of their construction, if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public
sewers. The following industrial sewer connection Application shall be fully completed and submitted to the approving
authority. The permittee shall not connect to the public sewer without prior approval by the approving authority of the
permittee’s Industrial Sewer Connection Application. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to file an amendment
for approval to the permit thirty (30) days prior to the change of any item of information on the permit. Failure to maintain
the permit as an accurate representation of the permittee’s waste discharges to public sewers shall be cause for penalty.
(d) Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing an Industrial Sewer Connect ion Application, the permittee shall consult
with the approving authority or his duly authorized representative concerning the types, concentration and volumes of
industrial wastes proposed for discharge. Conditional approval as to the general requirements must be obtained from the
approving authority prior to preparation of the Industrial Sewer Connection Application.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 3)
Sec. 11.804 Prohibitive Discharges
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface, down
spouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved
by the approving authority. Unpolluted processed water may be discharged upon prior written approval of the approving
authority to a storm sewer or natural outlet or into the sanitary sewer system by indirect connection whereby such
discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of three gallons per minute,
provided the waste does not contain material or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by
this article. Any person discharging waste of any type into a storm sewer or natural outlet shall first obtain the written
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/301
permission of the approving authority who shall designate the point of discharge whether it be sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
or natural outlet.
In case where, and in the opinion of the approving authority, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or
industrial plant building or other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the
system, the approving authority shall have the right to require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it
from entering the system.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged either directly or indirectly any of the following described
substances, materials, waters or waste:
(1) Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade).
(2) Any water or wastes which contain wax, grease, or oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify or
become discernibly viscous at temperature between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
(3) Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other substance may cause fire
or explosion hazards, or in any other way be injurious to persons, property, or the operator of the sewage
works.
(4) Any solids, slurries of viscous substances of such character as to be capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshlings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint
residues, or bulk solids.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance, which either singly or by interaction with other substances is
capable of causing objectionable odors, or hazard to life; or forms solid or creates any other condition
deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, alteration, or expense to handle
such materials.
(7) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, personnel or biological population of the
sewage works.
(8) Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment or in the public
sewage works.
(9) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as, but not limited to, plating or
heat treating wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters or the sewage treatment plant.
(10) Any cyanide greater than 1.0 parts per million, as CN.
(11) Any hexavalent chromium greater than 2.0 parts per million.
(12) Any mercury greater than 0.005 parts per million.
(13) Any trivalent chromium greater than 5.0 parts per million.
(14) Any manganese greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(15) Any copper greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(16) Any boron greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(17) Any nickel greater than 1.0 parts per million.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/301
(18) Any cadmium greater than 0.02 parts per million.
(19) Any arsenic greater than 0.05 parts per million.
(20) Any zinc greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(21) Any phenols greater than 0.2 parts per million.
(22) Any iron greater than 2.0 parts per million.
(23) Any tin greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(24) Any barium greater than 5.0 parts per million.
(25) Any lead greater than 0.1 parts per million.
(26) Any silver greater than 0.10 parts per million.
(27) Any selenium greater than 0.02 parts per million.
(28) Any chlorides greater than 250.0 parts per million.
(29) Any radioactivity as radium-226 and strontium-90 greater than 3 ppc liter and 10 ppc per liter
respectively. In the known absence of strontium-90 and alpha emitters the known concentration shall not be
greater than 1, 000 ppc per liter.
(30) Any antimony greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(31) Any beryllium greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(32) Any bismuth greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(33) Any cobalt greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(34) Any molybdenum greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(35) Any rhenium greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(36) Any tellurium greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(37) Any uranyl ion greater than 0.0 parts per million.
(c) Except in quantities, or concentrations, or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful for any person,
corporation or individual, to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer containing the following:
(1) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of 100 parts per million (833 pounds
per million gallons) of either or both combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion of the
approving authority it appears probable that such wastes:
(A) May deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner to clog the sewers.
(B) May overload skimming and grease handling equipment.
(C) Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving waters without being
affected by normal sewage treatment processes or,
(D) May have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities.
(2) Any radioactive wastes greater than the allowable stipulated in (B-29) above.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/301
(3) Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on acidification in excess of
one-half (0.5) part per million by weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers.
(4) Material which exert or cause the following:
(A) Unusual concentrations of solids or composition; as for example, in total suspended solids of
inert nature (such as Fuller’s Earth) and/or in total dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate ),
(B) Excessive discoloration,
(C) Unusual biochemical oxygen demand,
(D) High hydrogen sulfide content, or
(E) Unusual flow and concentration, unless such material shall be pretreated to a concentration
acceptable to the city, if such waste can (1) cause damage to collection facilities, (2) impair the
processes, (3) incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage, or (4) render the water unfit for
stream disposal. Where discharge of such wastes to the sanitary sewer are not properly pretreated or
otherwise corrected, the approving authority shall reject the wastes or terminate the service of water
and/or sanitary sewer.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 4)
Sec. 11.805 Control of Admissible Wastes
(a) Within sixty (60) days from the date of passage of this article, any person desiring to deposit or discharge any
industrial waste into the public sewers or natural outlets of the City of Atlanta or any sewer connected therewith, or who is
now so doing, shall make application to the approving authority for a permit therefore upon application forms to be
obtained from the city.
(b) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving
authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, water tight and equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and water tight. Grease, oil and same interceptors shall be maintained by the
permittee, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(c) Within sixty (60) days from the date of passage of this article, any person discharging or desiring to discharge an
industrial waste mixture into the public sewers or natural outlets of Atlanta or any sewer connected therewith, shall provide
and maintain in a suitable accessible position on the permittee’s premises, or such premises occupied by him, an inspection
chamber or a manhole near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel, or connection which communicates with the
sewer or sewer works of the city or any sewer connected therewith. Each such manhole or inspection chamber shall be of
such design and construction which will prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters and be filtered by screens with a
maximum opening of one inch but sufficient finesse to prevent the entrance of objectionable slugs of solids to the sanitary
sewer system, and shall be so maintained by the person discharging wastes so that any authorized representative s or
employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for
construction of the control manholes, or inspection chambers, including such flow measuring devices as may be required,
shall be included with the Industrial Sewer Connection Application.
(d) Sampling of the effluent of waste discharges may be accomplished manually or by use of mechanical equipment to
obtain a composite sample which would be representative of the total effluent. Samples shall be taken at six (6) months
intervals to establish the B.O.D., suspended solids and chlorine demand of the industrial waste for billing purposes, or at
such intervals as determined by the approving authority as necessary to maintain a control over the discharges from the
permittee. The method used in the examination of all industrial wastes to determine B.O.D., suspended solids, chlorine
demand and prohibited wastes shall be set forth in “Standard Methods”.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/301
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 5)
Sec. 11.806 Protection from Damage
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with an structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in accordance with the penalty provisions set out under
Section 11 herein. (Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 6)
Sec. 11.807 Powers and Authority of Enforcing Agents
(a) The approving authority, and other duly authorized employees of the city acting as its duly authorized agent and
bearing credential and identifications, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The
approving authority or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer.
(b) While performing the necessary work on private properties of paragraph (a) above, the approving authority or duly
authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
(c) Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall
continue any violation of his Industrial Sewer Connection Application shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer and/or
water service. Such disconnection and reconnection shall be at the total expense of the industry or sewer user.
(d) Where wastes, acids, chemical or other deleterious substances are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of
these structures or interfering with the proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately
terminate services by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities .
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 7)
Sec. 11.808 Industrial Waste Surcharge
(a) Persons discharging industrial wastes which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited previously other
than excessive B.O.D. or suspended solids but having a concentration for a duration of fifteen (15) minutes greater than
four (4) times that of “normal” sewage as measured by suspended solids and B.O.D and/or an average concentration during
a normal working day of the permittee’s industry of suspended solids or B.O.D. content in excess of “normal” sewage as
defined in Definitions as “normal” domestic sewage shall be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the
requirements of “normal” sewage; however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if the following requirements are
met:
(1) The waste will not cause damage to the collection and treatment facilities.
(2) The waste will not impair the treatment process.
(3) The person who discharges such waste enters into an Industrial Sewer Connection Application and
agrees to pay the sewer service charge and industrial waste surcharge.
(b) The person who discharges such wastes shall enter into an Industrial Sewer Connection Application with the city
providing for a surcharge over and above published water and sewer rates. The basis for surcharge on industrial wastes is a
capital and open cost of $0.36 per part per million per million gallons for the B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand) and a
capital and operating cost of $0.36 per part per million per million gallons for the suspended solids exceeding “normal”
sewage. The cost of the chlorination is based on the city’s contract cost of chlorine per pound per million gallons for each
part exceeding the five (5) parts of “normal” sewage. These rates shall continue until changed by action of the city council.
The surcharge shall be calculated for billing purposes with the following formula:
S.C. = [ 0.3B (B.O.D. -240) + 0.36(SS1-240) + 8.345 Pc(C-5
S. C.= Surcharge in dollars for time related volume
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/301
V = Volume in million gallons based on metered water
B.O.D. = B.O.D. - 5 day @ 20 deg. C of industrial waste (ppm)
S.S.1 = Suspended solids of industrial waste (ppm)
Pc = City’s contract price of chlorine per pound.
C = Chlorine demand of the industrial waste (ppm)
(c) Any person who refuses to comply with or who resists or willfully discharges wastes prohibited from discharge into
public sewers, or who refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, shall be served by the approving authority with
a written not ice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of violation of his Industrial Sewer
Connection Application and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary and/or water service, such disconnection
and reconnection to be of total expense to the customer. Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment
process are released to the sewer and cause rapid deterioration of these structures or interferes with the proper treatment of
sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate service by such measures as are necessary to
protect the facilities.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 8)
Sec. 11.809 Billing
Industrial waste surcharge provided for in this article shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for
water and sewer charges and shall be paid promptly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges shall
be paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the person become due and payment for
water and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of the sewer service charges and
industrial waste surcharges. (Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 9)
Sec. 11.810 Penalty for Failure to Pay Bills and/or Repeated Discharge of Prohibited Waste to Public Sewer
Failure to pay monthly bills for water and/or sewer service and/ or garbage charge, when due, or failure to pay
the established sewer surcharge for industrial waste when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to the
sanitary sewer shall be sufficient cause to disconnect any and all services to the water and/or sanitary sewer
mains of the City of Atlanta, Texas, and the same penalties and charges now or hereafter provided for by the
Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Texas, for failure to pay the bill for water and sewer service when due shall be
applicable in like manner in cases of failure to pay the established surcharge for industrial waste discharged to
the sanitary sewer mains as established herein. (Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 10)
Sec. 11.811 General Penalties
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any
provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.106 of this code, and each day that such violation shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punished accordingly.
(b) The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law and the power of injunction
as provided by Texas Revised Civil Statues, Article 1175 (19) and other applicable statues, may be exercised in enforcing
this Article whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting any property owner who is damaged of affected by a
violation of the terms of this article from bringing suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such remedies as may
be available at law or in equity for the protection of the rights of such property owner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/301
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 11)
Sec. 11.812 Hearing Board
(a) A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of difference between the approving authority and
permittee or sewer user on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article by the
approving authority.
One member of the board shall be a registered practicing professional engineer; one member shall be a lawyer; one
member shall be a representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; and two members shall be selected at large for
their interest in accomplishing the objectives of the article.
Two of the original members of the hearing board shall be appointed by the city council for a term of one year; two shall
be appointed for a term of two years and two for a term of three years, and each appointment thereafter shall be for a term
of two years. Each member may be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as originally appointed.
(b) The hearing board shall convene after being given at least seven (7) days written notice of a complaint filed with its
secretary. In order to convene the board such notice shall contain the specific grounds therefor in such language as to
apprise the board of the arbitration sought. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the city and the
permittee or sewer user.
The hearing board shall adopt its own rules, regulations and procedures for the conduct of hearings; it shall elect its own
chairman and secretary from among its members.
(c) Decisions of the hearing board relating only to interpretation and execution of rules and regulations established in
this Article but not to rates charged hereunder shall be final with the hearing board.
Decisions of the hearing board that effect or directly relate to rates set or to be charged hereunder shall be advisory only
and the applicant may appeal the board’s decision to the city council within 30 days of the hearing board’s decision;
provided, however, if no appeal is taken within 30 days the board’s decision is final.
(Ordinance 298, adopted 3/20/72, Section 12)
Sec. 11.813 Jurisdiction
The requirements of this article shall apply to all areas within the extraterritorial limits of the City of Atlanta,
Texas, as established by the Texas Revised Civil Statutes and as they shall be amended and shall apply to all
users of the Water and Sewage System of the City of Atlanta, Texas, regardless of location. (Ordinance 298,
adopted 3/20/72, Section 13)
ARTICLE 11.900 CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Sec. 11.901 Cross-Connection Control – General Policy
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of Atlanta, Texas from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s internal distribution system(s) or the customer’s private water
system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system; and,
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the
customer’s in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial
piping systems; and,
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/301
(b) Responsibility. The water superintendent shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water
distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow, of contaminants or pollutants through the water
service connection. If, in the judgment of said water superintendent an approved backflow-prevention assembly is required
(at the customer’s water service connection; or, within the customer’s private water system) for the safety of the water
system, the water superintendent or his/her designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an
approved backflow-prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on his/her premises. The customer shall immediately
install such approved assembly(s) at his/her own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to
install, have tested, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises
until such requirements have been satisfactorily met.
Sec. 11.902 Definitions
Water Superintendent. The water superintendent in charge of the water/wastewater department of the City of Atlanta, Tx is
invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and
for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
Approved. Accepted by the authority responsible as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article or as
suitable for the proposed use.
Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s approved public water
supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural
source(s), such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, and so forth; used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be
contaminated or polluted, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a crossconnection.
Backpressure. A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other
means that may cause backflow.
Backsiphonage. Backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping.
Backflow Preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
(1) Air Gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening
from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other assembly and
the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of
the water supply outlet, never less than 1 in. (25mm).
(2) Reduced-Pressure Backflow-Prevention Assembly. The approved reduced pressure principle backflowprevention
assembly consists of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and
below the first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves
as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.
(3) Double Check Valve Assembly. The approved double check valve assembly consists of two internally
loaded, check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly dosing
resilient-seated shutoff valves and filings with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. This assembly shall
only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard (that is, a pollutant).
Contamination. An impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign
substance that degrades the quality and creates a health hazard.
Cross-Connection. A connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any
other environment containing other substances in a manner that under any circumstances would allow such
substances to enter the potable water system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/301
Other substances may be gases, liquids, or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other
sources (potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color or add odor to the water.
Cross-Connections Controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system
with an approved backflow-prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously
afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
Cross-Connection Control by Containment. The installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly at the
water service connection to any customer’s premises, where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find
and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer’s water
system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly on the service line leading
to and supplying a portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections
that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.
Hazard, Degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse
effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
(1) Hazard-Health. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that could, if
introduced in the potable water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of
causing such effects.
(2) Hazard-Plumbing. A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water system that has not
been properly protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow-prevention assembly.
(3) Hazard-Nonhealth. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that
generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, if
introduced into the potable water supply.
(4) Hazard-System. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public
potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollution or contamination that would
have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Industrial Fluids System. Any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration, such as would constitute a health, system,
pollution, or plumbing hazard, if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited
to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public
potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and
alkalies; circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower, and/or cooling towers that are
chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as
wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, and so forth; oils, gases
glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other
purposes for firefighting purposes.
Pollution. The presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
Service Connection. The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, that is,
where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the
customer’s water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection
shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line
ahead of any meter or backflow-prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water
system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other
temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.
Water-Potable. Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the public health authority having
jurisdiction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/301
Water-Nonpotable. Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality.
Water-Used. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer’s water
system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water
purveyor.
Sec. 11.903 Requirements
(a) Water System.
(1) The water system shag be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer
system.
(2) Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer’s
system begins.
(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage,
and delivery of water to the distribution system.
(4) The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the
source to the customer’s system.
(5) The customer’s system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility
distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.
(b) Policy.
(1) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor
unless the water supply is protected as required by state/provincial laws and regulations and this article.
Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow-prevention
assembly required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflowprevention
assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(2) The customer’s system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the City of Atlanta to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the water
superintendent shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break
in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state/provincial and
city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(3) An approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water
system at or near the property line or on private property immediately inside the building being served; but in
all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
(A) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe
bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the water
superintendent, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of
hazard.
(B) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are
handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflowprevention
assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the
handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system that have been subject to
deterioration in quality.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/301
(C) In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected
and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the
premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected
against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the
service line.
(4) The type of protective assembly required under subsections (3)(A), (3)(B), and (3)(C) shall depend upon
the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
(A) In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (3)(A)
of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflowprevention
assembly.
(B) In the case of any premises where there is water of substance that would be objectionable but not
hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly.
(C) In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such
a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle
backflow-prevention assembly.
Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage
pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants.
(D) In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled” cross-connections, either actual or
potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly at the service connection.
(E) In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap
separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly on each service to
the premises.
(F) In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the water superintendent, an undue health
threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the water superintendent may
require an air gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement will
beat the discretion of the water superintendent and is dependent on the degree of hazard.
(5) Any backflow-prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the water
superintendent. The term approved backflow-prevention assembly shall mean an assembly that has been
manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association
titled:
AWWA C 510-89 - Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and
AWWA C511-89 - Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assembly,
and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by
“Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies” Sec. 10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-
Connection Control.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/301
Said AWWA and FCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the water superintendent.
Final approval shaft be evidenced by a “Certificate of Approval” issued by an approved testing laboratory
certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCHR specifications.
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the water superintendent to test and certify backflow
preventers:
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed above, will be added to an approved list as they are
qualified by the water superintendent.
Backflow preventers that may be subjected to backpressure of backsiphonage that have been fully tested
and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory’s
current list of approved backflow-prevention assemblies may be used without further testing or qualification.
(6) It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflowprevention assemblies are
installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances
where the water superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at
more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be
performed by the assembly manufacturer’s representation, water superintendent, or by a certified tester
approved water superintendent. It shall be the duty of the water superintendent to see that these tests are made
in a timely manner. The customer-user shall notify the water superintendent in advance when the tests are to be
undertaken so that the customer-user may witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired,
overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be
defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and a copy provided to the water
superintendent.
(7) All presently installed backflow-prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements of this section
but were approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of installation and that have been
properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection (6), be
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the water superintendent is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location,
requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water superintendent finds that the maintenance
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow-prevention assembly
meeting the requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 2001-02 adopted 3/19/01)
CHAPTER 12
PLANNING & ZONING*
ARTICLE 12.100 ZONING ORDINANCE*
Sec. 12.101 Adopted
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/301
The zoning regulations governing the use of land within the city as adopted by Ordinance 430 and as
subsequently amended are included at the end of this chapter as Exhibit A. Due to the technical nature of the
zoning ordinance, it has been printed for inclusion herein exactly as adopted and subsequently amended and is
specifically saved from repeal. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Editor’s note–Ordinance 430 was amended in its entirety by Ordinance 2017-001 adopted February 20, 2017.
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1. ENACTING CLAUSE
That the Zoning Ordinance attached hereto for all purposes is hereby adopted as the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Atlanta, Texas, together with a map delineating zoning districts as Ordinance No. [2017-001] of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
SECTION 2. REPEAL OF ORDINANCES
All Ordinances governing construction, land use, developments, permits or related to the Zoning of the City of
Atlanta, enacted by the City Council of the City of Atlanta, Texas, are carried forward and whenever the
standards and specifications in this Ordinance conflict with those contained in another Ordinance, the most
stringent or restrictive provision shall govern.
SECTION 3. ADOPTION OF STATUTES AUTHORIZING ZONING ORDINANCE
The statutes of the State authorizing and empowering cities to zone their cities and regulate and restrict the
height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lots that may be occupied,
the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; and in the case of designated places and areas
of historical and cultural importance, to regulate and restrict the construction, alteration, reconstruction or razing
of buildings and other structures; and authorizing and empowering the local legislative body to divide the
municipally [municipality] into districts of such numbers, shapes and areas as may be deemed best suited to
carry out the purposes set out in such statutes, and within such districts to regulate and restrict the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land, the same being Articles
1011a et seq., Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, are hereby adopted for and on behalf of the City; and the City,
acting through its duly authorized officials, shall have all of the rights, powers, privileges and authority
authorized and granted by and through such statutes.
State law reference–Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 211.
SECTION 4. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
4.01 Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of the City Council by enacting this Ordinance that the Zoning
Regulations and Districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City. They have been designed to
lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent overcrowding of the land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, parks, and open spaces; and to protect and enhance
historical, cultural, and environmental qualities and other public requirements. They have been made with
reasonable consideration, among other things; for the right to use the land subject to reasonable regulations; for
the character of the district; and its unique suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/301
conserving the value of land and buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City
consistent with the comprehensive plan as required by law.
4.02 Scope.
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance constitute minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Atlanta, Texas. Wherever higher or
more restrictive standards are established by provisions of any other applicable statutes, ordinances or
regulations, the provisions of such other statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
SECTION 5. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereon located within the City which are hereafter occupied,
used, erected, altered, converted, or maintained shall be used, placed, and erected in conformance with the
zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as hereinafter
provided.
SECTION 6. NONCONFORMING USES
6.01 Nonconforming uses, defined.
Any legal use of property existing at the time of the adoption of this article that does not conform with the
regulations prescribed in this article shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
6.02 Nonconforming uses at the time of adoption of this article may continue, effects of discontinuance.
The lawful use of land existing at the time of the adoption of this article, although such does not conform to the
provisions thereof, may be continued, but if said nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of time in
excess of six (6) months, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
article.
6.03 Nonconformance with yard, lot, area, parking or similar requirements other than use of property.
Because of changes in values and standards over time, many buildings built and parcels of land divided prior to
the adoption of these regulations may not be in compliance with the requirements established in this ordinance
for yard, lot, area, parking, or similar requirements other than use of property. Therefore, it is hereby found,
determined, and declared that any buildings or parcels of land that were constructed, divided or otherwise
established legally and in compliance with the codes, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of their
construction or division shall be considered to be in compliance with these regulations. This section shall not be
construed to allow changes in buildings or parcels of land following the date of adoption of this ordinance that
are not in compliance with the terms and conditions of this ordinance or that would increase, extend, or worsen a
nonconformity to make it less in compliance with this ordinance. This section also shall not be construed to
cause uses of property which are not in conformance with the terms of this ordinance to become in conformance,
regardless of their conformity with the regulations in effect prior to this ordinance or at the time the use was
established.
6.04 Structural changes.
The lawful use of the building at the time of the adoption of this article may be continued although such does not
conform to the provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout the building provided no structural
changes except those permitted by law or ordinance are made therein. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of the building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted
classification; provided; however, that in the event a nonconforming use of a building is once changed to a
nonconforming use of a higher or more restricted classification, it shall not later be reverted to the former lower
or less restricted classification.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/301
6.05 Maintenance.
The right of nonconforming uses to continue shall be subject to such regulations as to maintenance of the
premises and conditions of operation as may, in the judgment of the Board of Adjustment, be reasonably
required for the protection of adjacent property.
6.06 Obsolescence or destruction.
A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other
cause. In case of partial destruction by fire or other causes, not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its value, the
building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than fifty percent (50%) and less than the
total, the Board of Adjustment, hereinafter created, may grant a permit for repair after public hearing and having
due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the right of the public whether [sic]
and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and of the conservation and
preservation of property.
6.07 Trial of lawsuit not to be estoppel by request for nonconforming designation.
A violation of this article and a request for a nonconforming designation or request for relief under this
designation shall not create an estoppel of the trial of any lawsuit which may be filed in any court.
6.08 Legal use or structures.
By adoption of this ordinance, no presently illegal use or structure shall be deemed to have been legalized unless
such use or structure falls within a district where the actual use and structure conform to the provisions of this
ordinance except as provided for in Section 6.03. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where
recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be.
SECTION 7. ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The City of Atlanta, Texas, is hereby divided into Zoning Districts. The regulations as set out herein are uniform
within each district. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend and the City Council shall not
approve of any of these districts with other or different regulations than those set forth herein. This does not
preclude the establishment of other districts or revision of regulations of the districts in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 14, Procedure for Amending This Article. The districts herein established shall be
known and cited as:
Abbreviated For District Purposes
Zoning District Name Designation
Agriculture and Estate A-E
Single-Family Detached R-1
Attached, Duplex, Triplex,
Quadraplex
R-2
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/301
Multifamily MF
Mobile Home MH
Office and Restricted Business C-1
Retail Business C-2
General Business C-3
Light Industry I-1
Heavy Industry I-2
Planned Development PD
Historic District Overlay H
SECTION 8. ZONING DISTRICT MAP
8.01 Adoption of Map.
(A) Zoning District Map. The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon a Zoning District Map of
the City of Atlanta, Texas. Said map is adopted as part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in
detail.
(B) Adoption of Flood Hazard Area Map. The City of Atlanta adopts the most recent dated Flood Hazard Area Maps.
The adoption of the Flood Hazard Area Maps is essential for the protection of health, safety, and general welfare of the
public. Such Flood Hazard Area Maps shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the Building Official.
The following requirements shall be met before a building permit is issued within a flood hazard area, as depicted or [on]
said Flood Hazard Area Maps: No Building Permit may be granted in a Flood Hazard Area until the Planning and Zoning
Commission has recommended approval of the permit and the City Council has reviewed and approved the same.
8.02 Official Map.
One Zoning District Map shall be filed by the City. This copy shall be the Official Zoning District Map and shall
bear the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary. This copy shall be the master copy. The
master copy may be changed by ordinance only. A copy of the ordinance shall be attached to the master copy[.]
8.03 Copies of map.
Additional copies of the Zoning District Map shall be placed in the office of the Building Official. These copies
shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/301
8.04 Zoning District boundary lines.
The Zoning District Map shall indicate as clearly and accurately as possible the physical location of the
boundaries of all Zoning Districts. The district boundaries shall be placed on or over the City base map, and the
base map shall be used as reference information only and not an actual part of the Zoning Map. The base map
may be changed from time to time without requiring zoning amendments; however, the zoning district boundary
lines shall be changed only to define the boundaries as set forth by the Zoning Ordinance as may be amended
from time to time.
SECTION 9. ZONING; DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map are usually along centerlines of streets and alleys,
property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be
construed to follow such centerlines.
(B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such
lot lines.
(C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.
(D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the established centerline
of the right-of-way or if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between
the right-of-way lines.
(E) Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the
event of any change in the shore lines such change shall be construed as moving the zoning line.
(F) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and in the event of a change in the
centerline, shall be construed as moving with the centerline. The centerline shall be interpreted as being
midway between the shore lines.
(G) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in 9(A) through 9(F) shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of
the map.
(H) Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council or
whenever such area is franchised for building purpose, the zoning district that adjoins each side of such street,
alley, or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley, or
highway and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
(I) Boundaries indicated as dividing a lot or tract shall be construed as being located as shown on the Zoning
District Map. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale
of the map.
SECTION 10. NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS
10.01 Temporary classification.
All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Atlanta shall be temporarily classified in the Agricultural and Estate
District until permanent zoning classification[s] are given the area by the City Council of the City of Atlanta.
10.02 Procedure for establishing zoning.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/301
The procedure for establishing appropriate zoning on any annexed territory shall be the same as set forth in
Section 14 for the amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.
10.03 Recommendations by Planning and Zoning Commission.
Upon annexation of territory, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall study the newly annexed area and hold
necessary public hearings to determine the proper zoning of such land at that time. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council within six (6) months after annexation.
SECTION 11. USES LIMITED
No land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the
regulations presented for the district in which it is located, except as herein provided.
SECTION 12. PERMITS FOR AREAS TEMPORARILY ZONED A-E
In an area temporarily classified as A-E Agriculture and Estate District, no permit for construction of a building
for any purpose other than a use permitted in the A-E District shall be issued.
SECTION 13. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION*
13.01 Creation, membership, filling vacancies.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council, and shall consist of five (5)
members who shall be residents of the City and who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be
appointed all [at] the first regular meeting in November of each year for a two-year term with one-half to be
appointed in each year on a continuing basis. Members shall be selected with due regard for their fitness in order
that all citizens of the City shall have reasonable and fair voice in the affairs of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Upon the expiration of the terms of each member, his/her place shall be filed [filled] by the City
Council. Vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filed [filled] by the City Council for the remainder of
the term within thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs and shall become effective immediately. Membership
will be accompanied by active participation in the work of the commission and any member who is absent from
three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall be dropped automatically and the Commission chairman shall notify
the Council immediately that a vacancy exists. Members may also be removed by the City Council after public
hearing and for cause assigned in writing.
13.02 Meetings, organization.
At its first meeting following the annual appointment of members by the Council, the Commission shall elect
one of its members as Chairman and one as vice-chairman and shall schedule meetings regularly. A quorum
shall consist of a majority of the membership and an affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be
necessary to pass on pending questions. The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any question. The City
Manager shall be an ex-officio member of the Commission. The Commission shall meet not less than quarterly
with all meetings to be at the City Hall unless prior notice of a change in meeting place has been given in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
13.03 Rules, regulations and bylaws, quorum.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own
government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the City Council and same shall be
subject to approval by such City Council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(A) Regular and special meetings, open to the public.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/301
(B) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public.
(C) Reporting to the City Council on a quarterly basis.
(D) The holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
13.04 Recommendations, cooperation.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall procure information and make recommendations to the City
Council and shall cooperate with the City Council and other agencies as to all facts bearing upon needs of the
city with regard to all zoning in the city, as provided under Articles 1011a through 1011j, Revised Civil Statutes
of Texas.
13.05 Recommending Comprehensive Plan, other duties.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to make and recommend for
adoption a comprehensive plan, as a whole or in part, for the future development and redevelopment of the
municipality and its environs; and shall have the power, and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan
and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with Articles 1011a through 1011j, Revised Civil Statutes of
Texas. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance
or state law.
SECTION 14. PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING THIS ARTICLE
14.01 City Planning and Zoning Commission.
The City Council of the City may, from time to time, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal the regulations and restrictions as established herein and may change, restrict or extend
the boundaries of the various districts established herein. Any proposed supplement or change shall first be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its report and recommendation.
14.02 Public hearing.
No action on an amendment, change, modification or repeal shall be taken until after a public hearing. Notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the City at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the item set for such hearing. In addition to the foregoing published notice, written notice of
all public hearings on proposed changes in classification shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person
rendering the same for City taxes, affected by such proposed changes of classification and to all owners of
property, or to the persons rendering the same for city taxes, located within two hundred (200) feet of any
property affected thereby within not less than ten (10) days before any such hearing is held. Such notice may be
served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the City post office.
14.03 Effect of protest.
In the case, however, of a protest against any proposed amendment, supplement or change signed by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) or more of any area proposed to be altered or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the area immediately adjacent to the area thereof extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such
amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of a three-fourths of the members of the City
Council.
14.04 Waiting period for resubmittal of required.
No requests for rezoning or Special Use Permits shall be considered on any lot, tract or parcel more than once in
any six-month period of time, unless subsequent requests are for more restricted districts or conditions than
previous requests.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/301
SECTION 15. INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT
15.01 Method of and appeals from interpretation and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the City Building Official to interpret and enforce the provisions of this article and to
institute any appropriate action of proceedings to restrain, correct or prevent the violations of the terms of this
article. Appeal from action of the City Building Official in the interpretation and/or the enforcement of the
ordinance shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
15.02 Circumstances for application of greater restrictions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, such shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the health, safety, and general welfare. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate,
annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law relating to the use of buildings or
premises; nor is it intended by this article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement or covenants
between parties; provided, however, that where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises than are imposed by such existing provisions of Law or ordinance or by such rules or
regulations or by such easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall control.
SECTION 16. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of the regulations of
this article has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the
building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect,
builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in or assists in any such violation or who
maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day that any
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 17. COMPLETION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS
17.01 Buildings under construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this article and which entire building shall be completed
within one (1) year from the passage of this article.
17.02 Building, for which permits issued.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for
which a building permit has been heretofore issued and which entire building shall be complete within one (1)
year from the date of the passage of this article.
17.03 Effect of amendments.
If any amendment to this Ordinance is hereafter adopted changing the boundaries of districts, the provisions of
the two previous paragraphs of this section shall apply in the area affected by such amendment at the time of the
passage of such amendment.
17.04 Nonconforming designation.
If any building or activity covered by the conditions of the previous three paragraphs does not conform to the
newly adopted ordinance, district regulations or district boundaries, such building or activity shall be considered
nonconforming.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/301
SECTION 18. PERMITS
18.01 Site plan required.
No permit for the erection, alteration, construction, reconstruction, use or maintenance of any building, or the
use of any premises shall be issued by the Building Official unless there shall first be filed in his office by the
applicant therefor a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of
the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the building to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, used or maintained, with measurements of the building, together with a true statement, in
writing, signed, by the applicant showing the use for which building or premises is arranged, intended or
designed, and the location and dimensions of all accessory buildings or structures; and no permit shall be issued
by said Building Official unless such plan shall show in all details that such buildings or structure is to be
erected, used or maintained, and such premises are to be used in conformity with all the provisions of this
article. A record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the Building Official.
18.02 Failure to comply with plans and conditions of permit.
Failure of any applicant or of his/her agent, servants or employees to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, use or
maintain any building, structure or premises in conformance with such plans on which such permit is issued,
when such failure constitutes a violation of any provisions of this article, shall render such permit void, and the
Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit by giving written notice to the
applicant, or his agents, servants or employees and all work upon such building, structures or premises shall be
immediately discontinued on the serving of such notice until such buildings, structures or premises shall be
changed so as to comply with such plans and permit.
SECTION 19. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
19.01 Number, tense, and similar terms.
Certain words in this ordinance not heretofore or hereafter defined are defined as follows: Words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural
number include the singular number; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the word “lot” includes
the words “plot” or “tract” or “parcel”; the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
19.02 Definitions of words and terms.
The following words and the terms appearing in this article shall have such meaning as herein set out:
Accessory building: In a residential or multifamily dwelling district, an accessory building shall be a subordinate
building, attached to or detached from the main building, and the accessory building shall not have separate
utilities and shall not be rented or leased. In a residential or multifamily dwelling district, an accessory building
may contain accessory quarters, a washroom, a storage room for domestic storage only, and an accessory
building may also be used for other purposes which are customarily incidental to the main structure such as a
private garage for automobile storage, tool house, home workshop or greenhouse as hobbies only, children’s
playhouse, storage house, or garden shelter. In any other district, an accessory building shall be a subordinate
building, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main building.
Accessory quarters: An accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main
building and used as living quarters by the owners of the lot, the immediate family of the owners of the lot, or a
domestic employee. The accessory quarters shall not be rented or leased. A mobile home shall not be used as an
accessory quarters.
Accessory use: A use subordinate to, incidental to, and customarily associated with the primary use of the main
building or the primary use of the premises. An accessory use may be permitted in a district in which it is not
listed as permitted provided that it is operated in association with and subordinate to a permitted primary use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/301
Airport or landing field: A landing facility for aircraft to include navigational aids.
Alley: A public space or right-of-way which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting
thereon.
Antique shop: An establishment offering for sale within a building articles such as glass, china, furniture or
similar furnishings and decorations which have value and significance as a result of age, design or sentiment.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment house arranged, designed or
occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals.
Apartment house: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, or lot [let] to be
occupied as five (5) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence
by five or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Area of the lot: The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and
alleys.
Art gallery or museum: An institution for the collection, display or distribution of objects of art or science, and
which facility is open to the general public.
Basement: A building story which is partly underground, but having at least one-half of its height above the
average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height.
Bed and breakfast establishment: A private home in which lodging for one or more nights and breakfast are
provided by the resident for compensation. (See Section 22, Special Use Permit Requirements)
Block: An area within the city enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings, or, if said word is
used as term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets
which intersect said street on said side.
Board: Zoning board of Adjustment as provided in Section 26.
Boardinghouse, rooming house, or lodging house: A building other than a hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast
establishment where lodging and meals for five (5) or more persons are served for compensation. Boarders or
lodgers typically stay for one week or longer.
Breezeway: A covered passage typically one (1) story in height connecting a main structure and an accessory
building.
Buffer: Landscaping, fencing, separations, barriers, natural topography, natural vegetation, or any combination
thereof which may be required between land uses to minimize or mitigate conflicts between them or to mitigate
factors which may be considered to be obnoxious, offensive, or a nuisance to the public. See Section 29.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable
property of any kind. When subdivided in compliance with the Building Code in a manner sufficient to prevent
or significantly retard the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building.
Building ends: Those sides of a building typically having the least dimension as compared to the front or rear of
a building, and in which doors or openings are not customarily provided for ingress and egress. As used herein
for the building spacing regulations for multifamily dwelling, a building end shall be interpreted as being the
most narrow side of a building regardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent
to the side lot line or another building.
Building line: A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance, such distance
being the closest distance to the street line that a building may be erected. If a building line has been established
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/301
on an approved plat which is more restrictive than the requirements of this ordinance, that line shall take
precedence.
Business: Includes retail, commercial and manufacturing uses and districts as herein defined, or uses listed as
permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 Districts.
Business district or business uses: Includes all uses not permitted in the R-1, R-2, MF and MH District use
regulations.
Cellar: A building story with more than one-half its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Certificate of occupancy and compliance: An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official
which indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes
legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
Child care center, nursery or pre-school: A place where children are left for care and/or training.
Church or rectory: A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions and may include the on-site
housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel.
City Council: The governing body of the City of Atlanta, Texas.
Class or classification of building or uses: A class of buildings or uses shall be determined based on activities
which are first listed as permitted in a zoning district. For example, the class of uses for the C-2 district consists
of all of the activities which are listed as permitted for the first time in the C-2 district, which includes most
retail activities. Residential or office uses would not be included in this class of uses because they are first listed
as permitted in other zoning districts. In some cases, building code or life safety code requirements may take
precedence over the zoning ordinance in determining the class or classification of a building or use.
Clinic; medical: An institution, station, office, or group of offices for the examination and treatment of ill and
afflicted outpatients.
College or university: An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the State and
offering a program or series of programs of academic study.
Community center; public: A building and grounds owned or operated by a governmental body for the social or
recreational use, health or welfare of the community served.
Convalescent center or home: Any structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from illness
or suffering from infirmities or age.
Country club; private: An area of twenty (20) acres or more containing a golf course and/or a clubhouse and
available only to private specific membership. Such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club,
dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service facilities.
Court: An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of the building. An inner
court is a court entirely surrounded by exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side
open to a street, alley, yard or other permanently open space.
Curb level: The mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or in case of a corner lot, along that abutting street
where the mean curb level is the highest. Where no curb has been established, the City shall authorize and
approve the establishment of such curb or its equivalent.
Dance hall or nightclub: An establishment offering to the general public facilities for dancing and/or
entertainment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/301
Day camp: A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children, including
outdoor actives [activities], on a daytime basis.
Depth of lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Director of Planning: City Building Official.
District: A section of the City of Atlanta for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the land
and buildings are uniform.
Duplex: Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, or lot [let] to be occupied as
two (2) dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by two families and
not more than four (4) boarders or lodgers (two (2) per family) living independently of each other and
maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Dwelling unit: A building, portion of a building, room, or rooms which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be
occupied as living quarters by a family, individual, group of individuals, or a combination thereof.
Efficiency apartment: An apartment having a combination living area and bedroom. (No separate bedroom.)
Electrical substation: An electrical facility consisting of transformers and associated equipment having a primary
purpose of reducing the transmission voltage of a bulk electrical power source for distribution to specific areas
within the City. Where applicable, an electrical substation shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 22 of
this Chapter[.]
Family: Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than four
(4) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption.
Farm: An area of two (2) acres or more, which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit, trees and grain and their storage on the area, and/or the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine including dairy farms with the necessary
accessory uses, and for treating and storing the produce; provided however, that the operation of such accessory
use shall be secondary to that of the normal activities; and provided that it does not include the commercial
feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals, any type of agricultural or husbandry specifically
prohibited by ordinance or law, or commercial riding stables[.]
Farm accessory building: A structure, other than a dwelling, on a farm as herein defined, for the housing,
protection or storage of the usual farm equipment, animals or crops[.]
Flea markets: A collection or group of outdoor stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangements, used by
individual vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal property.
Flood Plain: Flood plain means that within a one-year period flooding might not occur at all or it might flood
several times.
Floor area: The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor
level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages.
Fraternity, sorority, lodge or membership association: Membership associations shall mean fraternities,
sororities, social organizations or any other association of persons, whether unincorporated or incorporated
under the laws of the State of Texas, for the promotion of some common object or purpose, to which
membership is by invitation only and entrance to its meeting place is permitted only to members and their
invited guests, and specifically excluding private clubs or other organization in which alcoholic beverages are
sold, stored, possessed or consumed at its meeting place or on the premises thereof. The term “alcoholic
beverage” as used herein shall mean alcohol and any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2
of 1%) of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/301
the term premises shall mean the grounds as well as all buildings and appurtenance pertaining thereto, and shall
also include any adjacent premises, if directly or indirectly under the control of such organization or association.
Front yard: An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the front of a lot between the
side lot lines and from the main building to the front or street line with the minimum horizontal distance between
the street line and the main building line as specified in Section 23 for the district in which it is located.
Garage sale: The sale of various items of new or used personal property displayed by the owner or owners in an
attached or detached garage or building in a residential neighborhood and owned by one of the sellers. The
display and sale of these items shall continue for no more than three (3) consecutive days.
Golf course; commercial: A golf course, privately owned but open to the public for a fee and operated as a
commercial venture.
Golf course; Private: A privately owned golf course open to members and guests[.]
Grade: For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, it is the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the
wall adjoining the street; for buildings having ways adjoining more than one street, it is the average of the
elevation of the sidewalks at the center of the walls adjoining the street; for buildings having no wall adjoining
the street, it is the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building; any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five (5) feet from a street line is to be considered
as adjoining the street[.] Where no sidewalk has been constructed, the City shall establish such sidewalk level or
its equivalent for the purpose of these regulations.
Gross floor area: The gross floor area of a building shall be measured by taking the outside dimensions of the
building at each floor level. In the case of a residential building, the floor area of cellars or attics not used for
residential purposes shall be excluded.
Group care home: A facility which provides room, board, care and supervision to children or adults exclusive of
a family unit of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, on a twenty-four (24) hour a day basis. Such
group care facility must be licensed or supervised by an appropriate local or state agency. The presence of not
more than two (2) employees, supervisors, managers, administrators, or care providers at any given time shall be
permitted on the premises.
Halfway house: A non-medical residential facility providing living facilities (either with or without board),
recreational, counseling and other rehabilitative services to individuals of either sex who require specialized
attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. The facility must be approved by an appropriate
local and/or State agency.
Height: The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average established grade at
the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher or, if no street grade has been established, to
the highest point of the roofs surface if a flat surface; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height
level between eases [eaves] and ridge for hip and gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the
following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, tanks, water towers, radio
towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height. See also
Legal height.
High risk uses: Those uses which present the possibility of bodily injury and/or property damage arising out of
an accident or occurrence.
Hobby shop: An accessory use housed in a dwelling or in an accessory building in which the residents of the
premises engage in recreational activities; from which no revenue may be derived; in which no goods may be
publicly displayed, offered for sale, or advertised for sale; nor may any sign be used in connection therewith.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/301
Home occupation: A home occupation is an operation able to be carried on in the home by a member of the
occupant’s family without structural alterations in the building or any of its rooms; without the installation of
machinery or additional equipment other than that customary to normal household operation; without the
employment of additional persons from outside the home; without the use of a sign, except for a one-square-foot
nameplate, to advertise the occupation; and which does not cause the generation of excessive traffic in the street.
Home workshop: See Hobby shop.
Hospital: An institution or place where sick or injured inpatients are given medical or surgical care either at
public (charity) or private expense, and which is licensed by the State of Texas.
Hotel and motel: A building or arrangement of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which the rooms are usually occupied singly for hire, and
in which there are no provisions for cooking in individual rooms or apartments[.] To be classified as a hotel or
motel an establishment shall contain a minimum of six (6) individual guest rooms or units and shall furnish
customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and use and upkeep of furniture.
Junk or salvage yard: Any land or building where metals, plumbing materials, appliances, vehicles or vehicles
parts, rags or paper, machinery or similar items or material are kept, salvaged, processed, stored, dismantled
and/or offered for sale as whole units, as salvaged parts, or as processed material.
Kennel: Any place where five (5) or more dogs, cats or any combination thereof, over the age of four (4)
months, are raised, trained, boarded, or harbored or kept. Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and animal
shelters are specifically excluded.
Kindergarten: A school for children of pre-public school age in which constructive endeavors, object lessons,
and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum.
Laboratory; manufacturing: Operations involving the compounding of products such as perfumes and
pharmaceuticals and/or the development and assembly of instruments and similar items.
Legal heights: The maximum height of a building permitted by any airport zoning ordinance or other ordinance
restricting the height of structures. See also Height.
Light fabrication and assembly processes: Operations including the manufacture of jewelry, trimming
decorations and similar items not involving the generation of noise, odor, vibration, dust or hazard.
Limited self-service gasoline or fuel station: An establishment for the retail sale of petroleum products only (not
including automobile accessories, service, or repair) on a customer self-service basis and limited to a maximum
of three (3) individual dispensing outlets at any separate station or on any parcel of property.
Liquor store: Facility whose primary purpose is for the sale of beer, wine or liquor not for on-premises
consumption. It may include soft drinks and some food items. A liquor store may also be known as a package
store.
Livestock auction: Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of livestock.
Living area: The area of a dwelling unit which is intended for occupancy by the residents of the dwelling unit.
Living area customarily includes that area of a dwelling unit which is served by heating and air-conditioning
equipment. Garages, attached storage areas with outside entrances, porches, covered patios, breezeways, and
accessory buildings are not normally included as living area.
Living unit: A building, portion of a building, room, or rooms which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be
occupied as living quarters by a family, individual, group of individuals, or a combination thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/301
Local utility line: The facility provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution or
collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power, telephone services, or cable TV services.
Lot: Land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such
open spaces as are required under this article, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially
approved place.
Lot[,] corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot coverage: The percent of lot area which is covered by a roof, floor, other structure and is not open to the sky.
Roof eaves to the extent of two (2) feet and ordinary projections including but not limited to fireplaces, windows
and door treatments that extend from the exterior walls of the building not exceeding twelve (12) inches shall
not be counted in computing coverage.
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot; interior: A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street.
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county
clerks, or a parcel of land the deed for which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Cass County.
Lot; through: Any interior lot having frontage on two streets.
Main building: The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
Mobile home, manufactured home, HUD-code home: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which,
in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected onsite,
is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.
Mobile home park: A unified development of two (2) or more mobile home spaces or stands arranged on a tract
of land under private ownership. A site plan for the mobile home park shall be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
Mobile home subdivision: A unified development of lots for mobile home sites which have been divided for the
purpose of individual ownership, and which is governed by the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the
City of Atlanta.
Modular home: A structure or building module which is manufactured at a location other than the location where
it is installed, used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or
other conveyance device, and designed to be used as permanent dwelling when installed and placed upon a
permanent foundation system. The term includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in this section; nor does it
include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. A modular
home shall be constructed in keeping with the standards of the Building Codes of the City of Atlanta. A modular
home shall be built by an approved company listed in the Building Codes of the City of Atlanta or provisions
shall be made at the owner’s expense for inspections to be made of the modular home by the City of Atlanta to
ensure its compliance with the Building Codes of the City of Atlanta.
Multifamily dwellings or apartments: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, based
[leased] or let to be occupied as five (5) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or
place of residence by five or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking
facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/301
Nameplate: An accessory sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area showing only the name and/or
occupation of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is erected or placed. A nameplate may not be
lighted.
Nonconforming use: A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of
this article or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it
is situated.
Nursing home or residence home for aged: A home where ill or elderly people are provided with lodging and
means [meals] with or without nursing care.
Occupancy: The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors, tenants, or owners.
Off-Street parking incidental to main use: Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with requirements
specified by this Ordinance and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use, on an immediately adjacent
lot or tract, or on an immediately adjacent lot or tract across an alley or a street; and located within the same
zoning district as the main use or a zoning district which would permit the establishment of the main use or a
commercial parking lot or structure.
Open space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and
unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of comics [cornices], eaves or porches.
Park or aboveground [sic]; public: An open recreation facility or park owned or operated by a public agency
such as the Parks and Recreation Department or School Board and available to the general public; or the
temporary or seasonal use of open land as a play area or recreation area which is authorized, sanctioned or
approved by the City of Atlanta.
Parking lot or garage: An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of currently licensed vehicles which
are in driveable condition.
Parking lot; truck: Facility for parking or storage of currently licensed trucks which are in driveable condition.
Parking space: An area measuring approximately one hundred eighty (180) square feet not on a public street or
alley, surfaced with an all-weather surfaced surface or gravel surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an
all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting unimpeded ingress
and egress. It shall not include the parking of trucks or buses for commercial purposes in any dwelling, duplex or
apartment district. Head-in parking adjacent to public thoroughfare wherein the maneuvering is done on a public
street shall not be permitted[.]
Place: An officially approved open, unoccupied space reserved for purposes of access to abutting property.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The agency appointed by the City Council as an advisory body to it and
which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning, among its other duties as set forth in the Bylaws of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and in Section 13 of this ordinance.
Public building, shop or yard of local, state or federal government: Facilities such as office buildings,
maintenance yards or shops required by branches of local, state or federal government for service to an area,
such as a Highway Department yard, City Service Center, or Experiment Station.
Public garage: A building or portion of a building used for repair, care or servicing of motor-driven vehicles, or
where motor-driven vehicles are equipped for operation, or kept for hire or sale, but not including the open
storage of trucks, trailers, and vans.
Quadraplex: Any building which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as four dwelling units or
apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by four families living independently of each
other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/301
Radio[,] television or microwave towers: Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any
portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installations for home use of radio or
television.
Railroad team track: A siding for spotting and unloading or loading boxcars or other railroad cars and which
area is connected to a public street by a drive for access.
Railroad track and right-of-way: Any track or right-of-way for rail service, but not including railroad stations,
sidings, team tracks, loading facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas.
Rear line: The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line. In case of uncertainty,
the Building Official shall determine the rear line.
Rear yard: The required rear yard is an open space unoccupied and unobstructed extending across the rear of a
lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth in each district as specified in Section 23.
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is not designed to be used as a permanent dwelling, and in which the
plumbing, heating, and electrical systems are self-contained and may be operated without connection to outside
utilities and which is self-propelled or designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
Recycling collection facility: A facility designed to collect, sort and package, by manual or mechanical
processes, recyclable items for transport to a reprocessing plant. The facility must be operated indoors with no
outdoor storage or collection bins, except when located in an I-2 District. The term recyclable item shall mean a
waste product which can be processed and used again as raw material in the manufacturing of same or similar
products and is not attached or combined with products containing other materials[.] The term “mechanical
process” shall mean sorting and packaging by machinery in which the composition of the item remains constant
but the shape of the product is altered.
Residence: Same as dwelling unit.
Residential districts: Shall include the A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, and MH districts.
Restaurants: Any eating or drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is the primary
business of such establishment. The term “primary business” means that the gross receipts from the sale of food
exceed fifty (50) percent of the entire gross receipts of such establishment.
Riding academy: A paddock, clubhouse and/or stable for quartering, training and riding horses; the facilities of
which are restricted to a specific membership and not available to the general public.
School; business and commercial: A business organized to operate for a prom [profit] and offering instruction
and training in a service or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school,
but not including manual trade schools.
School, public, private or denominational kindergarten, elementary or secondary: A school under the
sponsorship of a public, private or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public
elementary or secondary schools, but including trade or commercial schools.
School, trade: A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a trade such as
welding, brick laying, machinery operation and similar trades.
Screening, fencing: Sight-barring bushes or fencing with a minimum height of six (6) feet so that the view from
adjacent property and from public roads is blocked.
Secondhand merchandise dealers or storage: The keeping, handling, storage or use of furniture, appliances
and/or other merchandise or goods for sale or display. Secondhand merchandise is defined as an item which has
previously been sold at the wholesale or retail level or previously used by an individual or business.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/301
Service station: An establishment for the retail sale of petroleum products, automobile accessories and/or minor
automobile tune-up, muffler installation incidental to the primary use, oil change or other lubricative services in
which all services provided and all storage, supplies, parts, equipment and accessories are indoors. This
definition shall not include any major automotive repairs or service (engine and transmission overhauls, etc.).
Side line: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a part of a lot line, a line
bordering on an alley or place, or a side street line. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line shall be deemed a
side line.
Side yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated between the building and side
line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the required rear yard.
Single-family dwelling; attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party
wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family and not more than four (4)
boarders or lodgers, and is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. Includes
townhomes[,] zero lot line homes, patio homes and other similar types of housing.
Single-family dwelling; detached: A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and
located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other
lot or tract and occupied by one family and not more than four (4) boarders or lodgers.
Stables; commercial: Any structure which is used for the sheltering, quartering, or feeding of animals which are
available for use by the public for a fee, and which has a capacity for more than four (4) horses, mules, or other
livestock or animals.
Stables; private: Any structure which is used for the sheltering, quartering, or feeding of animals which are
available for use only to members of the stables or owners of the animals, and which has a capacity for not more
than four (4) horses, mules, or other livestock or animals. Stables shall comply with Chapter 2, Animal Control,
of the Code of Ordinances.
Stadiums, arenas, athletic fields: An athletic field or stadium owned or operated by a public agency for the
general public, including a baseball field, football field or stadium, or similar athletic field.
Story: The height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor of [to] the roof. The standard
height for a story is eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches between floors.
Story, half: A story having an average height of not more than eight (8) feet, covering a floor area of not more
than seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the floor of the story immediately below.
Street: Any thoroughfare or public right-of-way, other than any alley, more than fourteen (14) feet in width,
which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
Street line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street also referred to as the
right-of-way line.
Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column,
beams or girders, or any change to the floor plan of a building which alters egress routes from within the
building.
Swimming pool; commercial: A swimming pool, with or without accessory facilities, which is not part of the
municipal or public recreational system and which is not a private swim club, but where the facilities are
available to the general public for a fee.
Swimming pool; residential: A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a one-family,
two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located and fenced in accordance with the regulations of the City of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/301
Atlanta. A residential swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be
hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
Tavern, lounge or private club: A tavern or lounge shall mean an establishment, the primary activity of which is
the sale or consumption on the premises of beer, wine or other liquors and where food service, if any, is
secondary to the sale or consumption of beer, wine and other liquors. Private club shall mean any organization or
association of persons, whether unincorporated or incorporated, including fraternal and veteran organizations
and an organizations required to be licensed by the Texas Liquor Control Board, which sells, stores, possesses or
regularly provides and dispenses or makes available alcoholic beverages at its meeting place or on the premises
thereof to its members and their guests regardless of whether or not a fee is charged thereof and regardless of
whether or not the dispensation of alcoholic beverages is incidental to or the primary function of the operation of
such organization or association. The term “alcoholic beverage” as used herein shall mean alcohol and any
beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol by volume which is capable of use
for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted; and the term “premises” shall mean the grounds as well as
all buildings and appurtenances pertaining thereto and shall also include any adjacent premises, if directly or
indirectly under the control of such organization or private club.
Telephone exchange, switching relay and transmitting equipment: Any buildings, or premises normally used for
these activities, but not including public business facilities, storage or repair facilities.
Temporary field or construction office: A structure or shelter, subject to removal by order of the Building
Official, used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary
administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment.
Thoroughfare: (Same as Street.)
Transition area or district: An area which is located adjacent to or between a major thoroughfare or high traffic
volume street or an established business, commercial, or industrial area and an established residential area in
which a mixture of activities such as single-family residences, duplexes, apartments, lower intensity and
generally inoffensive business, or similar activities occur or can be reasonably expected to occur.
Travel trailer: A structure built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which is less than eight (8) body feet in
width and forty (40) body feet in length in the traveling mode, and which is less than 320 square feet when
installed or erected on-site.
Travel trailer parks: A unified development under private ownership designed for transient service on which two
(2) or more travel trailers, pickup coaches, and/or self-propelled motorized vehicles are parked situated or used
for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for such vehicles, regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for such accommodations. It shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used
or intended to be used as a part of the equipment of such park. The site plan for any travel trailer shall be
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Triplex: Any building which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as three dwelling units or
apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three families living independently of each
other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Used car lot: A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display and sale of automobiles that are in condition
to be driven on or off the lot. A used car lot shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, or the
dismantling of automobiles, or the storage of automobile parts.
Variance: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular
parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is
necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the
same vicinity and zoning district. (See Section 26)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/301
Width of lot: The mean horizontal distance between side lots lines.
Width of side yard: The mean horizontal distance between a side wall of a building and the side line of the lot.
Yard: An open, unoccupied space, other than a court, on the same lot on which a building is situated and which
is unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as provided for roof overhangs and similar special
architectural features and plant material.
Yard sale: A sale of various items of new or used personal property displayed by the owner or owners in any
portion of a yard, owned by one of the sellers, in a residential neighborhood. The display and sale of these items
shall continue for no more than three (3) consecutive days.
Zoning district map: The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are
drawn and which is an integral part of the zoning ordinance, as provided for in Section 8.
SECTION 20. ZONING DISTRICT PURPOSES AND PROHIBITED USES
20.01 A-E Agricultural and Estate District.
A. The Agricultural and Estate District is designed to accommodate agricultural and rural activities that are frequently
found in less-developed areas of the city and on the fringe of the developing areas in the city. It is also an area in which
future development might occur. It is intended that this district be used to hold agricultural and rural land in those uses as
long as is practical, reasonable, and economical; have as permitted uses certain activities which are normally expected to
take place in a rural or urban-fringe area; and be identified as an area in which the zoning may be changed in the future to
accommodate urban development.
B. Prohibited Uses:
1. Any building erected or land used for other than one or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
2. On- and off-premise signs, portable signs, animated or illuminated signs, except as permitted in Section
22.
3. Any use of property that does not meet the yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in Section 23.
20.02 R-1 Single-Family Detached Residential District.
A. The R-1 Single-Family Detached Residential District is established to provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations for residential development to meet the present and future housing needs of the City, with allowance for a
diversity of sites. The District is also established for the following additional purposes:
1. To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards, and other objectionable influences.
2. To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy and through traffic.
3. To protect residential areas against congestion, as far as possible, by managing the density of population
in and around them; by providing for off-street parking spaces; and by providing open areas for rest and
recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable
environment for urban living.
4. To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows as far as possible, through controls over the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
5. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of residential
development, to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect
the City’s tax base.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/301
6. To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
1. Any building erected on land used for other than one or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
2. On- and off-premise signs, portable signs, animated or illuminated signs, except as permitted in Section
22.
3. Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum yard, lot, and area requirements specified
in Section 23.
20.03 R-2 Attached, Duplex, Triplex, Quadraplex Residential District.
A. The Attached, Duplex, Triplex, Quadraplex Residential District is established to manage the density of population
and to provide adequate space and site diversification for medium density residential development where adequate streets
and other community facilities are available for present and future needs. This District is also established for the following
additional purposes:
1. To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards, and other objectionable influences.
2. To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic.
3. To manage the density of population and protect against congestion by providing for off-street parking
spaces and by requiring the provision of open space in residential areas in order to open areas for rest and
recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable
environment for urban living.
4. To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
5. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and not in conflict with the adopted policies of the City; to promote stability of
development; to protect the character in the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect
the City’s tax base.
6. To promote the most efficient use of City’s facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
1. Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
2. On- and off-premise signs, portable signs, animated or illuminated signs, except as permitted in Section
22.
3. Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard[,] lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
[20.04–20.07 Reserved.]
20.08 MF Multifamily Residential District.
A. The Multifamily Residential District is established to manage the density of population and to provide adequate space
and site diversification for higher density residential development in which adequate streets and other community facilities
are available for present and future needs. This District is also established for the following additional purposes:
1. To protect residential areas against pollution, environmental hazards, and other objectionable influences.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/301
2. To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic.
3. To manage the density of population and protect against congestion by providing for off-street parking
spaces; by requiring the provision of open space in residential areas in order to open areas for rest and
recreation; to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment
for urban living.
4. To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
5. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and not in conflict with the adopted policies of the city; to promote stability of
development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect
the City’s tax base.
6. To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
1. Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
2. On and off-premise signs, portable signs, animated or illuminated signs except as erected in compliance
with the Sign Ordinance to identify the multifamily development on the same property as the sign, and except
as permitted in Section 22.
3. Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
20.09 MH Mobile Home District.
A. The Mobile Home District is established to provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes
designed to accommodate the design criteria unique to mobile homes, recreational vehicles, and manufactured houses. This
District is also established for the following additional purposes:
1. To protect against pollution, environmental hazards, and other objectionable influences.
2. To provide adequately for vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
3. To promote housing densities appropriate to and compatible with existing and proposed public support
facilities.
4. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, to promote stability of development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve
the value of land and buildings; and to protect the City’s tax base.
B. Prohibited Uses:
1. Any building or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this District
in Section 21.
2. No more than one mobile home or recreational vehicle may occupy any approved space.
3. Any use of property that does not meet the yard, lot, and area, requirements as specified in Section 23.
[20.10 Reserved.]
20.11 C-1 Office and Restricted Business District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/301
A. The Office and Restricted Business District is established to provide for certain specific business activities that
generally would not be viewed as offensive in areas in transition from residential use to business use along more heavily
traveled streets. These business activities do not necessarily include neighborhood-oriented businesses. The permitted
activities in this district are restricted to businesses which normally do not generate heavy or excessive traffic, which
normally do not have late hours of operation, and which normally do not cause or create excessive noise, trash, or glare
from lights. Because this district is specifically designed to be used in areas which are a transition between businesses and
residences or between major thoroughfares or heavily traveled streets and residences, the businesses in this district should
lend themselves well to being located in structures which were originally built as residences on property which was
originally divided for residential use. A primary purpose of this district is to allow property to be converted to business use
in recognition of the demands of the marketplace in as unobtrusive, inoffensive, and safe a manner as possible so that the
occupants of properties which remain in residential use may continue to enjoy a high quality undisturbed residential
atmosphere until the transition is complete. In order to allow for and encourage the continuation of a high quality
undisturbed residential atmosphere in and adjacent to this District, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space,
landscaping, and off-street parking are made than are provided in other business and commercial districts. It is intended
that adequate off-street parking for customers and employees be provided and that appropriate landscaping and screening
be provided to ensure compatibility with the surrounding residential environment. This district is also established for the
following additional purposes.
(1) To provide appropriate space for off-street parking to control traffic congestion, and to encourage
business development to concentrate to the mutual advantage of consumers, merchants, and nearby residents.
(2) To protect against fire, explosions, pollution, and environmental hazards.
(3) To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan; to promote stability of business and residential development; to strengthen the
economic base of the City; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings;
and to protect the City’s tax base.
(4) To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses.
(1) Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
(2) Off-premise signs.
(3) Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirement as specified in
Section 23.
(4) Any outdoor storage or display.
(5) Temporary or portable signs, signs with flashing or intermittent lighting and signs in excess of thirty-two
(32) square feet.
20.12 C-2 Retail Business District.
A. The Retail Business District is established to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations with a variety of site
choices for retail development and for other development requiring a higher density of commercial establishments,
generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and/or
generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. This district is intended to be the primary district in which
consumer and service oriented activities are established. This District is also established for the following additional
purposes:
(1) To protect against fire and explosions, pollution, and other environmental hazards.
(2) To protect, as far as possible, commercial centers against traffic congestion.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/301
(3) To promote the most desirable uses of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) To promote stability of commercial development; to strengthen the economic base of the City; to protect
the character of the district and its uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the City’s
tax base.
(5) To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
(1) Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
(3) Any outdoor storage which is not screened.
20.13 C-3 General Business District.
A. The General [Business] District is established to provide for the development of business and commercial
establishments which could generally be considered non-offensive and to provide for appropriate locations for
development of more intense and higher density business districts as might be found along major thoroughfares or in the
vicinity of a major intersection with high traffic volumes. This District is also established for the following additional
purposes:
(1) To protect against fire and explosions, pollution, and other environment hazards.
(2) To protect, as far as possible, against traffic congestion.
(3) To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) To promote stability of commercial development; to strengthen the economic base of the city; to protect
the City’s tax base.
(5) To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Use:
(1) Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
(3) Any outdoor storage which is not screened.
20.14 I-1 Light Industry District.
A. The Light Industry District is established to accommodate commercial operations, manufacturing operations, and
industrial operations the external physical effects of which are generally restricted to the site occupied by a particular
activity and which in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts or activities. This District is
generally intended for smaller scale industrial activities, clean industrial activities, and commercial activities which might
be considered offensive or detrimental due to outside storage of material or generation of noise, dust, odor, or vibrations.
This District is also established for the following additional purposes:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/301
(1) To permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging,
assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material as long as
such use has no adverse external effects such as noise or odor which extend beyond the property lines of the
site.
(2) To protect against fire and explosions, pollution, and other environmental hazards.
(3) To protect, as far as possible, against congestion.
(4) To promote the most desirable uses of land and the direction of building development in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan.
(5) To promote stability of industrial development; to strengthen the economic base of the City; to protect
the character of the district; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the City’s tax base.
(6) To promote the most efficient use of City Facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
(1) Any building erected or land used for other than one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in this
District in Section 21.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
20.15 I-2 Heavy Industry District.
A. The Heavy Industry District is established to accommodate industrial operations the external physical effects of
which are restricted to the area of the District and which in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding
districts. This District is also established for the following additional purposes.
(1) To permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging,
assembly and/or treatment of raw materials or finished or semi-finished products.
(2) To protect against fire and explosions, pollution, and other environmental hazards.
(3) To protect, as far as possible, against congestion.
(4) To promote the most desirable uses of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(5) To promote stability of industrial development; to protect the character of the district; to conserve the
value of land and buildings; and to protect the City’s tax base.
(6) To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
B. Prohibited Uses:
(1) Those uses, which in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council would be
detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens of Atlanta or to adjacent development.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the minimum yard, lot, and area requirements as specified in
Section 23.
20.16 PD Planned Development District.
A. The Planned Development District is established to provide for a way of developing property which involves
activities, combinations of activities, or lot requirements which are not available in the other zoning districts contained in
this ordinance and to allow unique developments which will contribute to an improved quality of life in Atlanta and which
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/301
cannot be accommodated in another Zoning District contained in this Ordinance. This district is also established for the
following additional purposes:
(1) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for types of development to meet the present and
future needs of the City, with allowance for a diversity of sites. The City Council, after public hearing and
proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendation from the City Planning and Zoning
Commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned development districts anywhere
within the City:
(a) General retail shopping center on tracts of one (1) acre or more.
(b) Housing development on tracts of one (1) acre or more, or a community unit development.
(c) Industrial parks or districts on tracts of ten (10) acres or more.
(d) Medical center and hospital.
(e) Office center.
(f) Commercial use development on tracts of one (1) acre or more.
(g) Recreation center.
(h) A combination of any of the developments listed in (a) through (g).
(i) Transition districts as an extension of an existing district whereby the provision of transitional land
uses, off-street parking, screening walls, open space and planting would create a protective transition
between a lesser and a more restrictive district.
(2) In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this section, the City Council shall
require a comprehensive site plan of the development. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the
ordinance prior to the issuance of any building permit in a planned development district. Such required plan
and ordinance shall establish the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public or private streets
or drives, with adequate right-of-way to conform to the thoroughfare plan of the City, sidewalks, utilities,
drainage, parking space, height of building, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls, or
fences and other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable
transition to and protection of the adjacent property.
(3) Every planned development district approved under the provisions of this section shall be considered as
an amendment to this section as applicable to the property involved. In approving the planned development
district, the City Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development; and such conditions
shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure which
is part of the planned development district; and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent
to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a
certificate of occupancy.
(4) To protect areas against pollution, environmental hazards, and other objectionable influences.
(5) To protect areas, as far as possible, against heavy and through traffic.
(6) To protect areas against congestion, as far as possible, by managing the density of population in and
around them; by providing for off-street parking spaces; and by providing open areas for rest and recreation
and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk, thus providing a more desirable environment for urban
living.
(7) To provide for privacy and access of light and air to windows, as far as possible, through controls over
the spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/301
(8) To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and not in conflict with the adopted policies of the City; to promote stability of
development; to protect the character of an area; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect the
City’s tax base.
(9) To promote the most efficient use of City facilities and services.
(10) To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations with a variety of site choices, for development
requiring higher intensity, generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served
by a common access or parking area and/or generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(11) To protect against fire and explosions, pollution, and other environmental hazards.
B. Prohibited Uses:
(1) In general, while it is not specifically prohibited to include any activity as a Planned Development other
than those activities which are listed elsewhere in this Ordinance as prohibited in the City of Atlanta, it is
intended that this district not be used as a mechanism to allow individual activities to take place which could
normally be provided for in another Zoning District contained in this Ordinance.
(2) Any use of property which is not specifically listed as permitted in the Ordinance for an individual
planned development.
SECTION 21. PERMITTED USES
21.01 General provisions.
The list of activities which are permitted in each zoning district is contained in the tables on the following pages.
While this list is intended to be comprehensive, it is not intended that only those items which are included on the
list be permitted in the City. The appropriate zoning district for any activity which is not on the list shall be
determined as provided for in Section 15. The determination of the appropriate zoning district for an activity not
included on the list should be done in a reasonable manner, taking into consideration the purposes and general
characters of the zoning districts, the compatibility of the proposed activity with other uses in the district in
which it is to be placed, and the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan.
PERMITTED USES
X denotes permitted use
Blank denotes prohibited use
S denotes special use permit required
See Section 22 for special use permit requirements
A-E Agriculture and Estate
R-1 Single-Family Detached
R-2 Attached, Duplex, Triplex, Quadraplex
MF Multifamily
MH Mobile Home
C-1 Office and Restricted Business
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/301
C-2 Retail Business
C-3 General Business
I-1 Light Industry
I-2 Heavy Industry
PD Planned Development
21.02 AGRICULTURAL TYPE USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Animal clinic or hospital - no outside
runs or pens S X X X X
Animal clinic, kennel, pound, or
hospital with outside runs or pens S X X X
Farming and ranching operations X S X
Windmill X S S S S S S S S S
21.03 COMMERCIAL TYPE USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Bakery - commercial X
Blueprinting & photographic
reproductions X X X X X
Commercial printing and bookbinding X X X
Bottling plant X X
Cleaning and pressing shops not in
excess of 6,000 square feet X X X X
Cleaning, laundry and/or dying plant -
commercial X X
Cold storage plant or frozen food locker
X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/301
Dairy products depot X X
Feed store X X X
General repair services - indoor,
excluding auto X X X
Grain elevator S
Greenhouse - commercial S X X X
Heavy equipment sales, storage, leasing,
or renting X X
Landscape nursery - wholesale S X X X
Light equipment and tool renting -
indoor X X X X
Meat & game processing, no
slaughtering X X X
Meat & game slaughtering & processing
Mini-warehouse S X X X X
Petroleum products - wholesale X X
Public scales X X
Publishing company X X X
Taxidermist X X X X
Warehouse - storage or sales X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/301
Wholesaling - general X X X
21.04 CONSTRUCTION AND HOME IMPROVEMENT
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Construction or moving contractor -
equipment and storage X X
Building materials - screened X X X X
Building materials - unscreened X X
Cabinet or carpenter shop X X X
Home improvement center X X X X
Lumber yard X X
Moving and storage warehouse X X X
Portable building sales and rental X X X
21.05 EATING ESTABLISHMENTS
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Cafeteria X X X X
Confectionery - donut shop X X X X
Dinner theater X X X X
Drive-in restaurant X X X
Private club for consumption of
alcoholic beverages as accessory use to a
X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/301
restaurant
Restaurant - inside service only X X X X
Snack shop or convenience store X X X X
Tavern, lounge or private club S S S
21.06 EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND SPECIAL USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Art gallery X X X X
Art studio X X X X X X
Athletic instruction schools X X X
Boarding school - private S S S S X
Business or commercial school X X X
Cemetery or mausoleum S S S S S S X X S S
Charitable boarding - temporary X
Child care centers or pre-schools
(private, public or denominational) for
more than 4 children not related by blood
S S S X S X S S
Child care centers or pre-schools for not
more than 4 children not related by blood X X X X X X S S
Church S S S X S X X X
Convention facility S S S S S X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/301
Correspondence schools X X X X
Dance or baton schools X X X X
Day camp X X X
Fairground or exhibit area S X X X
Fraternal lodge or membership
organization X X X X
Halfway house S X X S S
Institutions of religious or philanthropic
nature X X X X
Juvenile home S X X S S
Library S S S S S S X X X X
Museum X X X X X
Orphanage/non-family foster home S X X S S
Public, private or denominational
kindergarten, elementary or secondary
school
S S S S S S X X S S
Scientific research laboratories S S S X X
Trade school X X X
Youth organization with living facilities S X X X X
Youth organization without living
facilities X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/301
21.07 GENERAL MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Analytical laboratory X X X
Animal fertilizer factories S
Artificial flowers - manufacture X X
Artificial limbs - manufacture X X
Asphalt batching plant - permanent X
Asphalt batching plant - temporary S S S S S S S S S X
Awning - manufacture X X
Bottling or drinks or foodstuffs X X
Brick kiln or tile plant X
Candy - manufacture X X
Cement or hydrated lime manufacture S
Clothing - manufacture, light
compounding, or fabrication X X
Concrete batching plant - temporary S S S S S S S S S X
Concrete plant – permanent X
Concrete products - manufacturing X X
Fireworks, gunpowder, or other
explosives - manufacture or storage
S
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/301
Garbage, offal, dead animals, wrecking
or salvage yards, junkyards, or refuse
storage
S
General manufacturing - indoor -
including feed, ice, dairy products,
laboratory, leather, light fabrication and
assembly
X X
Heavy manufacturing or industrial uses
not prohibited by law and excepting
those specifically listed as requiring use
permits
X
Lithographing X X X
Meat packing plant X X X
Packaging of foodstuffs X X
Paint - mixing or manufacture X
Paper products - manufacture X
Plastic products - manufacture X
Scrap metal storage S
Sheetmetal shop X X
Slaughterhouse S
Smelter or refinery S
Welding or machine shop X X
Any other use which is obnoxious or
offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke,
gas or noise
S
21.08 MEDICAL OR RELATED USES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/301
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Care facilities for alcoholics, drug
dependents, psychiatric or handicapped X X X S S
Complex for the elderly, residence for
the elderly, nursing home, or
convalescent center with food service,
housekeeping service, health care, and/or
administrative personnel
S X X X
Group care home for six or fewer people X X X X X X X X
Group care home for seven or more
persons S S S S S S S S
Health care practitioner’s office or clinic X X X S S
Hospital X X X S S
Medical laboratory X X X S S
Mortuary or funeral home X X X
Pharmacy X X X X
21.09 MOTOR VEHICLES AND RELATED USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Automobile leasing and rental X X X X
Automotive glass X X X X
Auto sales and repair - indoor X X X X
Auto sales - outdoor X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/301
Auto repair - outdoor X X
Automobile washing - service or
automatic X X X X
Mobile home sales X X X
Motorcycle sales and service X X X
New or rebuilt parts and supplies -
indoor only X X X X
Parking garage or lot - commercial X X X X X
Recreation vehicles sales and service X X X
Seat cover and muffler installation shop X X X
Service station - full or self service X X X X
Tire dealer - no outside storage X X X X
Tire dealer - with outside storage X X
Tire retreading or capping X X
Truck, bus, or trailer sales or rental X X
Truck or bus storage, commercial
vehicles X X
Wrecker service X X X X
21.10 NATURAL RESOURCE STORAGE AND EXTRACTION
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/301
Extraction and/or storage of sand,
caliche, stone, gravel, clay or other
natural resources
S S S S S S S S S S
Petroleum collecting storage facilities X X
Petroleum or gas well S S S S S S S S X X
21.11 OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL AND FINANCIAL
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Answering service X X X X X
Automatic bank teller machine X X X X X
Bank or financial institution X X X X X
Catering and wedding service X X X X X
General business offices X X X X X
Professional office X X X X X
Recording or photography studio X X X X X
21.12 RECREATIONAL, SOCIAL AND ENTERTAINMENT
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Amusement parks X X X
Arcade S S S S S S S
Boat storage - commercial X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/301
Bowling alley X X X X
Community recreation center -
commercial X X X X
Community recreation center - private or
public S S S S S S X X X X
Country club S S S S S S X X X X
Dance hall or nightclub in which
alcoholic beverages are consumed S S S
Dance hall or nightclub in which
consumption of alcoholic beverages are
prohibited
X X X
Drive-in theater X X X
Go-cart track X X X
Golf course or driving range -
commercial, municipal or private S S S S S S X X X X
Handball or racquetball courts -
commercial X X X X
Marina X S S S S S X X X X
Miniature golf courses S X X X X
Motor vehicle racetracks S S S
Park or playground - private S S S S S S X X X X
Park or playground - public X X X X X X X X X X
Riding academy S X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/301
Rodeo S X X X
Shooting range - outdoor S X X
Sexually oriented business S S
Stable X X X X
Stadiums, arenas, athletic fields - public S S S S S S X X X X
Swimming club - private S S S S S S X X X X
Swimming club - commercial S X X X X
Swimming pool - public S S S S S S X X X X
Tennis club - private S S S S S S X X X X
Tennis courts - commercial X X X X
Theater - other than drive-in type X X X X
21.13 RESIDENTIAL USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Apartment or multifamily dwelling X S
Bed and breakfast S S S S S X X
Boarding, rooming or lodging house X X X
Condominium X X S
Custodial quarters
S S S S
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/301
Duplex, triplex, or quadraplex X X X X
Group care home for six or fewer people X X X X X X X X
Group care home for seven or more
people S S S S S S S S
Home occupation X X X X X X X X X X
Hotel or motel X X
HUD-Code home X
Manufactured home X
Mobile home as fixed dwelling X
Modular home X X X X X X X X
Patio home X X X X X
Single-family dwelling - attached X X X X X
Single-family dwelling - detached X X X X X X X X
Townhouse or zero lot line home X X X X X
Trailer, travel trailer, mobile home,
recreational vehicle, or recreational
vehicle park
X
21.14 RETAIL SALE AND SERVICES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Beauty shop or barber shop
S
X X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/301
Feed dealers - retail S X X X
Grocery store or supermarket X X X X
Health studio or fitness club X X X X
Needlework, weaving, seamstress, tailor X X X X X
Pawnbroker X X X X
Produce stand - outdoor S X X X
Retail sales not otherwise listed with
gross sales area <6,000 SF X X X X X
Retail sales not otherwise listed with
gross sales area >6,000 SF X X X X
Sidewalk sales conducted by a
permanently established business on
same or adjacent property on a
temporary basis
X X X X
Washateria - equipped with self-service
automatic washing machines X X X X
21.15 SIGNS
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Advertising sign - off-premises X X X X
Agricultural sign X
Apartment name sign X
Billboard or commercial sign X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/301
General business sign - on premises X X X X X
Institutional sign X X X X X X X X X X
Nameplate - not to exceed one sq. ft. X X X X X X X X X X
Signs for churches and schools not in
excess of eighteen square feet and not
using flashing or intermittent lights
X X X X X X X X X X
Temporary signs for construction,
development, sales, or rental X X X X X X X X X X
21.16 TRANSPORTATION TYPE USES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Air freight terminal X X X
Airport, heliport, or landing field S S S S S S S S S S
Ambulance service when a separate use X X X X
Bus stop shelter X X X X X X X X X X
Bus terminal building X X X
Hauling or storage company X X X
Loading and unloading docks and team
tracks X X X
Motor freight terminal X X X
Parking garage or lot X X X X X
Railroad freight terminal
X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/301
Railroad passenger station X X X
Railroad team track X X X
Railroad track or right-of-way X X X X X X X X X X
Railroad yard X X X
Recreational vehicle park X
Taxi stand X X X X X
Truck parking lot X X
21.17 UTILITY AND RELATED SERVICE ACTIVITIES
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Antenna tower - commercial S S S S S S S S S S
Artesian water wells X X X X X X X X X X
Electrical generating plant S
Electrical substation S S S S S S S X X X
Electrical transmission line X X X X X X X X X X
Fire station or similar public safety
building X X X X X X X X X X
Gas transmission line and metering
station S S S S S S S S S S
Local utility distribution lines X X X X X X X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/301
Off-street parking incidental to main use X X X X X X X X X X
Private utility shop or storage X X X
Public building, shop, or yard of local,
state, or federal government S S S S S S S X X X
Public utility facilities S S S S S S S X X X
Public water reservoir or well X X X X X X X X X X
Radio and television or microwave
tower S S S S S S S S S S
Radio and TV studios X X X X
Sanitary landfill S
Sewage pumping station X X X X X X X X X X
Sewage treatment plant S S S S S S S S S S
Telephone business office X X X X X
Telephone line and exchange switching
or relay station excluding the conduct of
public business and repair and/or storage
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S
Utility contractors X X
Water reservoir, water pumping station
well or tower X X X X X X X X X X
Water treatment plant S S S S S S S S S S
21.18 TEMPORARY AND ACCESSORY USES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/301
A-E R-1 R-2 MF MH C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 PD
Accessory buildings X X X X X X X X X X
Accessory quarters X X X X X X X X X X
Field office for the sale of real estate -
temporary X X X X X X X X X X
Field or construction office - temporary X X X X X X X X X X
Garage sales X X X X X X X X X X
Gardening - noncommercial X X X X X X X X X X
Off-street parking incidental to main use X X X X X X X X X X
Swimming pool - residential X X X X X X X X X X
Temporary building for construction
purposes only X X X X X X X X X X
Tennis courts - residential X X X X X X X X X X
Post-disaster housing. Temporary housing may be permitted in residential subdivisions for up to six (6) months when approved by the
code enforcement officer. Such temporary uses may be located in a portable building or recreational vehicle.
SECTION 22. ACTIVITIES WHICH REQUIRE A SPECIAL USE PERMIT
The purpose of this section is to provide for certain activities which, when operated, maintained, or conducted
under certain specific or special conditions are not detrimental to the public health and safety, maintain and
contribute to separation of land uses, and allow an individual greater use of his property while still providing
protection and assurance to adjacent property owners. Special Use Permits may be granted or denied at the
discretion of the City Council after a recommendation has been made by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Both Council and Commission shall give due consideration to the protection of adjoining properties and the
surrounding area.
This Section applies to those uses that are listed in the Permitted Uses Table in Section 21 as requiring approval
of a Special Use Permit. The same procedure which is followed in considering a rezoning request shall be
followed in considering a request for a Special Use Permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/301
Every special use granted under the provisions of this section shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning
regulations as applicable to such property. In granting such permit, the City Council may impose conditions
which shall be complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Official for the use of the buildings or such property pursuant to said special permit; and such conditions shall
not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. The General
Requirements which are listed in this Section apply to all items requiring a Special Use Permit unless otherwise
specified for that item.
22.01 General requirements.
(A) A site plan of the proposed activity shall be provided at the time the application is submitted. The site plan shall be
drawn to scale and shall show all relevant information including dimensions of the property, building locations, building
setbacks, distances between buildings, parking, driveways, etc. If approved, the activity shall conform to the site plan
which is submitted.
(B) Unless otherwise specified, a Special Use Permit shall be approved for the life of the activity. If the activity is
discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more, a new Special Use Permit must be approved.
(C) Other reasonable requirements and safeguards which are deemed necessary to protect adjoining property may be
required by the City Council in the granting of a Special Use Permit in addition to the conditions specified for each item.
(D) All Special Use Permits will be reviewed annually to assure compliance with these regulations. If violations exist,
the applicant for the Special Use Permit and/or the owner of the property will be notified in writing of the violations and
will be allowed sixty (60) days to correct the violation. If the violation continues to exist, the Special Use Permit will
terminate upon the completion of sixty (60) days from the date of the notification of the violations unless the Special Use
Permit is again granted by the City Council in accordance with the procedural requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Atlanta.
22.01[A] Commercial type uses.
A. Mini-warehouse or rental storage units.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may establish additional
requirements for the construction, occupancy and use of the storage units as may be found necessary and
appropriate for a particular site. These requirements may include fencing, screening, siting, limitation on
number of storage units, or other factors as may be necessary to allow this activity to be established with a
minimal impact on the surrounding property.
(3) This activity shall be permitted in the C-2 district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
B. Scientific research laboratories.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) Laboratories which work with toxic, hazardous, dangerous, volatile, poisonous, radioactive, or similar
material shall not be considered for a Special Use Permit.
(3) This activity shall be permitted in the C-2, and C-3 districts upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
22.02 Educational, institutional, and special uses.
A. Child care center, nurseries, or pre-schools.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, MH, C-1, I-1, and I-2 districts upon approval
of a Special Use Permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/301
(3) In the A-E, R-1, R-2, 6, MF, and MH districts, the location at which the child care center is operated
shall be the full-time or primary place of residence of the operator. No employees from outside the home shall
be permitted at a child care center in these districts. The number of children to be cared for shall be specified
in the permit, and in no case shall more than twelve (12) children be cared for at one time.
(4) In any district, renewal of the Special Use permit shall be required every five (5) years.
22.03 General manufacturing and industrial uses.
A. Garbage, offal, dead animals, wrecking or salvage yards, junkyards, or refuse storage.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the I-2 district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
(3) A solid fence with a height of at least six (6) feet shall be required on all sides of the junkyard so that the
view of the junkyard and all materials therein from adjacent property and from public roads is completely
blocked. Trees shall be planted inside the fence as a visual buffer, there will be a minimum distance of seven
(7) feet measured from the surface of the ground to the top of the tree. The trees shall be planted a maximum
distance of twenty (20) feet apart.
(4) The Special Use Permit shall be renewed every five (5) years to ensure that the activity is in compliance
with these conditions.
B. Any other use which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar characteristics.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the I-2 district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
(3) The time limit for a Special Use Permit for an activity in this category shall be recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council.
(4) Determination of whether an activity falls in this category shall be based on Section 15.
(5) A buffer shall be required for this activity as provided for in Section 29.
22.04 Recreational, social, and entertainment.
A. Arcade.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the MF, MH, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 districts upon approval of a
Special Use Permit.
(3) In considering applications for Special Use Permits for the location of arcades, the following criteria
shall be considered:
(a) The effect that arcade-related traffic will have on adjacent areas.
(b) The amount and location of parking which would be provided.
(c) The location of the arcade with respect to residential areas.
(d) The nuisance factor of outside trade.
(e) The location of the arcade (whether it is in a building with other uses or whether it is a solitary
use).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/301
(4) For arcades requested to be located in MH or MF districts, no more than one amusement machine is
allowed for each ten (10) multifamily dwelling units or mobile home/travel trailer spaces.
(5) The site plan which must be submitted with the application for Special Use Permits shall include, but is
not limited to, the following:
(a) The number of machines/games/tables to be placed in the facility.
(b) The location and number of off-street parking spaces to be provided.
(c) The dimensions of the tract of land and of the building.
(d) The number of machines per square foot of building area.
(e) The restroom facilities which would be available.
22.05 Residential uses.
A. Apartment.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the C-3 district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
(3) The yard, lot area, and height requirements of the C-3 district shall apply to buildings which are built for
apartments or which are converted to use as apartments.
B. Bed and breakfast.
(1) The general requirements listed in Section 22.01 shall apply to this activity.
(2) This activity shall be permitted in the A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, and C-1 districts upon approval of a Special
Use Permit.
(3) No more than from five (5) to eight (8) persons in addition to members of the family living in the
residence may be accommodated at one time. If four (4) or fewer people are to be accommodated, a Special
Use Permit shall not be required. If more than eight (8) people are to be accommodated, a zoning change shall
be required.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for each bedroom in the residence.
(5) The off-street parking area shall be an all-weather surface and shall not be located in the front yard of the
residence.
(6) The off-street parking area shall be screened by a solid six-foot fence or by dense bushes or shrubbery.
(7) No alterations or modifications shall be made to the exterior of a building to alter the appearance of a
building as a residence if it is located in a residential area.
(8) A single sign may be permitted on the premises to advertise the bed and breakfast establishment. The
sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area and the sign shall be lighted.
(9) All other City Codes, including Fire Codes and Health Codes, shall be complied with.
(10) A bed and breakfast establishment shall be located in a single-family residence or one-family dwelling
and not in a duplex, triplex, quadraplex, or multifamily dwelling.
(11) The residence shall be the full-time place of residence of the owner of the property or the resident
manager of the property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/301
(12) The Special Use Permit shall be renewed every five (5) years to assure that all conditions are being
complied with.
C. Condominium.
(1) The same conditions shall apply for approval of a Special Use Permit for this activity which apply for
approval of a Special Use Permit for apartments in Section 22.11(A) [22.05(A)].
D. Multifamily dwelling.
(1) The same conditions shall apply for approval of a Special Use Permit for this activity which apply for
approval of a Special Use Permit for apartments in Section 22.11(A) [22.05(A)].
SECTION 22.5. SIGN REGULATIONS*
22.5.01 Signs in or over right-of-way prohibited.
No sign shall be located within or project over any public right-of-way. This provision shall not be applicable to
official traffic-control signs, or entrance and exit signs less than thirty (30) inches above grade placed with
permission of the city. No advertisement signs shall be placed on utility poles within the city limits of Atlanta.
22.5.02 Maintenance.
All signs together with all supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair. The building inspector may
order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with this section. Such removal shall be
accomplished at the expense of the owner or person in charge of the premises.
22.5.03 Removal of advertising copy.
Any advertising copy or message now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or product available for purchase by the public shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having
the beneficial use of the building or structure, upon which copy or message may be found, within thirty (30)
days after written notification from the building inspector. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified in such order, the building inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such copy or
message and any expense incident hereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, billboard, premises or
structure upon which such copy or message is displayed.
22.5.4 [22.5.04] Removal when unsafe or unlawful: authority of building inspector.
The owner of any sign regulated by this section, including supporting structures, shall keep the same in safe
condition at all times. If the building inspector shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or
is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice to the sign owner and the property owner. If such owner
fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards set forth in this section within thirty (30) days
after such notice, the building inspector may cause such sign to be removed or altered to comply at the expense
of the sign owner or owner of the property upon which it is located. The building inspector may cause any sign
which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
22.5.05 Freehand art murals and signs in the downtown district.
The City Council finds the need to regulate and control freehand art murals and signs in the downtown business
district in order to preserve and maintain the historic appeal of the downtown district.
A. The boundaries of the historic district are Louise Street to the West, then, Miller Street to the North, then
Haw Creek to the East, then, Thomas Street to the South. These boundaries have been previously identified as
eligible district area for grants from the Atlanta City Development Corporation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/301
B. The City Council specifically precludes any and all freehand artwork painted either directly onto building
facades or painted onto another material for application on the building facade in the downtown district
without prior, advanced written approval of the Board of Directors for the Atlanta City Development
Corporation.
C. Application for facade freehand murals or signage shall be made to the Atlanta City Development
Corporation on a form provided by that agency.
(1) The application must contained a detailed depiction of the desired artwork, the exact paint colors
and scheme, the types of paint, and materials that will be painted off-site and subsequently attached to
the facade, and the dimensions of the artwork.
(2) The directors of the Atlanta City Development Corporation shall review the application no later
than 45 days from submittal. The directors shall either approve, deny or ask for the application to be
amended.
SECTION 23. YARD, LOT, AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
Refer to Section 24 for special notes concerning yard, lot, and area requirements as indicated by the footnotes in
this table. The requirements in this table may be revised for items requiring a Special Use Permit under the
conditions in Section 22. Requirements for PD districts are as specified in each PD ordinance.
A-E (13) R-1 (14) R-2 (15) MF (24) MH (25)(26)(29)
Front Yard (8) 30 ft. 30 ft. 0 ft. or 10 ft. and 18
ft. (15)
25 ft. (23a) 25 ft.
Front Yard (8) Double
Frontage
30 ft. each side 30 ft. each side 0 ft. or 10 ft. and 18
ft. each side (17)
25 ft. (23a) each side 25 ft. each side
Rear Yard (9) 20% of depth of
lot
20% of depth of lot 10 ft. 15 ft. (23c) 10 ft.
Side Yard (9) 15 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft. with firewall, or
10 ft. (18)(19)
(23b) 10 ft.
Side Yard (9) Corner Lot 25 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. and 18 ft. (20) (23b) 10 ft.
Lot Width (1) 100 ft. 60 ft. 50 ft. 60 ft. (23f) 50 ft.
Lot Depth (1) 150 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. none required 100 ft.
Lot Area (1)(10) 2 acres or
87,120 sf
7,200 sf 1 DU: 2,000 sf;
2 DU: 6,000 sf;
3 DU: 8,500 sf;
4 DU: 11,000 sf
7,200 sf with 900 sf
min. living unit (23e)
5,500 sf
Lot Coverage none required none required none required max 30% lot area none required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/301
covered by main
building (23g)
Lot Depth Adjustment to
Thoroughfare
same as lot depth 130 ft. 100 ft. none required 130 ft.
Floor Area - Min 1,050 sf 1,050 sf 925 sf per unit 860 sf min. per unit none required
Height 2-1/2 stories 2-1/2 stories 2-1/2 stories 2 stories (22) 35 ft. (26c)
Parking and Loading 2 spaces per
dwelling unit
2 spaces per
dwelling unit
2 spaces per
dwelling (16)
1.5 spaces per
dwelling (23h)
2 spaces per mobile
home
Front Yard (8) none required if
all block same
district (30)
none required if all
block same district
(34)
none required if all
block same district
(39)
none required if all
block same district
(44)
none required if all
block same district
(49)
Front Yard (8) Double
Frontage
none required if
all block same
district (30)
none required if all
block same district
(34)
none required if all
block same district
(39)
none required if all
block same district
(44)
none required if all
block same district
(49)
Rear Yard (9) none or 20% of
depth of lot
max. 25 ft. (32)
none or 20% of
depth of lot
max. 25 ft. (36)
none or 20% of
depth of lot
max. 25 ft. (41)
none or 20% of depth
of lot
max. 25 ft. (46)
none or 20% of
depth of lot
max. 25 ft. (51)
Side Yard (9) none or if
adjacent to
residential, the
greater of 10% of
lot width or 15 ft.
(31)
none or if adjacent
to residential, the
greater of 10% of
lot width or 15 ft.
(35)
none or if adjacent
to residential, the
greater of 10% of lot
width or 15 ft. (40)
none or if adjacent to
residential, the
greater of 10% of lot
width or 15 ft. (45)
none or if adjacent
to residential, the
greater of 10% of
lot width or 15 ft.
(50)
Side Yard (9) Corner Lot 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Lot Width (1) none required
unless residential
(2)
none required
unless residential
(2)
none required unless
residential (2)
none required none required
Lot Depth (1) none required
unless residential
(2)
none required
unless residential
(2)
none required unless
residential (2)
none required none required
Lot Area (1)(10) none required
unless residential
(2)
none required
unless residential
(2)
none required unless
residential (2)
none required none required
Lot Coverage none required none required none required none required none required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/301
Lot Depth Adjustment to
Thoroughfare
none required
unless residential
(2)
none required (2) none required none required none required
Floor Area - Min none required none required none required none required none required
Height 2-1/2 stories 2-1/2 stories 6 stories unless by
residential (38)
6 stories unless by
residential (43)
6 stories unless by
residential (48)
Parking and Loading 1 space per 400
s.f.g.f.a.
none in front, see
Section 28
See Section 28 See Section 28 See Section 28 See Section 28
SECTION 24. SPECIAL NOTES CONCERNING LOT REQUIREMENTS INCLUDING EXCEPTIONS AND
VARIANCES
Following is a list of special notes which are referenced in the yard, lot and area requirements table. Notes 1–12
are general and may apply to more than one district. Notes 13–52 are specific to the district under which they are
listed. Although this Section is divided into subsections, the special notes are numbered consecutively for ease
of reference with the Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements in Section 23.
24.01 General.
(1) In any zoning district, the following shall apply: If the minimum lot width requirement is all that is provided, the lot
shall have adequate depth to conform to the minimum lot size requirement. If the minimum lot depth requirement is
provided, the lot shall have adequate width to conform to the minimum lot size requirement. In any case, in any zoning
district the width and depth of the lot shall combine to meet or exceed the minimum lot size requirements, and in no case
shall the width or depth of a lot be less than the minimum noted for that zoning district.
(2) The area requirements for any single-family detached residential activity in any non-single-family detached zoning
district shall be the same as the area requirements for that activity in the R-1 zoning district. The area requirements for any
residential activity other than single-family detached in any zoning district shall be the same as the requirements for that
activity in the zoning district in which it is first listed as a permitted use.
(3) Whenever a C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 District adjoins an A-E, R-1, R-2, MF or MH District, a buffer shall be required
as provided for in Section 29.
(4) All outside lighting features shall be placed and reflected in such a manner so as not to create a glare or sheen onto
adjacent property as to create annoyance, nuisance, or hazards.
(5) All outside signs in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 Districts shall be of the parapet wall, marquee, or flat wall type,
except that standard pole signs for drilling facilities shall be permitted provided they do not exceed thirty- six (36) square
feet in area.
(6) Where dwelling facilities are provided behind, above, or within businesses, the lot area requirements shall be the
same as those required for dwellings in the R-2 Zoning District.
(7) In order to provide for adequate vision clearance for traffic and pedestrian safety, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree,
shrub, topographic feature, merchandise, or hedge shall be maintained or located as to cause danger to traffic by
obstructing the view.
(8) The front yards herein required shall be adjusted in the following cases:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/301
(a) Where thirty-five (35) percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets is developed with buildings that have, with variation of five (5) feet or less, a front yard greater or less
in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the building line so
established by the existing buildings. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a building
line of more than fifty (50) feet.
(b) Where frontage between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not observed a
front yard as described in (a) above, then:
1. Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land and will not be more than two hundred (200)
feet from existing buildings on either side, the building line shall be a line drawn between the two
closest front corners of the adjacent [buildings] on the two sides.
2. Where building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within two hundred (200) feet of an
existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing
adjacent building. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a building line of more
than fifty (50) feet.
(c) Where building line has been established by an approved subdivision plat or by ordinance and such line
requires a greater or lesser setback than is prescribed by this article in the district in which the building line is
located, no building shall be erected closer to the street than the line so established.
(d) Where a building line is shown on a plat recorded for record with the county clerk prior to the passage of
this article, and such building line provides a front yard of twenty-five (25) feet or more in depth and a side
yard of ten (10) feet or more in depth and is part of a comprehensive plan for the orderly development of a
subdivision, either with a uniform or staggered building line, no building shall be erected closer to the street
than the building line or lines so shown.
(e) Open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eaves and roof extensions may project into the required
front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet; provided, however, that no supporting structure for such
extensions may be located within the required front yard. The supporting structure of an open carport or other
structure for the storage of automobiles shall not be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed
canopy for a gasoline filling station or similar business may extend beyond the building line but shall never be
closer to the property line than twelve (12) feet. The building line of a gasoline filling station shall mean the
actual wall of the filling station and shall not be interpreted as being the curb of a walk or driveway, or as the
front of a canopy or the column supporting same.
(9) The side and rear yards required shall be adjusted in the following cases:
(a) A structure built on a corner lot shall observe the same setbacks established by structure built on the two
adjoining lots. A minimum setback of 10 feet shall be required under any circumstances, and under no
circumstances shall a setback greater than 50 feet be required. Lots which are separated by a dedicated public
right-of-way shall not be considered adjoining lots.
(b) Every part of the required side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory
buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projection of window sills, belt courses and other ornamental
features projecting not to exceed twelve (12) inches. Eaves and awnings on main residential structures may
project to within three (3) feet of side or rear lot line.
(c) An accessory building may be built to the rear of the main building. A side and rear setback of five (5)
feet shall be maintained by the accessory building.
(d) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, balconies opening upon fire towers,
and ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into rear yards may be permitted by the building inspector into
the required rear yard for a distance not to exceed three and one-half (3-1/2) feet.
(e) Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three (3)
feet above the finished floor elevation of the ground (first) floor level of the building may project into a
required side yard provided such projections not be erected closer than two (2) feet from the side lot lines.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/301
(10) The minimum lot area requirements shall be varied from under the following conditions: On any lot separately
owned prior to the passage of this zoning ordinance, even though of less area than required by these regulations, a singlefamily
house may be erected provided that it is listed as a permitted use in the zoning district in which the lot is located.
(11) The following regulations shall apply to the location of more than one main building on a property. Only one main
building for single-family, two-family, or four-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located on a lot or
unplatted tract. Every dwelling shall face or front upon a public right-of-way or officially approved place, other than an
alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. Where a lot is used for retail, commercial,
industrial, or a combination of same, or for a combination of business and dwelling purposes, more than one (1) main
building may be located upon the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all the open space, parking and density
requirements applicable to the uses and districts and when all such main buildings face upon a public right-of-way, other
than an alley. Whenever two or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such
buildings will not face upon a public right-of-way, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission so that all buildings face upon an officially approved place.
(12) The minimum floor area requirements for houses in the R-1 District shall be varied under the following conditions:
The minimum floor area requirements established herein in the R-1 District shall not apply in built-up areas where forty
(40) percent of the existing block face based on the number of platted lots, is already developed with houses having living
areas of smaller size than required by the provisions of the two respective classifications. Houses may then be built with a
living area that is no smaller than the smallest house in the block face.
24.02 A-E District.
(13) Items 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the A-E District.
24.03 R-1 District.
(14) Items 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in this section apply to the R-1 District.
[24.04–24.06 Reserved.]
24.07 R-2 District.
(15) No front yard setback is required if no driveway, garage, or vehicle parking area is provided in the front of the
building. To provide for pedestrian safety, if a driveway, garage, or other vehicle parking area is provided in the front of the
building, the building must be set back at least ten (10) feet from the front property line and the entrance to the garage or
the wall at the end of the vehicle parking area must be set back at least eighteen (18) feet from the front property line.
(16) A maximum driveway opening of twenty (20) feet shall be permitted at the property line. This driveway opening
may be in the form of one twenty (20) foot wide driveway opening or two ten (10) foot wide driveway openings.
(17) If a lot has double frontage, the same setback requirements provided for in item 15 shall apply on both frontages.
(18) For townhouses, no side setback is required between units if a 4-hour firewall is constructed between units. A side
setback of at least ten (10) feet is required between all buildings. Roof overhangs and eaves may protrude no more than
one (1) foot into the side yard beyond the plane established by the walls of the building.
(19) For patio homes, zero lot line homes and similar types of housing, one side wall may be built on the property line if
that wall is solid masonry with no penetrations. Roof overhangs and eaves may protrude no more than one (1) foot into the
adjacent property beyond the plane established by the wall along the property line. A five (5) foot wide maintenance
easement shall be provided adjacent to any wall which is on a property line. A side setback of at least ten (10) feet is
required between all homes.
(20) On a corner lot, the side setback adjacent to the street shall be ten (10) feet. If a garage, driveway, or other which
[vehicle] parking area is provided on the side of a corner lot, the garage opening or end of the vehicle parking area shall
have a setback of at least eighteen (18) feet from the property line.
(21) Items 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the R-2 District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/301
[24.08 Reserved.]
24.09 MF District.
The following area requirements shall apply in the Multifamily zoning district in addition to the area
requirements contained in the Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements table.
(22) Height Regulations. No building shall exceed two (2) standard stories for living purposes. Where basement areas
are used for off-street parking or other service facilities, the maximum height of the building above grade shall not exceed
twenty-eight (28) feet. The heights of a multifamily dwelling may exceed two (2) standard stories for living purposes upon
approval of a Special Use Permit which, if approved, shall be granted for the life of the building.
(23) Area Regulations.
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet except where
circular or similar entrance drives across the lot in front of the main building are used, in which event the
minimum front yard depth shall be thirty-five (35) feet and no parking space or vehicle storage area shall be
located closer to the front property line than twenty-five (25) feet.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having minimum dimensions as follows:
(1) Where multiple-family dwellings or housing projects are arranged on a lot where the long
dimension of any building is parallel to the side lot line, or where the long dimension of such building is
parallel to another building in a project, a side yard of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided on each side of
each building so that the walls of a building arranged as parallel structures shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) feet apart, and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such side yard or space for a distance greater
than five (5) feet.
(2) For multiple-family dwellings which are arranged so that the long dimension of the building
parallel to the side lot line does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width, a minimum side yard of ten (10)
feet shall be provided.
(3) Where the end of a multiple-family dwelling or building does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
width and is located opposite another building-end or building-side or exposed wall face, such buildingends
or wall faces may be placed a minimum distance of ten (10) feet apart. Where openings for light,
air or access exist in building-ends or wall faces arranged as described above, the minimum distance
between such ends or wall faces shall be twenty (20) feet.
(4) A side yard on a corner lot adjacent to a street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and no
balcony or porch or any portion of the building may extend into such required side yard except that a
roof may overhang such side yard not to exceed five (5) feet.
(c) Rear yard required. No main building may be constructed nearer than fifteen (15) feet to the rear
property line. The main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of
that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected adjoining the midpoint of the opposite side lot line.
Carports or other detached accessory buildings shall be located within the rear portion of the lot as heretofore
described and shall not exceed one (1) story in height nor shall such structure be located closer than 15 feet to
a main building nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line or to any side lot line, nor closer than ten (10)
feet to any side street right-of-way line.
(d) Courts. When an apartment building or buildings are erected so as to create inner courts or outer courts
as defined in Section 19, the faces of all opposite walls in such courts shall be a minimum distance of thirty
(30) feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five (5)
feet.
(e) Area of lot. All buildings hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed or converted shall be
located on lots containing a minimum of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet, and there shall be
not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for each living unit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/301
(f) Width of lot. The minimum lot width for multiple-family uses shall be sixty (60) feet.
(g) Lot coverage. Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the total area of the lot may be covered by the main
buildings.
(h) Parking. Paved off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces per
dwelling unit for multiple-family dwellings. No such off-street parking space shall be located within the
required twenty-five (25) foot front yard, nor within four (4) feet of any building when such off-street parking
is located in the side yard, [and] a curb or equivalent barrier shall be placed so as to prevent any vehicle from
parking within a minimum distance of four (4) feet from the building.
(24) Items 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the MF District.
24.10 MH District.
(25) For a mobile home subdivision, the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be complied with. For a mobile
home park or recreational vehicle park the requirements of Chapter 28, Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Ordinance,
shall be complied with.
Editor’s note–No chapter 28 exists in the current Code of Ordinances. The user is directed to article 3.300, “Mobile Home Parks.”
(26) Minimum site requirements:
(a) Area. The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet. The
minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred (100)
feet. Lots that back up to major thoroughfares shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty (130) feet.
(b) Open space requirements.
1. The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest corner of the
mobile home to the front line of the lot.
2. No mobile home shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any property line.
3. The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Height regulations.
1. The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile home subdivision shall be
thirty-five (35) feet.
2. The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at ninety (90)
degrees to the frame, shall not exceed (3) feet.
(d) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a subdivision shall be graded and equipped to drain all
surface water in a safe and efficient manner.
(e) Mobile home stands. The area of the mobile home stand or space shall provide adequate support and
drainage for the placement of the mobile home.
(27) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings, including a private garage, may be constructed on the lot when located a
minimum of sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, a minimum of ten (10) feet from either side line, and a minimum of five
(5) feet from any part of the mobile home situated on the lot. This restriction does not prohibit the use of metal awnings
attached to the mobile home for the purpose of a carport, patio, or similar use.
(28) Parking. Off-street parking space shall be provided on each lot to accommodate two (2) automobiles.
(29) Items 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the MH District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/301
24.11 C-1 District.
(30) No front yard shall be required for any business use in the C-1 District unless the street right-of-way on which the
business is located is less than sixty (60) feet in width, in which case the building shall be placed not less than thirty (30)
feet from the centerline of said street right-of-way. When frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets
is located partly in a more restricted zoning district, the front yard shall conform to the more restricted use regulations.
(31) When a C-1 District adjoins an A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, or MH District, there shall be a side yard of at least ten (10)
percent of the width of the lot with a minimum requirement of fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall a side yard greater than
twenty-five (25) feet be required. Any property that is used for an activity that is permitted in a residential zoning district
shall be treated as though it were located in a residential zoning district.
(32) When an C-1 District abuts an A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, or MH District, there shall be a rear yard required which is equal
to twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, except where a lot is used for an activity which is also permitted in the R-1,
R-2, MF, or MH Districts, in which case Item 2 shall apply. In no case shall a rear yard greater than twenty-five (25) feet
be required. Any property that is used for an activity that is permitted in a residential zoning district shall be treated as
though it were located in a residential zoning district.
(33) Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the C-1 District.
[24.12 Reserved.]
24.13 C-2 District.
(34) The same regulations regarding front yards listed in item 30 under the C-1 District shall apply in the C-2 District.
(35) The same regulations regarding side yards listed in item 31 under the C-1 District shall apply in the C-2 District.
(36) The same regulations regarding rear yards listed in item 32 under the C-1 District shall apply in the C-2 District.
(37) Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in the section apply to the C-2 District.
24.14 C-3 District.
(38) No building shall exceed six (6) stories in height unless the additional height above six (6) stories is set back from
the street rights-of-way which are adjacent to the property one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above the six (6)
story limit. When a lot in the C-3 District adjoins a lot in the A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, or MH District, a building constructed on
the lot in the C-3 District shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
(39) The same regulations regarding front yards listed in item 34 under the C-2 District shall apply in the C-3 District.
(40) The same regulations regarding side yards listed in Item 35 under the C-1 [C-2] District shall apply in the C-3
District.
(41) The same regulations rear yards listed in item 36 under the C-1 [C-2] District shall apply in the C-3 District.
(42) Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section apply to the C-3 District.
24.15 I-1 District.
(43) The same regulations regarding building height listed in item 38 under the C-3 District shall apply in the I-1
District.
(44) The same regulations regarding front yards listed in item 34 under the C-2 District shall apply in the I-1 District.
(45) The same regulations regarding side yards listed in item 31 under the C-1 District shall apply to in the I-1 District.
(46) The same regulations regarding rear yards listed in item 32 under the C-1 District shall apply in the I-1 District.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/301
(47) Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section shall apply in the I-1 District.
24.16 I-2 District.
(48) The same regulations [regarding] building height in item 38 under the C-3 District shall apply in the I-2 District.
(49) The same regulations regarding front yards listed in item 34 under the C-2 District shall apply in the I-2 District.
(50) The same regulations regarding side yards listed in item 31 under the C-1 District shall apply in the I-2 District.
(51) The same regulations regarding rear yards listed in item 32 under the C-1 District shall apply in the I-2 District.
(52) Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in this section shall apply in the I-2 District.
SECTION 25. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE
25.01 When certificate required.
No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural uses and no building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Building Inspector stating that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all of the
building and health rules and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations.
25.02 Application for certificate.
Certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with application for a building permit
and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the completion of the erection or structural alterations to a building
in conformity with these and other applicable provisions and regulations.
25.03 Certificates to be kept on file and made available.
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
25.04 Certificate required to change class of building.
The use of any building already erected at the passage of this article shall not be changed from one class to
another unless and until a certificate of occupancy and compliance with the provisions of this article shall have
been obtained from the Building Inspector.
25.05 Certificate required for vacant building or vacant land.
Certificate of occupancy for the use of a vacant building or of vacant land or the change in the character of the
use of a building or land as herein provided shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used,
and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application has been made, provided
such use is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
25.06 Certificate for nonconforming use.
Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use existing at the time of the adoption of this article shall be
prepared and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming one, and does not conform to the
provisions of this article.
SECTION 26. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT*
26.01 Board of adjustment; created.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/301
There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members, appointed by the City Council for
two (2) year terms, and each having the power to vote.
26.02 Administration.
At the first meeting of the board, a chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected. Meetings of the board shall be
held at the call of the chairman, who may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote,
indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the City Secretary and shall be a public record.
26.03 Appeals to board - procedure.
Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or
department of municipality affected by any decision of the administrative office. Such appeals shall be taken
within fifteen (15) days’ time after the decision has been rendered by the administrative office, by filing with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An action appealed from shall stay all
proceedings upon the action appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts, stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment, or by a
court of record on application of [on] notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
26.04 Powers enumerated.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
(A) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article.
(B) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the article upon which the board is required to pass
under this article.
(C) To authorize upon appeal in special cases, such variances from the terms of the article as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions of
the article will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed and
substantial justice done. No variance shall be granted to permit a use in a zoning district in which that use is
prohibited.
26.05 Notification and hearing process.
Any request for an appeal, variance or special exception shall require a public hearing before the Board. Notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city, at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the time set for such hearing. In addition to the foregoing published notice, written
notice of all public hearings shall be sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same for city
taxes, located within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundary of the property with requested to which
[with respect to which] such appeal, variance or exception is requested within not less than ten (10) days before
any such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage
paid, in the city post office.
26.06 Compliance with Art. 1011-A–1011-J, Civil Statutes of Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/301
In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of Articles 1011-A through and
including 1011-J of the 1926 Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
26.07 Voting.
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirements,
decision, or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to effect any variance in said article.
26.08 Appeals from decision of the board.
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer or officer, department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of
the board and not thereafter.
SECTION 27. HISTORIC LANDMARK PRESERVATION
27.01 “Historic landmark” defined.
As used in this chapter, the term “historic landmark” shall mean any buildings, land, areas or districts of
historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural importance or value, which the City Council determines shall
be protected, enhanced and preserved in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the
people[.]
27.02 Declaration of policy.
The City Council hereby finds and declares as a matter of public policy, that the protection, enhancement,
preservation, and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the culture,
prosperity, education and welfare of the people. The purposes of this section are:
(A) To protect, enhance, and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive and
important elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, archaeological, and architectural history.
(B) To safeguard the city’s historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic
landmarks.
(C) To stabilize and improve property values in such locations.
(D) To foster civic pride in the beauty of noble accomplishments of the past.
(E) To protect and enhance the city’s attractions to tourists and visitors and provide incidental support and
stimulus to business and industry.
(F) To strengthen the economy of the City.
(G) To promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture, prosperity, education and welfare of the people
of the City and visitors to the City.
27.03 Historic landmarks - designation.
The City Council may designate certain buildings, land areas, and districts in the City as historic landmarks and
define, amend, and delineate the boundaries thereof. The suffix “H” shall indicate the zoning subdistrict
designation of those buildings, land, areas, and districts which the City Council has designated historic
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/301
landmarks. Such designation shall be in addition to any other zoning district designation established in the
zoning ordinance. All zoning district maps shall reflect the designation of an historic landmark subdistrict by the
letter “H” as a suffix.
27.04 Criteria to be used in determination.
In making such designation as set forth in this section, the City Council shall consider one (1) or more of the
following criteria:
(A) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of
Atlanta, State of Texas, or the United States.
(B) Location as the site of a significant historic event.
(C) Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of
the City.
(D) Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historical heritage of the City.
(E) Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by distinctive
architectural style.
(F) Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen.
(G) Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the
development of the City.
(H) Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a
significant architectural innovation.
(I) Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for preservation according to
a plan based on historic, cultural or architectural motif.
(J) Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual
feature of a neighborhood, community or the city.
(K) Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to produce data affecting theories of
historic or prehistoric interest.
(L) Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.
27.05 Historic Landmark Preservation Committee - created.
(A) There is hereby created a committee to be known as the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee of the City,
hereinafter called the “committee” composed of five (5) members appointed by the City Council within sixty (60) days
from the effective date of this Ordinance. All members should have knowledge or experience in the field of history, art,
architecture, or real estate planning and development.
(B) Appointments to the committee shall be for a term of two (2) years ending on September first of each odd-numbered
year and the members shall serve without compensation. The committee shall designate a chairman and a vice-chairman
from its members.
(C) The committee shall meet at least quarterly, with additional meetings upon call by the committee chairman or upon
petition of a simple majority of committee members. Three (3) members present shall constitute a quorum and issues shall
be decided by a simple majority vote of the members present.
27.06 Function.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/301
(A) The committee shall thoroughly familiarize itself with the buildings, land, area, and districts within the City which
may be eligible for designation as historic landmark and shall prepare an historic landmark preservation plan, hereinafter
referred to as the “preservation plan,” which shall:
(1) Identify and catalog buildings, land, areas and districts of historical, architectural, archaeological or
cultural value along with statements of fact which verify their significance;
(2) Identify criteria to be used in determining whether certain buildings, land, areas and districts should be
designated as historic landmarks;
(3) Identify guidelines to be used in determination of whether to grant or deny certificates of
appropriateness for proposed alterations to the exterior of a designated historic landmark;
(4) Formulate a program for private and public action which will state the role of various City agencies in
the preservation of historic landmarks;
(5) Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration activities for all acquisitions, to include
federal, state, municipal, private and foundation sources; and
(6) Recommend incentives for preservation.
(B) The preservation plan shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for inclusion in the comprehensive
plan of the City.
(C) The committee shall recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission that certain buildings, land, areas and
districts in the City be designated as historic landmarks. Each recommendation shall include:
(1) Those premises, lots or tracts to be designated.
(2) Any additional uses to be permitted in specific “H” subcontracts.
(3) Specific criteria for the required preservation of the exteriors of the premises within the designated
subcontracts.
(D) If the committee finds that certain buildings, land, areas or districts cannot be preserved without acquisition, the
committee shall recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission that the fee or a lesser interest in the property be
acquired by gift or purchase, using funds available for preservation or restoration.
(E) Where there are conditions under which the required preservation of an historic landmark would cause undue
hardship to the owner or owners, use changes may be recommended by the committee. Such changes shall be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
(F) Periodically the committee shall review the status of designated historic landmark subdistricts and include in the
committee minutes the report of such review.
(G) The designation of an historic landmark subdistrict may be amended or removed using the same procedure as
provided in this chapter for the original designation.
27.07 Action by Planning and Zoning Commission.
(A) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold public hearings as provided in the zoning ordinance of the City to
consider any historic landmark subdistrict designation recommended by the committee.
(B) At the conclusion of a hearing the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth in writing its recommendation,
including the findings of fact that constitute the basis for its decision and shall transmit such recommendation to the City
Council.
27.08 Action by the City Council and recording of designation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/301
(A) After notice and public hearing as required by law in a zoning case under the zoning ordinance, the City Council
may by ordinance designate an historic landmark subdistrict.
(B) Upon passage by the City Council of an historic landmark subdistrict designation ordinance, the City Secretary shall
file a copy of the ordinance with the Cass County Clerk and the Cass County Appraisal District together with a notice
briefly stating the facts of the designation and shall send a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner or owners of
affected property.
27.09 Certificate of appropriateness review.
(A) No building permit for proposed work in a designated historic landmark subdistrict shall be issued to any applicant
by the Building Official unless the application has first been reviewed by the Historical Landmark Preservation Committee
and a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the Building Official.
(B) When applying for such permit which is determined to involve alterations to the exterior of a designated building,
the applicant shall forward two (2) copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives, specifications and other documents
pertaining to the work to the Building Official, who shall forward it to the Historical Landmark Preservation Committee
Chairman within five (5) days of receipt thereof. Any applicant may request a meeting with the committee before
submitting an application and may consult with the committee during the review of the permit application.
(C) Upon review of the application, the Historical Landmark Preservation Committee shall determine whether the
proposed work is of a nature which will adversely affect any historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural feature of
the historic landmark, and whether such work is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and the
designating ordinance. It shall recommend approval or disapproval within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application.
Upon receipt of the committee’s recommendation, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall immediately notify the
applicant of their action. If the Planning and Zoning Commission has denied the certificate of appropriateness, the
applicant may file in writing, his notice of appeal with the City Council within ten (10) days after receiving notice from the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall immediately forward the notice of appeal,
together with a record of the proceedings, to the City Secretary, who shall place it on the City Council agenda for a
hearing; and the applicant shall be notified by the City Secretary of the date of the hearing.
(D) If no action has been taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission within forty-five (5) [sic] days of original
receipt by him of the application, the building permit shall be issued.
(E) No change shall be made in the application for any building permit after issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
without resubmittal to the committee and approval thereof in the same manner as provided above.
(F) After a decision is reached by the Planning and Zoning Commission denying an application for certificate of
appropriateness, where no appeal is made to the City Council, a resubmittal of application will not be accepted for
additional hearing within a twelve-month period from the date of final decision except upon written request by the
applicant, indicating the incorporation of changes in plans and specifications to the original application as recommended
by the Historical Landmark Preservation Committee.
27.10 Historic landmark demolition or removal.
If application is received by the Building Official for demolition or removal of any designated historic landmark,
or designated building within an “H” subdistrict as provided for in paragraphs 27.00 [27.06], 27.07, and 27.08 of
this Section, the committee shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days after the application is initially filed and
forwarded to the committee. The committee shall hear all other interested parties. The committee shall consider
the state of repair of the building, the reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair, taking into account the
purpose of preserving the designated historic landmark, the character of the neighborhood, and all other factors
which it finds appropriate. The committee may recommend the disapproval of the application by determining
that in the interest of preserving historical values, the structure should not be demolished; and in that event, the
application shall be suspended for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date of application. Within
the suspension period, the committee may request an extension of the suspension period by the City Council. If
the City Council, after notice to the applicant and public hearing, determines that there is reasonable ground for
preservation, the Council may extend the suspension period for an additional period not exceeding one hundred
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/301
twenty (120) days, to a total not more than two hundred forty (240) days from the date of application for
demolition. During the period of suspension of the application, no permit shall be issued for such demolition or
removal nor shall any person demolish or remove the building or structure. If no action is taken by the City
Council within two hundred forty (240) days from the date of application, the demolition permit shall be issued
and the Building Official shall so advise the applicant.
27.11 Provisions herein not to affect the present uses.
Use classifications as to all property which may be included in an historic landmark subdistrict shall continue to
be governed by the zoning ordinance of the city and shall continue upon establishing the “H” subdistrict.
27.12 Penalty.
(A) It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally alter, remodel, renovate, restore, demolish, raze or
maintain any historic landmark in violation of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to other remedies, the city may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction, restoration, demolition, razing or
maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion
thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted; and each offense shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
SECTION 28. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
28.01 Purpose.
(A) The minimum off-street parking and loading standards contained herein are established to secure safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the street; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to
conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land.
(B) Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any
use permitted in the district in which it is located unless there shall be provided on the lot or tract, or on an immediately
adjacent lot or tract, or on an immediately adjacent lot or tract across an alley or a street, which parking at herein stated
ratios of which spaces for the uses specified in the designated districts, except that an established use lawfully existing at
the effective date of this ordinance need not provide which parking as hereinafter set forth unless it is remodeled or altered
to the extent that paragraph 28.03(I) applies, and that no existing vehicle parking spaces in connection with said use at the
effective date of this ordinance may be reduced below the minimum number of spaces as hereinafter required. As used
herein, “immediately adjacent” means sharing a common boundary with at least one-half of the dimension of the boundary
of the adjoining lot or tract, whether or not such lots or tracts are separated by a street or alley. Where off-street parking for
any use is to be provided on an adjacent lot or tract, it shall be consolidated under a single certificate of occupancy with the
main use. In the event that the parking area is sold separately from the main use, no building permits will be issued for
construction on the parking area without first achieving compliance with the requirements for parking to be provided under
separate ownership or providing replacement parking and securing a new certificate of occupancy for the main use.
28.02 Definitions.
Floor area: The gross floor area of the specific use.
Maneuvering space: The space required for maneuvering vehicles into and out of parking spaces in such a
manner as to preclude the backing of any vehicle into any street right-of-way.
Parking space: An area measuring approximately one hundred eighty (180) square feet or as otherwise provided
for in Section 28.06 not on a public street or alley, surfaced with an all-weather surface or gravel surface,
enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a
street or alley permitted [permitting] unimpeded ingress and egress.
28.03 General provisions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/301
(A) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the
sum of the specific parking space requirements for each type of use included in the building or development.
(B) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the largest whole.
(C) Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking requirement for any use not specifically listed, the
requirements shall be interpreted, as provided for in Section 15, as those of a similar listed use.
(D) Head-in parking at any angle adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street shall not
be permitted. It shall be permitted for vehicles to back into the street from driveways serving single-family and duplex
residential activities.
(E) No off-street parking shall be permitted in the required front yard in any district except upon a driveway providing
access to a garage, carport, or parking area for a single-family or duplex dwelling, except as provided for in the R-2
District in Section 24.08 (25) [24.07].
(F) No supporting member or other portion of any garage, carport, or other vehicle storage structure shall be located
within a required front yard.
(G) In certain cases, fire lanes are required; for applicability refer to Chapter 6, Section 602.6 of the 1988 Standard Fire
Prevention Code as approved, adopted and amended by the City Council of the City of Atlanta.
(H) Stall bumpers of some form are desirable aids for quick, safe parking. They minimize the possibility of damage to
vehicles in opposing stalls. They encourage drivers to pull all the way into a parking stall which creates a more uniform
parking depth, leading to less aisle encroachment. The resulting orderly parking would allow vacant stalls to be located
more easily.
(I) After the effective date of this chapter, whenever a property is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of
employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of less than fifty (50)
percent over the number of existing parking spaces, new parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement
or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to the extent of fifty
(50) percent or more in floor area used, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise,
said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
(J) A building permit shall be required for any new parking area or change in an existing parking area. For new
construction the permit may be considered part of the building permit for the structure.
(K) A driveway permit will be obtained from the City of Atlanta before any person removes, alters, or constructs a curb,
approach, or gutter on any public property. One of the requirements in obtaining a permit is the submission of a scaled plat
plan showing the location of property lines, streets, alleys, proposed construction, proposed and/or existing off-street
stripped-off parking, and all existing buildings or structures on the lot.
(L) The Building Official has the authority to prohibit a driveway in a requested location as long as there is adequate
access to the property.
(M) In cases where the provision of a driveway for access to a parking area would cause too many driveways to be
located along a street in the opinion of the Building Official and City Manager, a legally documented access easement
across adjacent property(s) may be required in order to aid in maintaining smooth traffic circulation and to minimize
opportunities for conflicts between vehicles.
(N) In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same property with the activity or
establishment, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring
their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by
the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. When required off-street parking is provided
off-site, such site shall continue to be so used for parking only so long as the requirement exists or until another approved
parking site is provided.
(O) Not more than fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, nightclubs
or cafes, and up to one hundred (100) percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/301
provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not open,
used or operated during the same hours; provided that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed in the office
of the Building Official.
(P) Location of entrances and exits to parking areas shall be as near to the center of the block as practical so as to
minimize traffic interference at the intersections. All entrances and exits must be clearly marked. The exact location of
entrances and exits must be approved by the City on a site layout diagram at the time of issuance of a building permit.
Entrances on state highways must be approved by the city as well as by the Texas Department of Transportation. The City
reserves the right to reduce the number of entrances where requirements of traffic safety demand. The cost of such
reductions and entrances will be borne by the applicant.
(Q) No building, pole, sign, bush, tree, vehicle or other obstruction to visibility at the intersection of exits or entrances to
public streets or alley shall be erected, planted, allowed to grow or parked within a radius of 20 feet of said entrance or exit
unless otherwise indicated.
(R) The radius of all drive approaches shall be constructed so that the radius shall not extend beyond the projection of
the side property line from the front property line to the edge of the street pavement, except by written agreement of both
property owners filed in the office of the Building Official. This requirement is illustrated in the following diagram:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/301
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/301
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/301
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/301
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/301
(S) The desirable curb return radii are between five (5) and twenty (20) feet. The width of the driveway, street widths,
and traffic volumes must be considered when setting curb return radii so as to minimize hazards from entering and exiting
traffic.
(T) As a general guide, any parking area having a capacity of more than seventy-five (75) spaces should have more than
one (1) entrance and one (1) exit and any parking [area] having a capacity of more than one hundred fifty (150) spaces
should have entrances and exits on more than one (1) public street or alley. The specific requirements for the number of
entrances and exits will be determined by the nature of the establishment, anticipated traffic flow in and around the parking
area, and the requirements of traffic safety.
(U) Adequate room in compliance with the standards of this ordinance shall be provided on private property for
circulation within a parking lot to gain access to parking spaces. Public rights-of-way shall not be used or incorporated into
a parking lot for circulation between parking aisles or bays.
28.04 Minimum off-street parking requirements.
Accessible parking must be provided according to the standards in the Architectural Barriers Texas Accessibility
Standards (TAS)
Amusement park: One (1) space for each five (5) persons able to be accommodated.
Assembly hall (public or private, including churches, auditoriums, or meeting rooms): One (1) space per three
(3) seats or per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
Auto repair: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/301
Auto sales: One (1) space per employee plus one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of indoor sales
area.
Bank, savings and loan, or similar financial establishment: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area.
Bowling alley: Five (5) spaces for each lane.
Brick or lumber yard or similar outdoor storage area: One (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of site
area.
Commercial outdoor amusement: Twenty (20) spaces plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet
of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Car wash: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. No parking is required at a self-service
car wash.
Child care facilities: One (1) space per six (6) children or as otherwise provided for at the time of approval of a
Special Use Permit.
Commercial sports arena, stadium or a gymnasium: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats or seating
spaces.
Dance, fitness, music, or drama studio: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
Dance hall: One (1) space per three (3) seats or per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater.
Driving range: One (1) space per each three (3) persons able to be accommodated plus one (1) space per
employee.
Duplex: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Fraternity or sorority house: One (1) space for each member in residence plus one (1) space for each three (3)
additional active members.
Furniture store: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.
Gasoline service station: Minimum of six (6) spaces.
Golf course: Minimum of thirty (30) spaces.
Hospitals: One (1) space for every two (2) beds.
Hotel or motel: One (1) space for each room, unit or guest accommodation. Restaurants, meeting rooms, etc. are
counted separate.
Library and museum: One (1) space per employee plus one (1) for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor
area.
Lodge or fraternal organization building: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
Machinery sales or repair (indoor): One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.
Machinery sales or repair (outdoor): One (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of site area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/301
Medical or dental clinics or offices: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
(minimum of five (5) spaces).
Mini-warehouse or rental storage unit complex: Four (4) spaces per complex.
Miniature golf: One (1) space per four (4) persons able to be accommodated.
Mobile home: Two (2) spaces per mobile home.
Mortuary or funeral home: One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space in slumber room
parlors or individual funeral service rooms.
Multifamily dwelling: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per dwelling unit for residents plus one space per every
five dwelling units for visitors.
Nursing or convalescent home: One (1) space per five (5) beds plus one (1) space for each day staff member.
Office: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area (minimum five (5) spaces).
Participant amusements: One (1) space per five (5) persons able to be accommodated
Quadraplex: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Retail or personal service: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area (minimum of five
(5) spaces).
Retail sales (outdoor): One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of leasable area including customer
circulation areas and display areas.
Residence home for the elderly: One (1) space per dwelling unit.
Restaurant: drive-in, fast food, take-out, or service to auto: Eight (8) spaces plus one (1) space per fifty (50)
square feet of seating area.
Restaurant or cafeteria: One (1) space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement (minimum
of five (5) spaces).
Rooming, boarding, or lodging houses: One (1) space per each three (3) sleeping accommodations.
School: business, commercial, or trade: One (1) space for each four (4) students able to be accommodated.
School: elementary, middle, or junior high: One (1) space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each four (4)
seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly.
School: high school or college: One (1) space per each classroom, laboratory or instruction area plus one (1)
space for each four (4) students accommodated in the institution.
Single-family dwelling: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Skating rink: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area
Storage of sand, gravel, petroleum products, etc.: One (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of site
area.
Tavern, lounge, or private club: One (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area.
Theater: One (1) space for each three (3) seats.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/301
Triplex: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
Unspecified commercial, industrial, and warehouse activities: One (1) space per three (3) employees on the
maximum work shift or one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater, plus space to accommodate trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith.
28.05 Minimum off-street loading requirements.
All business uses shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise
and goods within the building or on the lot adjacent to a public alley or private service drive to facilitate the
movement of traffic on the public street. Such space shall consist of a minimum area of ten (10) feet by twentyfive
(25) feet and shall be provided as follows:
Square feet of
Gross Floor Area
Loading or Unloading Berths
25,000 or less 1
25,001 to 84,000 2
84,001 to 158,000 3
158,001 to 230,000 4
238,001 [230,001] to 325,000 5
Each 100,000 additional 1 Additional
28.06 Minimum standards and dimensions.
The minimum parking space standards for the City of Atlanta are shown in Table 1 with all the dimensions being
in feet. In Table 1, “long term parking” means that all parking spaces are occupied for a minimum of four hours’
duration. Figures 6, 7, 8 and 9 are illustrations of the dimensions listed in Table 1 for 8.0 feet stalls, one-way
traffic, and commercial driveways. All parking spaces are to be delineated with permanent or semipermanent
markings including but not limited to paint striping, concrete or wooden bumpers or curb stops, and pavement
marking buttons.
Editor’s note–The parking space dimension table and related figures are located following subsection 28.03(R).
SECTION 29. BUFFERS
29.01 Purpose.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/301
The purpose of a buffer is to provide a separation between conflicting or potentially conflicting land uses. This
separation is provided to mitigate the negative impacts of noise, light, glare, odor, pollution, dust, unsightliness,
or other factors which may be considered obnoxious, offensive, or a nuisance to the public which may be
generated on, created on, emanate from, or be visible on a lot or parcel of land.
29.02 General provisions.
The following general conditions and requirements shall apply under all circumstances except as may be
provided for in Section 29.04.
(A) Where any lot or parcel of land which is located in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 District shares a
property line or a part of a property line with a lot or parcel of land located in the A-E, R-1, R-2, MF, or MH
District, a buffer as required in Section 29.05 shall be provided on the lot or parcel of land located in the C-1,
C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 District. The buffer shall be provided at the time of construction of a use that is first listed
as permitted in one of those districts. The type of buffer provided shall be as provided for in Section 29.03.
The buffer shall be provided by the owner or developer for the lot in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 District.
(B) Where any lot or parcel of land which is located in the MF or MH District shares a property line or a
part of a property line with a lot or a parcel of land located in the A-E, R-1, R-2, District, a buffer as required
in Section 29.05 shall be provided on the lot or parcel of land located in the MF or MH District. The buffer
shall be provided at the time of construction of a use that is first listed as permitted in the MF or MH District.
The type of buffer provided shall be as provided for in Section 29.03. The buffer shall be provided by the
owner or developer of the lot in the MF or MH District.
(C) Where a buffer is required, it shall be completed prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy. A
buffer shall always be maintained in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. If the landscape
material in the buffer cannot be planted because of the season, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued provided a bond to cover the cost of the material and labor is filed with the Building Official.
(D) All buffers shall be maintained in such a way so as not to create a hazard by locking [blocking] the view
a driver has of vehicles or pedestrians moving on the property, of vehicles entering or exiting the property, or
of vehicles or pedestrians on the street.
(E) An earthen berm may count toward the prescribed height of any buffer.
(F) Under no circumstances shall a buffer be allowed to become a nesting ground, breeding ground, or
harborage for mosquitoes, rodents, snakes, vectors, vermin, or other pests. Additionally, a buffer shall be kept
free of litter.
(G) Any and all trees, bushes, shrubs, grass, ground cover, or other landscape material which are planted as
part of a buffer, or which is part of natural or existing vegetation which is incorporated into a buffer, which
dies due to exposure, neglect, or any other cause shall be replaced by the end of the upcoming March or
September, whichever is sooner.
(H) A buffer shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel of land, extending to the boundary of
the lot or parcel. Buffers shall not be located on or have counted as part of their total width any portion of an
existing or dedicated public or private street or right-of-way.
29.03 Types of buffers.
One or a combination of the following types of buffers shall be provided as called for in section 29.05:
(A) A six-foot-high or higher sight-barring fence or wall. The fence or wall shall be maintained in a good
state of repair.
(B) A strip of land a minimum of six feet wide planted with evergreen bushes and/or evergreen trees spaced
a maximum of six feet apart. At the time they are planted, the trees shall be a minimum of six feet tall
measured from the surface of the ground at the trunk to the top of the tree, and the bushes shall be a minimum
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/301
of four feet tall measured from the surface of the ground at the trunk to the top of the bush. Additionally, all
the time the bushes and/or trees are planted and thereafter, they shall create a screen which is at least 50
percent opaque between two and six feet above the ground throughout the year. The trees and/or bushes shall
be well maintained and cared for.
(C) A strip of land a minimum of twenty-five feet wide planted with evergreen trees, evergreen bushes,
deciduous trees, deciduous bushes, or on which earth berms are constructed, or a combination thereof so as to
create a screen that is at least 50 percent opaque between two and eight feet above the ground throughout the
year. At the time they are planted, bushes must be a minimum of 3 feet tall from the surface of the ground at
the trunk to the top of the plant, and trees must be a minimum of six feet tall from the surface of the ground at
the trunk to the top of the tree. The planting strip may be allowed to grow into a semi-natural state.
(D) A strip of land a minimum of 40 feet in width that is allowed to remain in its natural date.
(E) A strip of land a minimum of 300 feet in width that is allowed to remain in its natural state.
(F) A Type B buffer may be substituted for a Type A buffer upon approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and any other wider buffer may be substituted at the discretion of the owner or developer.
29.04 Exceptions.
Upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, one of the narrower or lower-type buffers listed in
Section 29.03 may be substituted for the required buffer listed in Section 29.05 under one of the following
circumstances:
(A) If a parking lot or driveway is located between the buildings, storage areas, or other usable or improved
areas of the site and any property line along which a buffer is required;
(B) If the natural topography contributes to the intent of the requirements for a buffer;
(C) If a combination of narrower or lower-type buffers is provided; or
(D) If the distance, topography, and/or vegetation between the source of any possible nuisances and any
occupied structures on adjacent properties is sufficient to accomplish the purpose of a buffer.
29.05 Table of requirements.
Many specific uses and the particular type of buffer which is required for each use are listed in this table. This
table is designed to be cross-referenced with the Permitted uses table in Section 22 [21] of this ordinance. The
table of buffer requirements is not intended to be all-inclusive. It is intended to serve as a guide regarding the
type of buffer that should be provided between certain land uses. The appropriate buffer for any activity that is
not identified in this table shall be determined as provided for in Section 15. The types of buffers listed
correspond to those listed in Section 29.03.
Editor’s note–The table of buffer requirements referred to in section 29.05 was not set out in the ordinance.
(Ordinance 2017-001 adopted 2/20/17)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/301
ARTICLE 1.000 COPY CHARGES
The Atlanta Public Library shall charge and collect from library patrons and members of the general public the
sum of Fifteen Cents ($0.15) per page for each copy made on the library premises with library equipment.
(Ordinance 424, adopted 9/21/93)
Code reference-Chapter 1, Article 1.600, Section 1.606
ARTICLE 2.000 HANGAR STORAGE FEES
(a) Beginning the 22nd day of July, 2014, and continuing monthly thereafter each aircraft owner utilizing a “T-hangar”
or other such structure for the storage of aircraft shall pay to the city a monthly rental fee being the greater amount of the
following:
(1) Two cents ($0.02) per square foot of land utilized by said hangar of similar structure; or
(2) Each aircraft owner using field storage or tie down facilities provided by the city shall pay to the city a
monthly rental fee of five dollars ($5.00).
(b) Each aircraft owner utilizing a “T-hangar” or similar structure, or claiming ownership in any “T-hangar” or similar
structure, on or before the 1st day of August, 2014, shall every five years execute a hangar site lease agreement with the
city on a uniform form prepared and approved by the city attorney.
(c) Each aircraft owner renting a hangar owned by the city shall pay a monthly fee of $185.00 per month. Occupants of a
city-owned hangar shall execute an annual lease on a uniform form approved by the city attorney.
(Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 7/21/14)
Code reference-Chapter 1, Article 1.800
ARTICLE 3.000 ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
Sec. 3.100 Impoundment Fees
The city council of the City of Atlanta, Texas, approves the initial fee schedule, payable to the City of Atlanta by animal
owners, as follows:
(1) Impoundment Fee $20.0
(2) Wildlife capture at
premises
$25.00
(3) Daily boarding fee –
dog or cat
sm. $3.50
lg. $4.50
(4) Daily boarding fee – $5.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/301
dog or cat in quarantine
(Ordinance 386, adopted 4/3/89, Section 10)
Code reference-Chapter 2, Article 2.100, Section 2.110
Sec. 3.200 Dangerous Dog Fees
(a) The owner of a dangerous dog shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(b) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address within the city, he/she, not later
than the fourteenth (14th) day after the sale or move, shall notify the city. On presentation of a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), the city shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dog’s dollar.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Code reference-Chapter 2, Article 2.300
ARTICLE 4.000 BUILDING RELATED FEES
Sec. 4.100 Building Permit Fees
$100.00 and less No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a
$5.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged
$101.00 to $2,000.00 $5.00 per thousand or fraction thereof
$2,001.00 to $15,000.00 $10.00 for the first 2,001 plus $3.00 for each additional
thousand or fraction thereof, to and including
$15,000.00
$15,001.00 to $50,000.00 $49.00 for the first $15,000.00 plus $2.50 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $136.50 for the first $50,000.00 plus $2.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/301
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $236.50 for the first $100,000.00 plus $1.25 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 and up $736.50 for the first $500,000.00 plus $.75 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof.
Sec. 4.200 Plumbing Permit Fees
$10.00 Issue Fee
Plumbing Fixtures each unit $2.50 Alteration or repair of water piping
$5.00
Floor Drain $2.50 Gas test (new or repair) $10.00
Trap (including Water and Drainage) $2.50 Back flow devices $10.00
House Sewer $5.00 Sprinkler system $10.00
House Sewer (replaced or repaired) $5.00 All other (miscellaneous) $10.00
Water Heater (new or change out) $2.50
Sec. 4.300 Mechanical Permit Fees
Issue Fee $10.00
Fee for inspecting heating, ventilating, duct work, air conditioning and refrigeration systems shall be $10.00 for
the first $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, of valuation of the installation plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
Fee for inspecting repairs, alterations and additions to an existing system shall be $5.00 plus $2.00 for each
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
Fee for inspecting boilers (based on Btu input):
33,000 Btu to 165,000 $5.00
165,001 Btu to 330,000 $10.00
330,001 Btu to 1,165,000 $15.00
Reinspection Fee $5.00
Sec. 4.400 Electrical Permit Fees
$10.00 Issue Fee
2 Bedroom Residence (New) $22.00 A/C Window Unit $2.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/301
3 Bedroom Residence (New) $26.00 Ceiling Fan $2.00
4 Bedroom Residence (New) $30.00 Separate Circuit $2.00
Multi Family $40.00 Circuits 220V $3.00
1st 100 Outlets $0.20 each Misc. Repair $2.00
> 100 Outlets $0.05 each
Temporary Pole $5.00
Sign Connection $5.00
Swimming Pool $15.00
Range $2.00 SERVICE: CHANGE/UPGRADE/NEW
Heater $2.00 100 Amp Service or less $5.00
Dishwasher $2.00 150 Amp Service $10.00
Dryer $2.00 200 Amp Service $15.00
Washing Machine $2.00 Over 200 Amp Service $20.00
(Resolution 2000-03 adopted 4/17/00)
Sec. 4.500 Heating, Air Conditioning License and Fees
(a) License Fees. The initial fee for a Class “I” and “III” license shall be $25.00 for the first year, and the renewal fee
shall be $10.00 thereafter. The initial and renewal fee for a Class “II” and “IV” license shall be $5.00 per year. The initial
fee for Class “V” shall be $200.00 and only one (1) permit shall be granted per year. (Ordinance 391, adopted 11/20/89,
Section III)
Code reference-Chapter 3, Article 3.400, Section 3.403
Sec. 4.600 Planning and Zoning Special Use Permit Fee
(a) The fee for application for a special use permit shall be $125.00. The fee is not refundable upon the applicant’s
failure to receive the special use permit.
(b) The fee for special use permit is subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 2002-07 adopted 8/19/02)
ARTICLE 5.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. 5.100 Itinerant Vendor License Fee
The license fee for an itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be $60.00. Provided, however, when any person, firm,
company, partnership, corporation or association engages in any activity mentioned in Chapter 4, Article 4.200, Section
4.202, through one or more agents or employees, such person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association shall,
in addition to said $60.00 fee above mentioned, pay a license fee of $10.00 for each agent or employee so engaged, all of
which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the
purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of said licenses. (Ordinance 396, adopted 1/22/90, Section 6)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.200, Section 4.206
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/301
Sec. 5.200 Pool/Recreation Hall License Fee
The city secretary is authorized to collect the following annual license fee for each location of any pool hall, recreation
hall, or recreational area owned and operated for profit, to wit: the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each license issued and
a like sum for each renewal thereof. (Ordinance 405, adopted 3/16/92, Section 3)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.400, Section 4.403
Sec. 5.300 Sexually Oriented Business License Fee
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ordinance 437, adopted 8/1/94,
Section 6)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.700, Section 4.706
Sec. 5.400 Junkyard License Fee
In order to defray a part of the expense necessary to provide for the surveillance, supervision and inspection of motor
vehicle junkyards required under the terms of Article 4.800 of this code, there is hereby fixed a license fee which shall be
collected from any person operating a motor vehicle junkyard in said city in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, if
the land used or to be used for such yard or business shall be one (1) acre or less, and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year
if such land shall be in excess of one (1) acre. (Ordinance 445, adopted 1/18/95, Section VI)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.800, Section 4.805
Sec. 5.500 Certificate to Operate Ambulance
Before a certificate is issued or renewed, an annual fee of $100.00 shall be paid, which may be subject to change from time
to time by the city council in the form of a resolution. This fee shall not be prorated for fractional parts of a calendar year.
The operator making application for renewal of a certificate shall do so prior to October 1 of any year. (Ordinance 387,
adopted 6/19/96, Article V)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.900, Section 4.905
Sec. 5.600 Ambulance Service Rates
(a) The rates for ambulance service shall be as follows:
Item Rate
ALS Treatment Scene-no transport $100.00
(Ordinance 2007-03 adopted
5/21/07)
Base rate $550.00
Mileage $12.00 per mile
(Ordinance 2007-01 adopted
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/301
1/8/07)
Waiting time per hour $90.00
Sterile water $10.00
Defibrillation $50.00
Quick combo/defib pads $50.00
Dextrose stick $15.00
Gloves per pair $NC
C-collar $20.00
Sheets per set $NC
Oxygen mask $10.00
Bag valve mask $50.00
OP airway $5.00
EGTA airway $60.00
ET tube $50.00
Suction $25.00
Disposable CID $20.00
Bandaging $15.00
Splinting $15.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/301
OB kit $25.00
Burn sheet $10.00
Cold pack $10.00
Isolation suit $15.00
Medications Rate
Albuteral 2.5-mg $25.00
Adenocard 6-mg $65.00
Atropine 1mg/10ml $10.00
Ammonia inhalants $5.00
Dextrose 50% 25-grams $25.00
Dextrose 25% 25-grams $25.00
Epinephrine 1:1000-1ml $5.00
Epinephrine 1:10,000-10ml $20.00
Furosemide 40mg/4ml $10.00
Glucose instant $10.00
I/O needle $25.00
IV setup $50.00
Lidocaine 2% @ 100mg $10.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/301
Lidocaine 2gr/500ml $50.00
Naloxone 2mg/2ml $40.00
Naloxone 0.4mg/ml $20.00
Nitrostat 0.4mg tablet $10.00
Oxygen $20.00
Syrup of Ipecac $10.00
Replacement of IV bag $25.00
Sodium-Bicarb. 50meq/50ml $60.00
Sodium-Bicarb. 10meq $60.00
(Ordinance 2002-03 adopted 4/15/02)
(b) Atlanta Memorial Hospital and Brooks Hospital, Inc., shall pay three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the temporary
transfer of patients from the City of Atlanta to the City of Texarkana, and return, for diagnostic purposes.
(c) The special rate to be charged for the services set forth in this article shall apply only to accounts paid within thirty
(30) days from the billing date.
(Ordinance 434 adopted 6/20/94)
(d) Ambulance service rates are subject to change and may be changed by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Code reference-Chapter 4, Article 4.1000
ARTICLE 6.000 INSPECTION OF LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE EQUIPMENT
Any person, firm or corporation installing any such equipment as herein provided shall secure the approval of same as
complying with the requirements of this article by the city fire marshal as herein provided for, and shall, upon requesting
such inspection for approval, pay an inspection fee of $1.00, for each piece of equipment, to cover cost of inspection.
(Ordinance 155, adopted 3/7/55, Section 6)
Code reference-Chapter 6, Article 6.103
ARTICLE 7.000 UTILITY RELATED FEES AND CHARGES
Sec. 7.100 Water Rates
The monthly rates for water usage shall be as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/301
(1) Residential and Multifamily Unit Water Rates. The monthly minimum base rate charged in the
residential and multifamily classification to each meter customer shall be $30.31, which shall include the first
2,000 gallons of water consumption. For each 1,000 gallons consumed monthly above 2,001 gallons, the
charge shall be $3.49 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Commercial and Church Rates. The monthly base rate charged in the commercial and church
classification to each meter customer shall be $30.31, which shall include the first 2,000 gallons of water
consumption. For each 1,000 gallons consumed monthly above 2,001 gallons, the charge shall be $3.69 per
1,000 gallons.
(3) Water Service Outside the City Limits. The base minimum water rate for customers who reside outside
the corporate limits shall be 25% higher than the rate for those customers living within the corporate limits.
The charge for each additional 1,000 gallons shall also be 25% higher than that charged to resident customers
in the same classification.
(4) Automatic Inflationary Increase. The minimum base water rate and the charge for additional 1,000
gallon units shall increase each year by 4% to account for increased expenses in providing services. The
increases shall become effective on the September utility billing cycle every year, without further action of the
city council.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.101
Sec. 7.200 Sewer Rates
The monthly rates for sewer usage shall be as follows:
(1) Residential Sewer Rates. Sewer rates are calculated based upon the actual metered water usage each
monthly billing cycle. The monthly minimum base rate charged in the residential classification shall be
$15.13, which shall include the first 2,000 gallons. From 2,001 gallons to 15,000 gallons, the charge shall be
$3.49 for each 1,000 gallons. There shall be no charge to residential customers for usage above 15,000 gallons.
(2) Multifamily Sewer Rates. Sewer rates are calculated based upon the actual metered water usage each
monthly billing cycle. The monthly minimum base rate charged in the residential classification shall be
$15.13, which shall include the first 2,000 gallons. For each 1,000 gallons above 2,001 gallons, there shall be a
charge of $3.49 per thousand gallons.
(3) Commercial and Church Rates. Sewer rates are calculated based upon the actual metered water usage
each monthly billing cycle. The monthly minimum base rate charged in the commercial classification shall be
$18.99, which shall include the first 2,000 gallons. For each 1,000 gallons above 2,001 gallons, there shall be a
charge of $3.69 per thousand gallons.
(4) Sewer Service Outside the City Limits. The base minimum sewer rate for customers who reside outside
the corporate limits shall be 25% higher than the rate for those customers living within the corporate limits.
The charge for each additional 1,000 gallons shall also be 25% higher than that charged to resident customers
in the same classification.
(5) Automatic Inflationary Increase. The minimum base sewer rate and the charge for additional 1,000
gallon units shall increase each year by 4% to account for increased expenses in providing services. The
increases shall become effective on the September utility billing cycle every year, without further action of the
city council.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.102
Sec. 7.300 Negotiated Rates
Industrial water and sanitary sewer service shall be set on a negotiated basis. An industrial user shall be defined
as a “user which requires water in its manufacturing process, or produces a large volume of discharge into the
sanitary sewer system.” Rate negotiations shall be conducted between the user and a committee consisting of the
city manager as chairman, city engineer, Atlanta Economic Development Corporation executive director, city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/301
attorney and the chairperson of the water rate committee. Such industrial rates shall be subject to approval by the
city council.
Sec. 7.400 Billings
(a) The water department shall determine and designate the accounts for water, sewer and sewer service furnished by the
city together with the billing date therefor, all of which shall be due and payable at City of Atlanta, 315 North Buckner
Street, Atlanta, Texas.
(b) Such rates and charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid by the customers of the waterworks and sanitary
sewer system to the water department and such bills and accounts shall be due and payable on or before the 10th day
following the billing date and shall become delinquent on the 11th day after such billing date and a ten percent (10%)
penalty shall be added to the amount due and unpaid.
(c) Customers requesting accounts to be placed on “vacation” must do so in writing by applying for such consideration
at the water department in city hall. Accounts will not be placed on vacation for a period of time less than (4) weeks.
(d) When the billing of an account for water or wastewater is disputed by the customer and another reading of the meter
is requested, the customer shall be liable for a $5.00 fee to be assessed on the next month’s billing if the meter reading is
found to be accurate.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.104
Sec. 7.500 Deposits
(a) Each customer shall, at the time of making application for water and sewer service, pay a deposit to the water
department as follows:
(1) Resident customers: $75.00.
(2) Commercial customers: $150.00.
(b) The charges for water and sewer service furnished shall be a valid lien and legal charge against the deposit made by
the customer. The deposit shall bear no interest. Upon termination of the service, the deposit shall be refunded to the
customer, less any amount or amounts of unpaid balances due the city for water, sewer or trash collection services.
(c) The city manager may waive the payment of additional deposit when an additional account location is added to an
existing established account which has been satisfactorily maintained in good standing for a period of one year.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.105
Sec. 7.600 Disconnection of Services
(a) If a customer shall fail to pay in full for water or sewer service rendered by the city before the expiration of ten (10)
days after the date upon which such bill becomes delinquent, the water service of the customer shall be disconnected, and
such service shall not be restored until the customer shall have paid the delinquent water and sewer bill in full, together
with a reconnection fee in the sum of $30.00. In the event service is discontinued for nonpayment, the customer’s deposit
shall be applied to the unpaid balance of the account.
(b) Prior to the restoration of service to a customer whose service has been discontinued for nonpayment, the customer
must pay all amounts due and make the residential or commercial deposit required by this article.
(c) In the event water service is terminated for nonpayment or theft of services, the fee for resuming service shall be
thirty and no/100 dollars ($30.00), and the fee must be paid at the water department prior to the restoration of water
services.
(1) Water service shall not be restored to any residential or commercial customer unless a responsible person
is present at the premises when such restoration of service is made.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/301
(2) Restoration of services shall be during business hours of 8:00 o’clock a.m. until 4:30 o’clock p.m.
(3) In the event the customer or other responsible person is not present at the premises for reconnection
purposes, an additional trip fee of ten and no/100 dollars ($10.00) per trip during business hours and twenty
and no/100 dollars ($20.00) per trip after business hours shall be paid by the customer.
(d) All water customers are required to maintain a sanitary sewer system in good order. Failure to satisfactorily maintain
the customer’s sewer system or to make improvements as directed by the city may result in the cutoff of city water service
to the location. Any improvements required by the city will be for sanitary or health reasons only.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.106
Sec. 7.700 Special Provisions for the Payment of Delinquent Accounts
(a) The city manager is designated as the due process hearing officer for water and sewer accounts and as such shall hear
and determine matters of hardship, illness or disability which would justify a payment schedule other than that fixed by
this article.
(b) Customers desiring special consideration with regard to the payment of accounts as established by this article must
make an affidavit showing the circumstances upon which they request a variance of the established payment schedule.
Such affidavit shall be delivered to the city manager who may act solely upon the affidavit or may set a hearing date and
request the customer to be present for the purpose of answering, under oath, questions concerning the request for a
variance in payment of the customer’s account. Any determination by the city manager may be appealed to the city council
at its regularly scheduled meeting.
(c) Any person making untrue or false statements in an affidavit for the purpose of gaining a variance or exception with
regard to the payment of an account shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine not less than twentyfive
and no/100 dollars ($25.00), nor more than two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00).
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.107
Sec. 7.800 Insufficient Check Policy
The city manager shall establish a written policy with regard to the processing of insufficient or other returned
checks given in payment of water and sewer accounts. The city manager is authorized to charge a fee up to but
not exceeding twenty and no/100 dollars ($20.00) for each occasion upon which a check is dishonored by the
bank upon which it is written. In the event a customer’s check should be dishonored two times, then the account
shall be declared past due and water service to the customer shall be discontinued as provided herein. In the
event a customer has three checks returned from the bank, the city will then place that customer on a “cash only”
payment system, and will no longer accept checks from that customer for payment of water/wastewater/trash
collection accounts.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.108
Sec. 7.900 Damaged Meters
The customer shall have the sole responsibility for safeguarding the water meter on his premises. Should the
water meter be damaged in any way, the customer may be charged for the price of a new meter, plus an amount
equal to the costs of one hour’s labor charge required to replace the meter or any portion thereof.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.109
Sec. 7.1000 Hours for Restoring Water Service
It shall be the policy of the water department to commence or terminate water service during normal business
hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. The city manager is authorized to establish
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/301
reasonable procedures through which a customer may request restoration of services. The city manager is
authorized to make reasonable charges related to special services made at the request of a customer.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.110
Sec. 7.1100 Tapping Fee
(a) A tapping fee for connecting new customers to the water and sanitary sewer system shall be made as follows:
(1) Residential water tap: $300.00.
(2) Residential sewer tap: $350.00.
(3) Commercial water tap 3/4" or less: $350.00.
(4) Commercial sewer tap 6" or less: $400.00.
(b) Water tap for lines larger than 3/4" or commercial sewer taps for lines larger than 6" will be charged on actual cost of
material, labor and equipment used to make the tap. No dual connections (being more than one customer on a single line)
shall be permitted. A second water tap for the purpose of irrigating lawns may be placed at a service location at the request
of the customer. Installation of the second meter will cost $300.00 and will be charged on a per thousand gallon rate with
no minimum charge and no sewer charge.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.111
Sec. 7.1200 Fully Metered System
The water system shall be operated on a fully metered basis.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.112
Sec. 7.1300 Private Water Wells
A resident of the city who has a private water well will be required to install check valves to prevent backflow of
water from the well to cross-connect into the city’s water distribution system.
Code reference–Chapter 11, Article 11.100, Section 11.113
Sec. 7.1400 Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste
The monthly rate charges in the city for the collection and disposal of solid waste are hereby established as set
forth below:
(1) For Residential Units. $19.76 per month for one polycart. Collection will be made once per week.
Additional residential polycart rate is $11.53 per month.
(2) For Commercial.
(A) Commercial polycart charge shall be $31.38 per month. Collection shall be made once per week.
A second commercial polycart rate is $17.50 per month. Accounts where two carts are inadequate will
be required to utilize a commercial bin.
(B) Customers generating more than the quantity of solid waste per week set forth in the subsection
(A) above shall be required to use containers (bins) provided by the contractor and in accordance with
the quantity of the waste generated and the number of collections required per week, the following rates
shall apply:
Container Trips per Week
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/301
Size
1 2 3 4 5 6
2 yard $96.99 $142.44 $194.93 $218.98 $242.85 $269.08
3 yard $115.18 $178.10 $203.06 $242.10 $264.20 $321.64
4 yard $133.22 $206.93 $240.30 $273.81 $307.37 $374.32
6 yard $171.55 $235.57 $309.59 $353.91 $398.22 $483.66
Note: Additional pickups shall be made at request of commercial customers for $6.00 per pickup
plus $2.25 per cubic yard collected.
(3) The contractor is franchised by the city to provide compactors, roll-off boxes and removal of waste
requiring special handling due to size, weight or type of material and the contractor shall negotiate a
reasonable fee with customers for such services. The fees for these additional services shall be billed and
collected by the contractor, and the contractor shall remit 10% of those fees to the city.
Code reference-Chapter 11, Article 11.500, Section 11.508
Sec. 7.1500 Automatic Inflationary Increase
The minimum base rate for residential and commercial solid waste accounts, as well as the collection tables,
shall automatically increase 4% to account for increased expenses in providing services. The increases shall
become effective on the September utility billing cycle every year, without further action of the city council.
Sec. 7.1600 Convenience Waste Station
(a) Trash bags up to 55 gallons: One dollar ($1.00) fee per bag.
(b) Pickup load regardless of volume: Five dollar ($5.00) charge.
(c) Trailer load regardless of volume: Five dollar ($5.00) minimum charge.
(d) Trailer load after first six (6) feet: One dollar ($1.00) per extra foot of trailer.
Code reference-Chapter 11, Article 11.500, Section 11.514
Sec. 7.1700 Effective Date for Rates
This article shall become effective and shall be in full force on September 1, 2014 in order that utility bills
mailed in September, 2014 but not collected until October 2014 shall contain the updated fees.
(Ordinance 2014-04 adopted 7/21/14)
ARTICLE 8.000 MUNICIPAL COURT
Sec. 8.100 Technology Fund
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/301
The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon
conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. (Ordinance 2003-14 adopted
12/15/03)
ARTICLE 9.000 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ITEM RATE
Mobile Equipment:
Engine 1 $500.00 per hour
Engine 2 $500.00 per hour
Tanker 1 $400.00 per hour
Brush 1 $400.00 per hour
Rescue 1 $600.00 per hour
Fire chief vehicle $250.00 per hour
Asst. fire chief vehicle $250.00 per hour
Rescue 2 $300.00 per hour
Hazmat Equipment:
Absorbent, per bag $ 18.00
Absorbent pads $ 2.00 each
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/301
Absorbent booms $ 40.00 each
Top soil $ 40.00
Disposable coveralls $ 25.00
Neoprene gloves $ 7.00 pair
Latex gloves $ 8.50 pair
Over boots $ 25.00
Disposable goggles $ 18.00
Gas plug kit $ 65.00
Plug and dike $ 75.00
Drum liners $ 11.00
Barricade tape $ 22.00
Poly sheeting $ 60.00
Gas Multimeter $ 75.00
CO meter $ 75.00
Microblaze, 5 gal. $130.00
Level A suit $750.00
Level B suit $300.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/301
Level C suit $100.00
Chem tape $ 30.00
Bacterial bugs, 5 gal. pail $125.00
AFFF foal, per gallon $ 40.00
Class A foam, per gallon $ 25.00
Rescue Equipment:
Spreaders $300.00
Cutters $300.00
Rams $300.00
Air bags $300.00
K-12 saw $ 65.00
Target saw $ 65.00
Ajax tool $ 25.00
K-tool $ 25.00
Windshield tool $ 15.00
Rescue blanket $ 32.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/301
Cribbing $ 50.00
Hand Tools:
All hand tools will be included in the apparatus price. Exception will be where tools are
used and contaminated and have to be replaced. Tool price will be replacement cost.
Miscellaneous Fees:
Investigator $175.00 per hour
Inspector $175.00 per hour
(Ordinance 2005-05 adopted 7/18/05)
ARTICLE 10.000 RESERVED*