CHARTER
PREAMBLE
We the people of the City of Abilene, dedicated to the principal of local self-government, under law, as interpreted by the light of reason,
and administered to secure justice, do invoke the guidance of God in establishing a municipal government, capable of efficiently
translating the wishes of the voters into effective administration as promptly and economically as possible, and ordain these provisions for
the Charter of our City.
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS
Sec. 1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Abilene, Taylor County, Texas, within the corporate limits as heretofore or hereafter established are hereby
constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of “City of Abilene,” hereinafter
referred to as the “city,” with such powers, rights, duties, privileges and immunities as are herein provided.
Sec. 2. Form of government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as “Council-Manager Government.” Pursuant to the provisions of,
and subject only to the limitations imposed by, the state constitutions, state laws and this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in
an elective council hereinafter referred to as the “council,” which shall enact legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint
the city manager who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city.
Sec. 3. General powers of the city.
The city shall be a home rule city. It shall have all powers granted to home rule cities by the constitution and laws of this state, as fully
and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into
execution such granted powers, and the powers are hereby adopted that are conferred upon cities by Article XI, Section 5, of the
Constitution of the State of Texas (Home Rule Amendment). Among other powers, the city shall have the power to contract and to
cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency or any political subdivision thereof, or with the United States
Government or any agency thereof, to accomplish any lawful purpose. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate
limits for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and,
subject to the provisions of this Charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve and control such property as may now or
hereafter be owned by it; may provide for the expenditure of public funds for a retirement system, group health, life and accident
insurance coverage, and surety bonds for city employees and officers; may pass ordinances and enact such regulations as may be
expedient for the maintenance of good government order and peace of the city and the welfare, health, morals, comfort and safety of its
inhabitants consistent with the provisions of this Charter. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be
exclusive and in addition to the powers enumerated or implied herein the city shall have all powers not prohibited by the constitution or
laws of this state.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(a), 2-27-97)
Sec. 4. Annexation.
The council shall have the power to fix, by ordinance, the boundary limits of the city and to provide, by ordinance, for the annexation of
additional territory lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of the territory to be annexed. The council
shall have the power to detach, by ordinance, any territory with or without the consent of the inhabitants of such area to be detached.
Upon the introduction of such annexation or detachment ordinance to the council, it shall be published at least one time in the official
newspaper of the city in the form in which it may be finally passed, and said ordinance shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at
least thirty (30) days have elapsed after the first publication thereof, and a public hearing held thereon. When any territory shall be so
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/648
annexed, the same shall be a part of the city and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and
the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens, including the right to vote in municipal elections,
and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. When territory has been so detached, the same shall no
longer be a part of the city. However, it is specifically provided that the council shall have the authority to annex property to the city by an
ordinance passed under its emergency powers and without giving notice thereof when a petition is duly presented bearing the signatures
of all of the owners of the property sought to be annexed.
Sec. 5. Street development and improvement.
The city shall have the power, in connection with its power to develop and improve or cause to be developed and improved any and all
public streets, sidewalks, waterways, alleys and other public ways within the corporate limits of the city, to assess the cost of such
development and improvement partly or entirely by assessments levied as a lien against the property abutting thereon and against the
owners thereof. These assessments may be levied in any amount and under any procedures not prohibited by the constitution or statutes
of the State of Texas, and may prescribe the time, terms and conditions of payment thereof, the rate of interest, and may include
reasonable attorney's fees and costs of collection, if incurred, but no assessment may be made against land or owners of land in excess of
the enhancement in value to the property occasioned by such development or improvement. If improvements be ordered constructed in
any part of any area used or occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railway or public utility, then the city shall have the power to assess
the whole cost of improvements in such area and the added costs of improvements in areas adjacent thereto made necessary by such use
or occupancy against such railway or utility, and shall have the power, by ordinance, to provide for the enforcement of such assessment.
As an alternative and cumulative method of developing, improving and paving any and all public streets, sidewalks, waterways, alleys,
highways and other public ways within its corporate limits, the city shall have the power and authority to proceed in accordance with
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Chapter 313, Street Improvements and Assessments In Certain Municipalities.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(b), 2-27-97)
ARTICLE II. THE COUNCIL
Sec. 6. Number, selection and term.
The council shall consist of six councilmen and a mayor, all of whom shall be elected at large, as hereinafter provided. Each councilman,
unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall serve for a term of three years, beginning with the first meeting of the
council following his election, and ending with the first meeting of the council three (3) years later, or until his successor has been elected
and duly qualified. Such terms for councilmen shall be on a three year staggered basis to the end that two (2) councilmen shall be elected
each year. The mayor, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this charter, shall serve for a term of three (3) years, beginning with
the first meeting of the council following his election and ending with the first meeting of the council three (3) years later, or until his
successor has been elected and duly qualified.
Sec. 7. Qualifications.
At the time of his election to office, each councilman and the mayor shall be at least twenty-one years of age, shall be a citizen and
qualified voter of the State of Texas and the city. At the time of his election to office each councilman and mayor shall have resided
within the City of Abilene for at least twelve months. Three councilmen shall be residents of the area of the city north of the Texas and
Pacific Railway Company main line, as located in the city on the effective date of this Charter, and the other three councilmen shall be
residents of the area of the city south of such main line. The mayor may be a resident of any part of the city. Residence requirements shall
be effective only as of the date of the election of each councilman, but a member of the council or the mayor ceasing to reside in the city
shall immediately forfeit his office. Neither the mayor nor any member of the council shall hold any other office or employment under the
city government while he is a member of said council; nor shall he hold any other paid employment under the city government within two
(2) years thereafter unless such employment be an elective office.
(As amended 4-3-76; Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(c), 2-27-97)
Sec. 8. Salaries.
The mayor and each councilman shall receive a salary of one dollar ($1.00) per year for each year he serves as mayor or councilman. The
council may establish by ordinance methods of reimbursement for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by the mayor and
councilmen in the performance of their duties.
Sec. 9. Vacancies.
All vacancies of the council must be filled by election, pursuant to Article XI, Section 11, of the Texas Constitution. Candidates elected to
fill such unexpired terms shall have the same qualifications as those officers whose unexpired terms they fill. If required to be filled
hereunder, each such vacancy shall be filled by an election called and held for such purpose, within 120 days from the inception of such
vacancy.
(Ord. No. 42-2006, pt. 2(1), 8-28-06 / referendum 11-7-06)
Sec. 10. Powers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/648
All powers and authority, including determination of all matters of policy, which are expressly or by implication conferred on or
possessed by the city shall be vested in and exercised by the council; provided, however, that the council shall have no authority to
exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other city officers by this Charter.
Sec. 11. Appointments by council.
Members of all boards created by the council shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council.
Sec. 12. Investigative powers of the council.
The council shall have the power to inquire into or investigate the official conduct of any department, agency, office, officer or employee
of the city and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers,
records or other evidence, and as it shall provide by ordinance, to punish and fix penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any
such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, records or other evidence.
Sec. 13. Interference in administrative matters.
Except for the purpose of inquiry or investigation the council and its members shall deal with the administrative departments and
personnel solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city
manager, either publicly or privately, except those administrative departments and personnel whose offices are filled by appointment by
the mayor with approval of the council under the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 14. Mayor and mayor pro tempore.
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council; shall be recognized as the head of the city government; and shall be entitled to vote
on all matters considered by the council. At its first meeting following each regular election and qualification of councilmen, the council
shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tempore, who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and when so
acting, shall have the same powers and duties as herein set forth for the office of mayor.
Sec. 15. City secretary.
The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint the city secretary, who may be removed from office at any time by a majority
vote of the council. The city secretary shall keep the minutes, agenda, ordinances, and other official records of the council and city; and
shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or the council. The city secretary shall be the custodian of
the official seal of the city. The city secretary shall appoint such assistants as may be authorized by the council.
Sec. 16. Meetings of the council.
The council shall meet in regular session at least twice each month, which regular meetings shall be at least one week apart, and at such
other times as may be prescribed by resolution. Special meetings of the council shall be called by the city secretary upon the written
request of the mayor or any three councilmen. All council meetings shall be held at the city hall, or at such places as will permit the
attendance of the general public. The city secretary shall notify news media of the time and place of all special meetings, prior to such
meetings.
Sec. 17. Rules of procedure; quorum.
The council shall by resolution determine its own rules and order of business, except that four or more members of the council shall be
required to constitute a quorum.
Sec. 18. Procedure to enact legislation.
The council shall legislate by ordinance only and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be “Be It Ordained by the City Council of
the City of Abilene, Texas.” The city attorney shall approve all ordinances prior to their adoption by the council, as to the legality and
form thereof, or shall present his written objections thereto to the council and file a copy thereof with the city secretary. Every ordinance
enacted by the council shall be signed by the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or any three members of the council and shall be filed with, and
recorded by, the city secretary in an ordinance book reserved for that purpose. Except in the case of ordinances issuing bonds or as
otherwise provided by state law or this Charter, there shall be a first and second reading of all ordinances in open meetings of the council
on two separate days. A reading by descriptive caption only shall be sufficient. Upon consideration for passage of any ordinance,
resolution or motion, the city secretary shall call the roll of the council and record the votes, which record of votes shall constitute a
public record. Except as otherwise provided by state law or this Charter, passage of an ordinance, resolution or motion shall require the
affirmative votes of at least four members of the council. The council shall call a public hearing before the final passage of any ordinance
if required by state law or this Charter or by ordinance enacted thereunder, and may call a public hearing before the final passage of any
ordinance if such hearing be deemed to be in the public interest; notice thereof shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the city at least 24 hours prior to the time of such hearing. All ordinances, unless otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or by the terms
of such ordinance, shall take effect immediately upon final passage thereof. The requirement for reading of ordinances upon two separate
days may be waived by the council in cases where such ordinances relate to the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety
or welfare, if adopted by the affirmative votes of at least five council members and contain a statement of the nature of the emergency.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/648
Sec. 19. Publication of ordinances; effective date.
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city secretary shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any
penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of its provisions, and of every ordinance required by law or this Charter to be published, by
causing said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one time within twenty (20) days after final passage thereof in
the official newspaper of the city. The affidavit of such publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before any officer
authorized to administer oaths and filed with the city secretary shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such
ordinance in all courts. Such ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after date of such publication, unless otherwise provided in such
ordinance, provided that any penal ordinance passed as an emergency measure shall take effect immediately upon publication.
Sec. 20. Code of ordinances.
The council shall have the power to cause all general ordinances of the city to be compiled, indexed and printed in code form, whenever
the codification or recodification thereof is deemed desirable or required by law. When adopted by the council, the printed codes of
general ordinances so designated shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of such codes or any part thereof being published
in any newspaper. The caption, descriptive clause and other formal parts of the ordinances of the city may be omitted without affecting
the validity of such ordinances when they are published as a code. A printed copy of the city's code of ordinances, when authenticated by
the city secretary, shall be admitted in evidence in courts without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence in all courts of the
existence and regular enactment of all ordinances therein set forth.
Sec. 21. Emergency powers.
A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist when, as the consequence of a major calamity, activities of a war-like nature, riots, or
insurrection, the normal procedures of the municipal government are inadequate for the protection of persons or property. A state of
emergency may be declared by the vote of the council, or by order of the mayor, or, in his absence or disability, the mayor pro tempore, if
a meeting of the council cannot be called within the time available, whenever conditions threaten to render inadequate the normal
procedures of the municipal government for protection of persons or property.
Sec. 22. Powers of mayor during emergency.
During a state of emergency the mayor, or, in his absence or disability, the mayor pro tempore, shall have all the powers which would be
vested in the council under this Charter and may exercise those powers to the extent he considers to be reasonable or necessary for the
protection of persons or property. In addition thereto he shall be specifically empowered:
a. To give orders directly to any city officer or employee as well as through the city manager;
b. To suspend temporarily or replace any city officer or employee, other than a councilman, when deemed necessary;
c. To place temporarily any city officers, employees, services, equipment or properties under the direction or control of any
office or officers of the county, state or federal governments, including the military services, and the duly constituted officers
for the civil defense;
d. To enter upon cooperative agreements with the proper authorities of county, state or federal governments, or other
municipalities, for mutual assistance within the area of an existing or threatened emergency;
e. To order the evacuation of persons from all or any part of the city and to close any buildings or areas within the city;
f. To authorize expenditures totaling not more than ten (10) per centum of the city's current annual budget for general
purposes without budget appropriation therefor;
g. To re-establish the seat of the city's government at another place, provided that such place, if outside the city's territorial
limits, shall be at the place nearest thereto which is suitable and practical; and,
h. To summon citizens to serve as special police, with the powers and duties appropriate thereto.
Sec. 23. When emergency powers of mayor to terminate.
The emergency powers herein provided shall be exercised only to the extent made necessary by the nature of the emergency and during
the continuation of the state of emergency. The state of emergency shall terminate when so ordered by the mayor, or by the mayor pro
tempore in the absence or disability of the mayor, or may be terminated by vote of a majority of the council.
ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS, INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Sec. 24. Annual elections.
The regular election of council to places on the council occupied by council whose terms are expiring and the regular election of the
mayor, if his term is expiring, shall be held on such date as prescribed by the election laws of the State of Texas. In such election each
qualified voter shall vote for not more than one candidate for each council place to be filled, and for not more than one candidate for
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/648
mayor. Said elections shall be ordered by the Council, and in case of its failure to order same, the mayor shall make such order. In case of
the inability of the council and mayor to act, the elections may be called by the city secretary, and in case of his inability to act, by the
county judge of Taylor County, Texas, and in case of his inability to act, by the governor of the State of Texas. The city secretary shall
give notice of such election by causing said notice to be published at least thirty (30) days prior to the day of such election.
(As amended 4-3-76; Ord. No. 42-2006, pt. 2(2), 8-28-06 / referendum 11-7-06)
Sec. 25. Regulation of elections.
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in
accordance with this Charter and ordinances or resolutions adopted by the council for the conduct of elections. The council shall appoint
the election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in the city elections and for
all other expenses in holding said elections.
Sec. 26. Application for candidacy.
Any qualified person may make application to have his name placed on the official ballot for the post of councilman or mayor. The
application shall be made in accordance with all applicable laws and shall state that the candidate agrees to serve if qualified and elected.
There shall be six councilman places; councilman places Nos. 1, 3 and 5 shall be filled by qualified candidates residing at the time of the
election north of the main line of the Texas and Pacific Railway Company tracks as located at the time of the effective date of this
Charter; and place Nos. 2, 4, and 6 shall be filled by qualified persons residing at the time of the election south of said main line. Said
applications shall be filed with the city secretary within time limits as provided by state law.
Sec. 27. Canvassing elections and declaring results.
Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the city secretary. The council shall canvass the
returns, investigate the qualifications of the candidates and declare the official results of the election on such date as prescribed by the
election laws of the State of Texas. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the council by election
precinct totals. The qualified person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared elected by said
council. The decision of the council, as to qualifications of candidates, shall be conclusive and final for all purposes.
(Ord. No. 42-2006, pt. 2(3), 8-28-06 / referendum 11-7-06)
Sec. 28. Runoff elections.
If no candidate receives a majority of all the votes cast for an office, the council shall immediately upon declaring the official results of
the election, order a run-off election for each office to which no one was elected. Such run-off election shall be held on such date as
prescribed by the election laws of the State of Texas and in such run-off election the two (2) candidates who received, in the preceding
election, the highest number of votes for each office to which no one was elected, shall be voted on again by the qualified voters, and the
candidate who receives the majority of the votes cast for each such office in the run-off election shall be elected to such office.
(Ord. No. 42-2006, pt. 2(4), 8-28-06 / referendum 11-7-06)
Sec. 29. Qualification and notification of city officers.
Any officer elected or appointed must qualify by taking and subscribing his oath of office within thirty (30) days, otherwise, the office
shall be deemed vacant. It shall be the duty of the city secretary to notify all persons elected or appointed by the mayor with approval of
the council of their election or appointment and all the elected or appointed officers may enter upon their duties after so qualifying.
Sec. 30. Special elections.
The council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the state law or this Charter, fix the time and
place of holding same, and provide all means for holding such special elections, provided that every special election shall be called and
held as nearly as practicable, according to the provisions governing annual elections.
Sec. 31. Initiative.
The voters of this city shall have the power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of
taxes, or one repealing such an ordinance, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any
initiated ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten (10)
per centum of such voters computed as of the date of the last regular municipal election. Such ordinance may be passed by the council
without change, or submitted to the voters at an election called for that purpose.
Sec. 32. Referendum.
The voters of this city shall have the power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council which would have been
the proper subject of an initiative election under this Charter, except that ordinances authorizing the issuance of either tax or revenue
bonds, whether original or refunding, shall not be subject to referendum. The petition for referendum shall require the same number and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/648
qualification of signers thereto as required by this Charter for an initiative petition, except that referendum petitions must be filed with the
city secretary within sixty (60) days after the final passage of the ordinance which is the subject of the referendum, or the petition shall be
barred by the lapse of time. When such petition has been certified as sufficient by the city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition
shall not go into effect, or, if it has gone into effect, then further enforcement or action thereunder shall be suspended unless and until
such ordinance is approved by the voters as herein provided.
Sec. 33. Recall.
The voters of this city shall have the power to recall any elected officer of this city and may exercise such power by filing with the city
secretary a petition which shall be signed and verified by the same number of signers with the same qualifications and in the same manner
required in this Charter for an initiative petition. If the petition is certified by the city secretary to be sufficient, the council shall order and
hold, or cause to be held, an election forthwith to determine whether such officer shall be recalled.
Sec. 34. Results of recall election.
If the majority of the legal votes cast at a recall election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the council shall immediately
declare his office vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. An officer thus removed shall
not be eligible to hold office again in the city within a period of four years from the date of his recall.
Sec. 35. Limitation on recall.
No recall petition shall be filed against an officer within six months after he takes office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than
one recall election during a term of office.
Sec. 36. Form of petitions.
All papers for any particular petition circulated for the purpose of an initiative, referendum, or recall shall be uniform in size and style.
Initiative petitions shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance and referendum papers shall contain sufficient description of the
ordinance sought to be repealed to positively identify it. The signatures to initiative, referendum or recall petitions need not be appended
to one paper, but all petition papers comprising a single petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument
with an affidavit attached made by the person so filing such petition that it bears a stated number of signatures, and that all the signatures
appended thereto are, in his belief, the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. Names and addresses of the
signers of such petitions shall be printed adjacent to said signatures.
Sec. 37. Filing, examination and certification of petitions.
Petitions for initiative, referendum or recall shall be filed with the city secretary. Within twenty days after a petition is filed, the city
secretary shall determine whether such petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters and whether it has a proper affidavit
attached of the person filing same. After completing examination of such petition, the city secretary shall certify the result thereof to the
council at its next regular meeting. If such petition is insufficient, the city secretary shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which
it is defective, and shall at once notify the person who filed it of his findings.
Sec. 38. Amendments of petitions.
An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notice of insufficiency has been sent by
the city secretary, by filing a supplementary petition signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition, and the same procedures
shall then be followed by the city secretary and council as in the case of an original petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition
shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
Sec. 39. Consideration of petition by council.
Whenever the council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such
petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The
council shall take final action on such ordinance not later than thirty days after the date on which it was submitted to the council by the
city secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such consideration shall be upon the
question “Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?”
Sec. 40. Submission to voters.
If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition in the exact form proposed, or it fails to repeal a referred
ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the voters not less than thirty days nor more than ninety days from the
date the council takes its final vote thereon.
Sec. 41. Results of election.
If a majority of the voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. A
referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon shall be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/648
are approved by the voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of
such conflict.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Sec. 42. City manager–Generally.
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city.
Sec. 43. Same–Appointment.
The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of the council for an indefinite term, and may be removed by the council
by a vote of at least four of the council members. The action of the council in removing the city manager shall be final, it being the
intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such removal in the council.
Sec. 44. Same–Qualifications.
The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability.
The city manager need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city; however, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city.
Sec. 45. Same–Compensation.
The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council.
Sec. 46. Same–Powers and duties generally.
The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this
Charter. The powers herein conferred upon the city manager shall include, but shall not be limited to, the powers set forth in sections 47
through 52, inclusive.
Sec. 47. Same–Appointments.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city manager shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city,
suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for, by or under this Charter, with the exception of
those administrative department heads and officers whose appointment and removal is subject to the approval of the council as may be
provided by the laws of the State of Texas or other provisions of this Charter. The city manager may authorize any such administrative
officer whom he has appointed to exercise the powers herein granted with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or
agency.
Sec. 48. Same–Direction and supervision of departments, etc.
The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all functions of the city and of its departments, offices and agencies,
except for the functions specifically assigned to any such department, office or agency by this Charter.
Sec. 49. Same–Enforcement of laws; performance of contracts.
The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and ordinances passed by the council, subject to enforcement by him
or by officers subject to his direction and supervision under this Charter, are faithfully executed, and that all contracts, permits, privileges
and franchises to which the city is a party are properly performed.
Sec. 50. Same–To prepare annual budget.
The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council.
Sec. 51. Same–Reports to council.
The city manager shall make regular monthly reports to the council on the operations of every city department, office and agency subject
to his direction and supervision under this Charter, keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city
and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable.
Sec. 52. Same–Other duties.
The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, or required of him by the council not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 53. Administrative departments.
There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter or as may be established by ordinance, all of which shall
be under the control and direction of the city manager unless otherwise provided in this Charter. The council may abolish or combine one
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/648
or more departments created by it and may assign or transfer duties of any department of the city from one such department to another by
ordinance.
Sec. 54. Department heads.
At the head of each department which is under the control and direction of the city manager, there shall be a director, who shall be
appointed and may be removed by the city manager. Such directors shall have supervision and control over their respective departments,
and may serve as chiefs of divisions within their respective departments. With the consent of the council, the city manager may serve as
the head of one or more such departments, or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.
Sec. 55. Parks and recreation board–Created.
There is hereby created a board consisting of seven (7) members to be known as the parks and recreation board. Within thirty (30) days
after the effective date of this Charter, the initial members of such board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council.
All of the members shall be qualified voters of the city and shall receive no compensation for their services upon this board. The board
may elect such officers as it may choose and shall establish a schedule of meetings as it deems necessary.
Sec. 56. Same–Term of office of member; appointment.
The normal term of office of each member of the parks and recreation board shall be three (3) years. Two of the members of the first
board shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years, and three members shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Annually thereafter the council shall give due and proper consideration to a list of prospective board
members as submitted by the remaining board members; then, the appropriate number of members shall be appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the council for a term of three years. Should a vacancy occur for any reason, the mayor, with the approval of the council,
shall appoint, within thirty (30) days, a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
Sec. 57. Same–Powers and duties.
The parks and recreation board shall have jurisdiction and control over public lands and properties heretofore or hereafter designated for
park and recreational uses, and may relinquish such jurisdiction and control over any such land only upon the affirmative vote of four of
the seven members of said board. No such public lands and properties heretofore or hereafter designated for park and recreational uses
shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city except after the affirmative vote of four of the seven members of said board.
Sec. 58. Same–To formulate policies.
The parks and recreation board shall be responsible for the formulation and recommendation of park and recreation policies to the city
manager and the council, and shall be responsible for the implementation of such policies throughout the city.
Sec. 59. Same–“Parks” defined.
The term “parks” shall be defined as any public land or lands heretofore or hereafter designated such by the council and accepted as such
by the parks and recreation board.
Sec. 60. Same–Purchase of parks.
No additional parks as heretofore defined shall be purchased by the City and placed under the jurisdiction of the parks and recreation
board unless such acquisition and placement first shall be approved by the affirmative vote of four of the seven members of said board.
Sec. 61. Same–Recommendation of policies.
The parks and recreation board shall recommend to the director of parks and recreation, to the city manager and to the council such
policies as it may deem necessary and desirable in the preparation of a comprehensive park and recreation improvement program. It shall
recommend acquisition and/or disposal of park and recreation property and generally review the enactment of these programs.
Sec. 62. Same–Assistance and recommendation of budget.
The parks and recreation board shall advise and assist the director of parks and recreation in the preparation of an annual budget request
to be submitted to the city manager and council.
Sec. 63. Parks and recreation department–Created; director.
There shall be a parks and recreation department, the director of which shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the
parks and recreation board. Said director shall be subject to removal by the city manager.
Sec. 64. Same–Employees; restrictions on board members.
All employees of the parks and recreation department shall be appointed by the director of parks and recreation with the approval of the
city manager. No individual member of the parks and recreation board shall issue instructions to any departmental employee, but shall
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/648
implement the park and recreation program through the director of parks and recreation.
Sec. 65. Administrative procedures for park and recreation board.
The expenditure of departmental funds, the accounting therefor, all purchases, contracts, bidding procedures, personnel control, and other
administrative matters of the parks and recreation board shall be those adhered to by other city departments in conformity with the
provisions of this Charter and applicable state laws.
Sec. 66. Reports by department of parks and recreation.
The director of parks and recreation shall prepare, with the assistance of the board, an annual report of the programs and facilities of the
department, and such reports as may be requested from time to time by the council and/or the city manager.
Sec. 67. Retention of certain powers by council.
All powers, jurisdiction, properties, responsibilities and duties not vested in the parks and recreation board in the foregoing sections 55
through 66 shall be vested in the council.
Sec. 68. Appropriation of funds for parks.
In adopting the annual budget for the operation of the city government, the council shall appropriate no less than two per centum (2%) of
the general operating fund for use by the parks and recreation department. Revenues resulting from the operation of the parks and
recreation department shall be credited to the parks and recreation fund or accounts, and shall be in addition to the amount appropriated as
set forth in this paragraph. The council shall not be restricted to the minimum appropriation described above, but shall appropriate such
funds as it may consider necessary and desirable to carry on an adequate park and recreation program within the city. The council shall
give due consideration to the needs of the parks and recreation department when capital improvement projects are prepared and bond
proposals are submitted to the voters.
ARTICLE V. LEGAL DEPARTMENT AND MUNICIPAL COURT
Sec. 69. Legal department–Established; head.
There shall be a legal department, the head of which shall be the city attorney.
Sec. 70. Same–Appointment of city attorney.
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and may be removed by the council.
Sec. 71. City attorney–Qualifications.
The city attorney shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Texas and shall have been engaged in the practice of law at least five
years. He shall be a resident of the city during his service as city attorney.
Sec. 72. Same–Powers and duties.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney for, all the offices and departments of the city and he shall represent the city in
all litigations and legal proceedings. He shall examine and approve, or disapprove, as to form and legality, all documents, contracts and
legal instruments in which the city may have an interest.
Sec. 73. Assistant city attorneys.
There shall be such Assistant City Attorneys as may be authorized by the Council and appointed by the City Attorney, with the approval
of the Council. Such Assistant City Attorneys shall be authorized to act for and on behalf of the City Attorney. Services of an Assistant
City Attorney may be terminated by the City Attorney or by the Council in case the office of the City Attorney is vacant.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(j)), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 74. Private practice prohibited.
Neither the city attorney nor assistant city attorneys shall be engaged in the private practice of law while serving as city attorney or
assistant city attorneys.
Sec. 75. Municipal court.
There shall be a court known as the municipal court of the city, which court shall be deemed always open for the trial of causes, with such
jurisdiction, powers and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/648
Sec. 76. Judge of the municipal court.
The municipal court shall be presided over by a magistrate who shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. He shall be a
competent attorney who is licensed to practice law in the State of Texas and shall be a resident of the city during his tenure of office. He
shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council for a term of two years, but he shall be subject to removal by the council
for cause, after notice and hearing.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 77. Assistant municipal court judge.
In the event the judge of the municipal court is temporarily unable to act for any reason, the mayor with the approval of the council, shall
appoint a qualified attorney to act in his place.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 78. Additional courts.
The council shall have the power to create and establish additional municipal courts and the mayor with the approval of the council, may
appoint one or more judges of each municipal court, each of whom shall be a magistrate.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 79. Clerk of the municipal court.
There shall be a clerk of the municipal court who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be responsible to the city
manager. The clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and
otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in issuing process of such court and conducting the business thereof. There shall be such
deputy clerks as the council may authorize. The clerk of the municipal court shall appoint such deputy clerks, with the approval of the
city manager. Such deputy clerks shall have the authority to act for and on behalf of the clerk of the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 80. Costs, process and procedure in the municipal court.
The council shall determine what costs, if any, shall be charged for proceedings in and for all processes issued by, said court.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 81. Style of writs.
The style of all writs issued out of the municipal court shall be in the name of the State of Texas.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(d), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 82. Jurors.
All jurors shall be residents of said city and otherwise possess the same qualifications as jurors in the state courts.
ARTICLE VI. PLANNING AND ZONING
Sec. 83. Planning and zoning commission–Created; composition.
There shall be established a planning and zoning commission which shall consist of seven (7) citizens of the city who own real property
within said city, and the ex officio members hereinafter specified. The city manager, the chairman of the board of adjustment, the director
of public works and others as the council may provide by ordinance or resolution shall serve as ex officio members. Ex officio members
shall not have the power to vote. The voting members of said commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council for a term of three (3) years, except that of the seven (7) members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one (1)
year; two (2) for a term of two (2) years; and three (3) for a term of three (3) years. Such appointees shall serve without compensation and
may not hold any elective office of the State of Texas or any other political subdivision thereof. The commission shall elect a chairman
from among its official members and shall meet not less than once each month. A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled by the
mayor with the approval of the council for the remainder of the term. A majority of appointed members shall constitute a quorum, but
decisions may only be made with the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members of the commission.
Sec. 84. Same–Powers and duties.
The planning and zoning commission shall:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/648
a. Make, amend, extend or add to a general plan for the physical development of the city which shall contain the
commission's recommendations for growth, improvement and beautification of the city. A copy of the general plan, or any part
thereof, shall be forwarded to the city manager who shall thereupon submit such plan to the council with his recommendations
thereon. The council may adopt this plan as a whole or in part, and may adopt any amendment thereto, after at least one public
hearing on the proposed action. All amendments to the general plan recommended by the planning and zoning commission
shall be submitted in the same manner to the council for approval, and all recommendations to the council from any city
department affecting the general plan must be accompanied by a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission.
b. Recommend to the council approval or disapproval of proposed changes in zoning districts;
c. Approve or disapprove the platting or subdividing of land within the corporate limits of the city and within adjacent areas
as permitted by law;
d. Submit annually to the city manager, not less than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of
recommended capital improvements, if any, which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary or desirable during the
forthcoming five-year period;
e. Require information from the other departments of the city government in relation to its work;
f. Recommend to the council approval or disapproval of plans for slum clearance, public housing and urban redevelopment
and renewal projects;
g. Perform such additional duties and exercise such additional powers as may be prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 85. Director of planning.
There shall be a director of planning who shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of planning shall serve as the regular
technical advisor of the planning and zoning commission, shall have the status of a director of a department and shall have such other
duties and responsibilities as the city manager may establish.
Sec. 86. Board of adjustment.
The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint a board of adjustment.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(e), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
ARTICLE VII. FISCAL MATTERS
Sec. 87. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year shall begin on October 1 each year and end on the following September 30, but the fiscal year may be changed by the
council by ordinance, provided that no change shall be effective until six (6) months after final passage of such ordinance.
Sec. 88. Budget.
The department heads of the city shall prepare annual departmental budget requests for the ensuing fiscal year as directed by the city
manager and submit said requests to him for his review. It shall be the duty of the city manager to submit a balanced annual budget not
later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the current fiscal year to the council for its review, consideration and revision if desired. The
council shall call a public hearing or hearings on the budget. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the 25th day of the last
month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the city manager shall
be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council. The budget as adopted must set forth the appropriations for services, functions
and activities of the various city departments and agencies, and shall meet all fund requirements provided by law and required by bond
covenants.
Sec. 89. Appropriations.
During the fiscal year the council shall have the power to transfer funds allocated by the budget to one activity, function or department, to
another activity, function or department, and to re-estimate revenues and expenditures, except that no transfer shall be made of revenues
or earnings of any public utility supported principally by its own revenues.
Sec. 90. Emergency appropriations.
At any time in the fiscal year the council may make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure in order to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.
Sec. 91. Borrowing.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/648
The council shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the public
interest.
Sec. 92. General obligation bonds.
The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public
improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding
bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of
Texas.
Sec. 93. Revenue bonds.
The city shall have power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public
utilities, recreational facilities or any other self liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of
Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the
properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to
demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of
the State of Texas.
Sec. 94. Bonds incontestable.
All bonds of the city having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable and
all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, and after said exchange, be incontestable.
Sec. 95. Purchases.
All purchases made and contracts executed by the city shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the constitution and statutes
of the State of Texas.
Sec. 96. Independent audit.
Within thirty (30) days after the beginning of the fiscal year, the council shall cause a continuing independent audit to be made, by a
certified public accountant, of all accounts of the city for such fiscal year. The certified public accountant so selected shall have no direct
personal interest in the financial affairs of the city, and shall report in writing to the council at such time as it may require. Upon
completion of the audit, the results thereof shall be reported in writing to the council as soon as reasonably possible following the close of
the fiscal year, which report shall be a public record.
Sec. 97. Financial statement.
The council shall, at the end of each month prepare or have prepared under its direction a certified statement as to financial receipts and
disbursements for that particular month, and shall publish such statement not later than the 20th day of the following month and the
method of publication shall be any one of the following two methods as the council shall deem best, to wit:
1. By publishing said statement one time in a newspaper of general circulation in Abilene, Texas, or
2. By having a sufficient number of copies of said statement available in the office of the city secretary to be given to those
persons who desire to come to said office and secure a copy thereof.
ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED
Secs. 98–109. Reserved.
Editor's note: At an election held on May 3, 1997, the voters approved a Charter amendment repealing former Article VIII, which pertained to revenue and taxation.
Said article is now covered by state law. The amendment was put before the voters by Ordinance 10-1997, pt. 3(f), adopted Feb. 27, 1997.
ARTICLE IX. FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Sec. 110. Power to grant; term.
The council shall have, by ordinance, the power to grant, renew and extend all franchises, easements or rights of a public nature of all
public utilities operating within the city and with consent of the franchise holder to amend the same, provided, however, that no franchise
shall be granted for an indefinite term and no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than forty (40) years.
Sec. 111. Introduction of application for franchise.
Before any ordinance, granting to any individual, corporation or association of persons any franchise, easement or right of a public
nature, shall be read or passed by said council, notice of intention to apply therefor shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in said city at least ten (10) consecutive publication days, the first of which said publication shall appear not more than twenty
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/648
(20) days next before the introduction of the same before the council. Said notice shall state the nature of the franchise or right for which
application is made; the number of years to run; and the streets and alleys or other property covered by same, and shall be published at the
expense of the applicant. Filing of a copy of same with the city secretary shall constitute introduction of same before said council.
Sec. 112. Reading of franchise ordinance; effective date.
Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending or amending a franchise or public right shall be read and passed at two regular meetings
of the council, which shall be at least one week apart. A public hearing shall be called and held on such ordinance before final passage,
and no such ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days after its second and final passage.
Sec. 113. Required vote for passage.
No ordinance granting any franchise, easement or public right shall be deemed passed without the affirmative votes of at least five
members of said council.
Sec. 114. Powers of city pertaining to franchises.
Included among the powers of the city are the following:
a. To regulate, locate or prohibit the erection of any and all poles, wires or other utility equipment, conveyance or structure,
on the streets, alleys and public places of said city, and to cause the same to be changed, removed, altered, increased,
diminished, placed underground, or be supported by poles of such material, kind quality and class as may be determined by
said council whether same be telegraph, telephone, electric or otherwise, and to enforce the provisions hereof by appropriate
action in any court of competent jurisdiction;
b. To purchase, own, construct or lease, and to maintain and operate either within or without the limits of said city a system
of waterworks, reservoirs, gas and electric plants, sewers and other public utilities for the use of the public and the city, and to
furnish service therefrom and to make and collect such charges and fees therefor as may be fixed by said council, and to issue
the bonds of said city in payment therefor; provided that the issuance of said bonds shall first be submitted to a vote of the
qualified voters of said city, as provided herein for other bond elections; and,
c. To regulate the carrying of electric currents and the controlling of such currents.
Sec. 115. Ownership, use and control of streets, etc.
No franchise or easement involving the right to use the same either along, over, across, under or upon the streets, alleys, highways, parks
and public ways shall be valid unless granted in compliance with the terms hereof.
Sec. 116. Compensation for franchise.
No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted by said city, nor a franchise or privilege to commence at any time after seven (7)
months subsequent to the passage of the ordinance granting the same, and all persons or corporations to whom a franchise may hereafter
be granted shall pay to said city for such privileges such compensation therefor as may be fixed by said council, in the grant of such
franchise or privilege. Said compensation as fixed by said council shall become due and payable at such time as said council shall fix in
the grant of such franchise or privilege, and upon the failure on the part of any person, firm or corporation to pay said compensation when
due, the franchise or privilege as enjoyed by him or them shall, after thirty (30) days from such date, become forfeited.
Sec. 117. Council to fix and regulate charges, fares or rates.
Said council shall determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any person, firm or corporation that may now or hereafter
enjoy a franchise or exercise any other public privilege from said city, and of any and all public utilities of whatsoever kind, and to
prescribe the kind of service to be furnished to the public by such person, firm or corporation, and the manner in which it shall be
rendered and from time to time alter or change such rules, regulations and compensation, after reasonable notice to, and a hearing of, the
owners of such utilities, and after a public hearing thereon, provided that the rates, charges and fares so fixed shall at all times be
reasonable, and permit a reasonable net return on the actual value of the physical properties and equipment of such utilities. In this
connection, the council may require any utility or franchise holder to furnish such financial reports as the council may request, including
reports of actual operating costs and the financial condition of its operation within the City of Abilene.
ARTICLE X. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 118. Interim government.
The present charter of the city shall continue in full force and effect until the regular city election held on the first Tuesday in April, 1963.
At such election, the councilmen for Place Three (north side) and Place Four (south side) shall be elected for a term of three years. The
councilmen for place five (north side) and place six (south side) shall be elected for a term of two years. The election for the mayor shall
be as provided herein. The councilmen for places one and two shall serve the remaining one year of their terms, said councilmen being
the commissioners now having served only one year of their terms in present commission places two and four.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/648
Sec. 119. Continuity in government.
Any ordinance in effect at the time this Charter is adopted, and not otherwise in conflict with this Charter, which refers to some office or
employment of the city which ceases to exist under this Charter, shall continue in force and the powers and duties therein prescribed shall
be the powers and duties of the office or employment which, under this Charter, succeeds to the same general powers and duties of such
office or employment under the previous Charter. When the term “city commission” appears in any such ordinance it shall be construed
as “council” after the effective date of this Charter.
Sec. 120. Effect of Charter on existing law.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the city on the effective date of this Charter, and not in conflict with this
Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances and demands, of or against
the city, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be
valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of beginning of such proceedings or under the law after
the adoption of this Charter.
Sec. 121. Official oath.
All officers of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed in
the constitution of the State of Texas. Oath of the office shall be administered by the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or any other person
authorizedby law to administer oaths.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(g), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 122. Public meetings.
All meetings of the council and boards or commissions appointed by the council shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of
Texas, commonly referred to as the Texas Open Meetings Act. Minutes of all such open meetings shall be kept and such minutes shall
constitute public records.
(Ord. No. 114-1980, 11-20-80; Ref. of 1-17-81; Ord. No. 42-2006, pt. 2(5), 8-28-06 / referendum 11-7-06)
Sec. 123. Public records.
All public records of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times,
provided that such police records, vital statistics records, or any other records which are closed to the public by law shall not be
considered public records for the purpose of this section.
Sec. 124. Official newspaper.
The council shall have the power to designate by resolution a newspaper of general circulation in the city as the official newspaper, and
shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matters which are required to be officially published by this Charter,
the ordinances of the city, or the constitution or laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 125. Notice of injury or damage.
The city shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person injured or someone in his behalf,
or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death
injury, shall file a notice in writing with the city secretary within six (6) months after the same has occurred, stating specifically in such
notice when, where and how the exact injury occurred, the full extent of the injury, the amount of damages claimed or asserted, and a list
of persons, if known, who witnessed the injury. The city shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property
unless the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the
city secretary within six (6) months after said damage or injury occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the injury was
sustained. The person giving notice under this section shall subscribe his name to the notice under oath that the statements and facts
contained in said notice are true and correct.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(h), 2-27-97; Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 126. Execution, garnishment and assignment.
Property, real or personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable for sale or appropriation under any writ of execution or cost bill. Funds
belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor
shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any
person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever.
The city shall not be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee of said city, whether earned or unearned, upon
any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the city such assignment shall be absolutely void.
Sec. 127. Bond or security not required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/648
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed
in behalf of said city, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond,
undertaking or security had been given, and said city shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.
Sec. 128. Judicial notice of Charter.
This Charter shall be deemed a public act and shall have the force and effect of a general law; may be read in evidence without pleading
or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places without further proof.
Sec. 129. Remission of fines and penalties.
The council shall have the power to remit in whole or in part, on such conditions as it may deem proper, by a vote of at least five of the
council members, any fine or penalty belonging to the city which may be imposed or incurred under any penal ordinance of the city.
Sec. 130. Offset on debts.
The city shall be entitled to counterclaim and off-set against any debt, claim, demand or account owed by the city to any person, firm or
corporation in arrears to the city for any debt, claim, demand or account of any nature whatsoever, including taxes, penalty and interest.
No assignment or transfer of any such debt, claim, demand or account owed by the city shall effect the right of the city to off-set the sum
owed to the city.
Sec. 131. Nepotism.
No person related within the third degree by affinity or consanguinity to the mayor, any member of the council or the city manager shall
be appointed to any paid office, position, clerkship or other service of the city. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person
who shall have been employed by the city at least ninety (90) days prior to and at the time of the election of the mayor or councilman, or
the appointment of the city manager.
Sec. 132. Unjust benefit.
No elected or appointed officer or employee of the city shall benefit unduly by reason of his holding public office.
Sec. 133. Ethics.
No officer or employee having a direct or indirect interest in any proposed or existing contract, purchase, work, sale or service to or by
the city shall vote or render a decision, or use his position, authority or influence in a manner that would result in his financial betterment
to any degree. Further, any elected officer shall publicly disclose any such interest upon assumption of office or prior to consideration of
any such matters.
(Ord. No. 10-1997, pt. 3(i), 2-27-97, Ref. of 5-3-97)
Sec. 134. Malfeasance in office.
Failure to comply with any provisions of the foregoing sections 132 or 133 shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or
employee failing to so comply shall immediately forfeit his office or position, and said office or position shall be deemed vacant.
Sec. 135. When contracts voidable.
Any violation of the foregoing sections 132 and 133 with the knowledge, express or implied, of persons or corporations contracting with
the city shall render the contract voidable by the council.
Sec. 136. Political and religious discrimination.
No person in the service of the city or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted, discharged or in any way
favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race or religious beliefs, provided that such
opinions, affiliations or beliefs do not advocate the overthrow of the government of the United States of America by force or violence.
Sec. 137. Political activity.
No appointed or hired employee on the payroll of the city shall make a contribution to the campaign fund of any person seeking election
to a city office or to any political party supporting a candidate for election to a city office, nor shall he be solicited for this purpose; nor
shall he take active part in any political campaign relating to an election to a city office.
Sec. 138. Bribery.
No person seeking appointment to or promotion in the administrative service of the city shall either directly or indirectly give, render or
pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or on account of or in connection with his appointment or promotion or
any examination conducted therefor.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/648
Sec. 139. Ineligibility for office for certain acts.
Any person who either by himself or with others wilfully violates any provision of the foregoing sections 137 or 138 shall be ineligible
for appointment or election to a position in the city for a period of four years, and if he is an officer or employee of the city at the time of
such violation he shall immediately forfeit the office or position he holds.
Sec. 140. Charter amendments.
The Charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas, as amended from time to time.
Sec. 141. Use of gender.
A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to include females, firms, partnerships and corporations as well
as males.
Sec. 142. Construction of Charter.
This Charter shall be liberally construed as a general grant of power subject only to the limitations of the constitution and statutes of the
State of Texas.
Sec. 143. Severability.
If any section or part of a section of this Charter be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter.
Sec. 144. Rearrangement and renumbering.
The council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this Charter or any
amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate, and upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the city
secretary, shall be forwarded to the secretary of state for filing.
CERTIFICATE
September 26, 1962
To the Honorable Mayor and Board of Commissioners,
City of Abilene, Texas.
Sirs:
In the election held on the 28th day of June, 1962 the voters of the City of Abilene voted affirmatively on the question “Shall a
Commission be chosen to frame a new charter?”
Members of the charter commission elected at that time and who thereafter qualified by taking the oath of office are:
Bryan Bradbury, Robert J. Tiffany, George Minter, Jr., Garnett Gracy, Dr. John C. Stevens, Garvin Beauchamp, C. G. Whitten, John
Crutchfield, Hudson Smart, Floyd Childs, Riley Maxwell, A. Crutcher Scott, James E. Russell, W. Lee Byrd, and J. Floyd Malcom.
After organizing, this charter commission elected the following officers:
Chairman Bradbury
Vice-Chairman Smart
Secretary W. Lee Byrd
The commission has held 28 meetings and numerous subcommittee meetings. After the taking of evidence, receiving suggestions,
performing considerable research and after full consideration of the many problems and the ends to be accomplished, the charter
commission has prepared and given its final approval to a new charter, a copy of which is hereto attached for submission to the qualified
voters of this City in an election to be held for that purpose.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/648
Pursuant to the obligations imposed on this charter commission by law, it has determined and hereby certifies:
1. That the annexed charter is a true and correct copy of the charter prepared and approved by this charter commission.
2. That the City of Abilene, Texas is a city having more than 5,000 inhabitants.
3. That in the submission of this charter to the voters, it would be impracticable to segregate each subject for a separate vote
thereon for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it
should be adopted in its entirety. Therefore it is to be submitted so as to be voted upon as a whole.
4. That the election for this purpose is to be held in the City of Abilene on the 6th day of November, 1962.
5. That the charter commission completed its work on the 26th day of September, 1962.
Respectfully submitted,
Bryan Bradbury
______________________________
Bryan Bradbury, Chairman
Charter Commission of the City of Abilene
ATTESTED:
W. Lee Byrd
______________________________
W. Lee Byrd, Secretary
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
Included herein is a listing of legislation affecting the 1962 Charter.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption Date Referendum Date Part Disposition
114-1980 11-20-80 1-17-81
122
10-1997 2-27-97 5-3-97 3(a) 3
3(b) 5
3(c) 7
3(d) Title , 75–81
3(e) 86
3(f) Rpld. 98–109
3(g) 121
3(h) 125
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/648
3(i) 133
3(j) 73
42-2006 8-28-06 11-7-06 2(1) 9
2(2) 24
2(3) 27
2(4) 28
2(5) 122
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of
Abilene, Texas,” and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the “Abilene City Code.”
(Code 1965, sec. 1-1)
Charter references: Code of Ordinances, sec. 20.
State law references: Codification of ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 1176a.
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction, definitions.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of this city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed,
unless such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, would be repugnant to the
context of the provisions or the context clearly requires otherwise.
Generally: All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of language; but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Board of health: The Abilene Public Health Advisory Board as established in Chapter 13 of this Code.
Editor's note: Ordinance 38-1991, pt. 1, adopted Dec. 19, 1991, provided that all references to the “Abilene-Taylor County Board of Health” be deleted and
“Abilene Public Health Advisory Board” be substituted therefor.
Bond: When a bond is required by any provision of this Code, an undertaking in writing is sufficient if properly drafted and executed.
City: The City of Abilene in the Counties of Taylor and Jones in the State of Texas.
City council: The governing body of the city.
Code: This Code of Ordinances as designated and cited in section 1-1 above.
County: The County of Taylor, or the County of Jones in the State of Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/648
Computation of time: In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act or event before or after
which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it
is Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday.
Delegation of authority: Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize such officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or
make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designates otherwise.
Easement: A right, library, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another.
A right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent
with a general property right in the owner.
Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and
corporations as well as to males.
In the city: The words “in the city” or “in this city” mean and include any territory within the corporate limits of this city and the police
jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special act, except
as otherwise specified.
Joint authority: Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise specifically declared.
Law: Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United States, the state, the county, the city or any agency thereof, as well
as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate.
Month: The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Number: Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the
singular.
Oath: The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official time standard: Whenever certain hours are named in this Code they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the city.
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc.: Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the city by title only, i.e., “mayor,” “secretary,” “manager,” “chief of police,” etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the
officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city.
Or, and: “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or” if the context of the provision requires it.
Owner: The “owner” shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person: The word “person” shall include and be applied to a firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization, club, society, group
acting as a unit, or body politic and corporate, as well as to an individual.
Personal property: The words “personal property” shall include money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things in action, and any other
species of property, except real property.
Preceding, following: The words “preceding” and “following” shall mean the next before and the next after, respectively.
Property: The word “property” shall include real, personal and mixed property.
Public place: Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or
business open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the public has access.
Public way: Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
Real property: The words “real property” shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Reasonable time: In all cases where any section of this Code or city ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or
reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice.
Residence: The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of
returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed to be his residence.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/648
Roadway: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Shall, may: The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is discretionary.
Sidewalk: The word “sidewalk” shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature, subscription: The word “signature” or “subscription” shall include a mark when the person cannot write, when his name is
written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness.
State: The words “the state” or “this state” shall mean the State of Texas.
Street: The word “street” shall mean and include public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges,
public ways and approaches thereto and other public thoroughfares in the city devoted to public use.
Tenant, occupant: The words “tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tense: Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past or present.
Writing, written: The words “writing” and “written” shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing
words and letters.
Year: The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
(Code 1962, sec. 1-2; Ord. No. 38-1991, pt. 1, 12-19-91)
State law references: General rules, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Sts. art. 10; definitions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Sts., art. 23; computation of time, Tex. Rules of Civ. Proced.,
Rule 4.
Sec. 1-3. When section 1-2 does not apply.
The rules of construction and definitions set forth in section 1-2 shall not be applied to any section of this Code or city ordinance which
shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or definition, or when the subject matter or context of such provisions or
ordinances may be repugnant thereto.
Sec. 1-4. Incorporation by reference.
All standard codes, rules, regulations, and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with
subsequent amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of
the city secretary.
Sec. 1-5. Parenthetical and reference matter.
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections in this Code is for information only and is not a part of this Code. Citations to the 1965
Code of the city (Code 1965) and to later ordinances indicate only the source of such section and the text may or may not be changed by
this Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code.
(Code 1965, sec. 1-3)
Sec. 1-6. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Code 1965, sec. 1-4)
Sec. 1-7. Reference to Code, conflicts.
In addition to the rules of construction and definitions specified in this chapter, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of
this Code:
(a) All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise
specified.
(b) If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter
shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/648
(c) If conflicting provisions be found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in
numerical order shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.
Sec. 1-8. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby; provided, that supplementation of this Code by authorized persons shall be permitted.
Sec. 1-9. General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations; culpable mental state not required.
(a) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a
fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each day of any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Furthermore, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Code unless the provision defining
the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state, otherwise the requirement of a culpable mental state is expressly dispensed with
for purposes of constituting, alleging, or proving a violation of a provision of this Code.
(Code 1965, sec. 10-1; Ord. No. 136-1983, pt. 1(1), 12-15-83; Ord. No. 40-1988, pt. 1, 8-25-88; Ord. No. 17-1992, pt. 1, 5-14-92; Ord.
No. 46-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-8-05)
State law references: Penalties for violation of ordinances, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code ,sec. 54.001, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 6.02(b).
Sec. 1-10. Penalty not exclusive.
The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or
permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code.
In the event any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily
abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine.
Sec. 1-11. Severability of parts of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or
section of this Code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid judgment of decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs or sections of this Code.
(Code 1965, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-12. Effect of repeals.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not review any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of
an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of such repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. City seal.
The seal of the city shall be the coat of arms of the state in a circle with the words, “City of Abilene, Texas” engraved around the margin
thereof.
(Code 1965, § 1-9)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/648
Sec. 2-2. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 12-1986, adopted Mar. 27, 1986, repealed § 2-2, microfilming records, as derived from the 1965 Code, § 1-10. For current provisions
relative to similar subject matter, see § 2-114 et seq.
Sec. 2-3. Procedure for drawing and signing checks.
The city manager or his designee, the director of finance, shall be responsible for a check-signing procedure that meets with generally
accepted accounting procedures and insures the city of internal control.
(Code 1965, § 2-3)
Sec. 2-4. Assignment of wages.
A voluntary assignment by any city officer or employee of a portion of his salary or wages to the Abilene Municipal Employee Federal
Credit Union, for the payment of premiums of any insurance policies which may be held by reason of his employment with the city, an
assignment for the purpose of making contributions or payments to any retirement funds provided by law, for the United Fund, for
purchase of government bonds or for Social Security may be recognized by the city.
(Code 1965, § 2-4)
Sec. 2-5. Use in evidence of copies of Code provisions.
A copy of any provision of this Code, when certified by the city secretary, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts without further
proof, and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision.
(Code 1965, § 1-7)
Secs. 2-6–2-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CIVIL SERVICE FOR FIREMEN, POLICEMEN*
Secs. 2-23–2-87. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-88–2-93. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RETIREMENT
Sec. 2-94. Election to participate.
On behalf of the City of Abilene, Texas, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of
all departments now existing or hereafter established (excepting the fire department); participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System as provided in Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended (article 6243h of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas) and all of
the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees.
Sec. 2-95. Effective date.
Participation of the employees of this city in the municipal retirement system shall be effective September 1, 1948.
Sec. 2-96. Notice of election.
The city manager is hereby directed to notify the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to
participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in said system.
Sec. 2-97. Inclusion of employees.
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department
shall become a member of the municipal retirement system as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add
new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants.
Sec. 2-98. Deposit rates.
That all employees of all departments of the City of Abilene, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall make
deposits to the system at the rate of seven (7) per cent of their individual earnings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/648
(Ord. No. 44-1990, pt. 2, 11-1-90; Ord. No. 40-92, pt. 3, 9-24-92)
Sec. 2-99. Vesting provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, secs. 852.105 and 854.202, the City of Abilene, Texas, adopts the
following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter “TMRS”):
(1) An employee of the city who is a member of TMRS may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive
a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member
has at least five (5) years of credited service performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under §
854.202(c) or are subject to § 854.102(e).
(2) An employee of the city who is a member of TMRS may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is
at least sixty (60) years old and has at least five (5) years of creditable service performed for one (1) or more municipalities
that either have authorized eligibility or are subject to § 854.102(e).
(3) Any employee of this city who is a member of TMRS and who performed service for this city prior to September 1,
1987, for which service that employee did not receive credit because the employee was not at that time a member of TMRS
due to his or her age at the date of his or her employment, is hereby granted service credit with TMRS for all of such service
that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with TMRS, pursuant to §
852.105.
(Ord. No. 47-1989, pt. 1, 12-7-89; Ord. No. 58-2005, § 1(Exh. A), 11-17-2005)
Editor's note: Ordinance 47-1989, Pts. 1–4, adopted Dec. 7, 1989, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been included herein by the editor as secs. 2-99–2-102.
Sec. 2-100. Authorization of updated service credits.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended,
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the
“system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar
year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city (hereinafter called the “city”) and on such date had at
least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is
defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated
service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another
participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the
calendar year preceding such allowance shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and
subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant thereunder and all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) per cent of the “base updated service credit”
of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service
credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2004, subject to approval by the board of
trustees of the system. An allowance shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this ordinance ceases to be in
effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has
made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(f) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the
system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective
date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(g) Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, this section shall be and become effective on the first day of January
2004.
(Ord. No. 47-1989, pt. 2, 12-7-89; Ord. No. 44-1990, pt. 1, 11-1-90; Ord. No. 35-1991. Pt. 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 40-1992, Pts. 1, 4, 9-24-
92; Ord. No. 50-1993, Pts. 1, 3, 11-18-93; Ord. No. 47-1999, 9-9-99; Ord. No. 44-2003, 11-25-03)
Note: See the editor's note following § 2-99.
Sec. 2-101. Obtaining service credit for probationary time.
Any employee of this city who is a member of TMRS and who performed service as a probationary employee for this city prior to
September 1, 1989, for which the employee did not receive credited service in the system because the person, as a probationary
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/648
employee, was not enrolled as a member of the system during the period of probationary employment, is hereby allowed to obtain prior
service credit for the period of such probationary service credit for the period of such probationary service, not to exceed six (6) months
credit, pursuant to the provisions of section 63.303, as amended by the 71st Legislature.
(1) To obtain prior service credit allowable, any employee entitled thereto shall file a detailed written statement of the
service claimed with the director of administrative services within one year from the effective date of Ordinance No. 47-1989
[January 1, 1990].
(2) As soon as practicable after the employee has filed a claim for prior service credit under section 63.303, the director of
administrative services shall, if such director determines that such service was performed as claimed, verify the prior service
allowable (not exceeding six (6) months) and the average monthly compensation paid the member during the period of
probationary employment, and shall certify to the board of trustees of the system the creditable prior service approved and the
average monthly compensation paid to the person by the city during the period of probationary employment.
(Ord. No. 47-1989, pt. 3, 12-7-89)
Note: See the editor's note following § 2-99.
Sec. 2-102. Special credit for military service.
(a) Pursuant to section 63.502 of Title 110B, as amended, the City of Abilene hereby elects to allow eligible members in its
employment to establish credit in TMRS for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves
of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members, as used herein shall be those
employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 63.502(b) and 63.503, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be
as further set forth in section 63.505.
(b) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with TMRS, in that member's individual account
in the employees saving fund, an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00).
The City of Abilene agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement
with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service
matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit.
(Ord. No. 47-1989, pt. 4, 12-7-89)
Note: See the editor's note following § 2-99.
Sec. 2-103. Increase in retirement annuities.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.404 and 854.203 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in
monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”) to retired employees and to
beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such
employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same
person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on
the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by either thirty (30) percent, fifty (50)
percent, or seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year
immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date
of the increase under this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same
manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed
hereunder.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the
city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the System.
(f) The initial ad hoc increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2009, subject to approval by the Board
of Trustees of the System. An increase in retirement annuities may be made hereunder, on an ad hoc basis, provided the city has an
ordinance in effect that provides for a simultaneous adoption of Updated Service Credit as provided for in the TMRS Act on January 1 of
subsequent years, subject to review and approval by the city council during the annual budget process.
(Ord. No. 40-1992, pt. 103, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 50-1993, Pts. 1, 3, 11-8-93; Ord. No. 36-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-2-04; Ord. No. 64-2008,
pt. 4(Exh. A), 12-4-08; Ord. No. 54-2011, pt. 1, 12-15-11; Ord. No. 55-2011, pts. 1–5, 12-15-11)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/648
Sec. 2-104. Authorization of restricted prior service credit.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the
“System”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service
previously performed as an employee of any incorporated city or town in the United States or of any council of governments in this state
for which the person has not otherwise received credit service in this System, including combined service credit under Chapter 803. The
service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length of service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value
in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of
updated service credits.
(b) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take action required under said Section 853.305
while still an employee of this city.
(Ord. No. 52-1994, pt. 1, 12-15-94)
Editor's note: Ordinance 52-1994, adopted Dec. 15, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of Pt. 1 of said ordinance as § 2-104 herein was
at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 2-105. Authorization of changes to be made to the current service and prior service contributions.
Pursuant to Section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its
account in the municipal accumulation fund of the System at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees
who are members of the System, as the System's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization
period determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to
be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of
city contributions.
(Ord. No. 32-2004, § 1, 10-21-04)
Editor's note: Ordinance 32-2004, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2004, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as § 2-105 at the editor's
discretion.
Sec. 2-106. Additional rights.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854-202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which subtitle shall
herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the City of Abilene, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its
employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the “system”).
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if
the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted
a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this ordinance, the governing body of the city has: (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member
retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open
Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the
effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ord. No. 56-2006, § 1, 10-19-06)
Editor's note: Ordinance 56-2006, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2006, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as § 2-106 at the discretion of the
editor. Section 2 of said ordinance provided this section shall become effective on the first day of January, 2007.
Secs. 2-107–2-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SOCIAL SECURITY*
Sec. 2-111. Execution of agreements–Directed.
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the applicable state and federal laws relative to federal old-age and survivors insurance
benefits for employees of this city.
Sec. 2-112. Same–Agent.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/648
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments required
for the purposes of this division for and in behalf of said city council and city.
Sec. 2-113. Fund established.
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
division. Such money so allocated and set aside shall be known as the City of Abilene Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside
and maintained in the regular city depository.
ARTICLE IV. RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM*
Sec. 2-114. Definition of city records.
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or
restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the
transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-115. Additional definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City means the City of Abilene, Texas.
Department head means the officer who as set forth in this article or by administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that
creates or receives records.
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or
disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the
state.
Librarian means the librarian of the Texas State Library.
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
Policy means records management policy created per section 2-121.
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records
maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may
require.
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and
disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the
development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and
permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms,
reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-122.
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-120.
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-118 or designee.
Records management policy means the policy developed under section 2-121.
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain
actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-116. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the city provides for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/648
management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government
Records Act, as amended, and accepted records management practice.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-117. City records declared city property.
All city records are hereby declared to be property of the City of Abilene. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her
position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. Provided, however, that city records exempted from public disclosure
under state or federal law shall not be made subject to disclosure by their designation as city property under this section.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-118. Designation of records management officer.
The city secretary or designee shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of
the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial
designation or of being sworn into office.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-119. Duties of the records management officer.
The records management officer shall have the following duties:
(1) Organize, by cooperation of all city departments' personnel, a physical inventory of all city records.
(2) Conduct an appraisal process of all inventoried records.
(3) Develop procedures and guidelines for utilization of microphotographic equipment.
(4) Develop and coordinate automated information systems.
(5) Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards, and
procedures.
(6) Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all city departments, define
and identify vital and permanent records, and establish retention periods for all records.
(7) Review disposition schedules annually and update or amend as needed.
(8) Coordinate and be responsible for the city-wide files management and records disposition programs.
(9) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city offices and departments, by preparation of manuals of
procedures and policies and by on-site consultation.
(10) Develop, disseminate, and coordinate files maintenance and records disposition procedures, including, but not limited
to, those prescribed by this article, to meet the current and long-term information needs of the city.
(11) Train departmental records officers and other personnel in the fundamentals of records management and their duties in
the records management program.
(12) Carry out at the proper time destruction and transfers that are required by records schedules.
(13) Design and manage the operations of a records center for the low-cost storage of inactive records.
(14) Control, procure, establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment and supplies in all
city departments. Keep careful records of savings in equipment, supplies, and staff costs realized by each department of the
city through implementation of the records management program, including the amount of storage space and equipment
released for other uses.
(15) Develop a city-wide forms design and control system.
(16) Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city office and department to
ensure maximum availability of records for re-establishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.
(17) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/648
(18) Protect privacy and assure availability of public information from records stored in the records center.
(19) Administer the records and information management program.
(20) Update the policy as necessary.
(21) Carry out the duties found in the policy.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-120. Establishment of records management committee; duties.
A records management committee consisting of the city secretary, assistant city secretary, city attorney or designee, records inventory
specialist, city manager or designee and record custodian of the city police and fire departments is hereby established. The committee
shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management
program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; and
(4) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-121. Records management policy to be developed; approval of policy; authority of policy.
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management policy for the city for
submission to the city council. The policy must contain procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of
recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality
that are of historical value. The policy must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed
by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the policy shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, or disposed of in accordance
with the policy.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the
department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the policy adopted under it and may
not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(d) The records management committee can review and update the policy as necessary and in accordance with state law.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-122. Designation, duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers.
Each department will have a records liaison officer designated by the department director. In addition to other duties assigned in this
article, the records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of
records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records
management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-123. Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state.
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each
record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the policy
may require.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/648
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to
ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping
procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city.
(c) A records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head, the city attorney and
the records management officer.
(d) The initial records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state
law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management
officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-124. Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule.
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-123 shall be implemented by
records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the policy.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is
pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the
records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained
by the records management officer and city attorney.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-125. Records center.
A records center, developed pursuant to the policy, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer.
Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the policy developed under section 2-
121 of this article.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Sec. 2-126. Noncurrent record not to be maintained in office files.
Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any office of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records center,
or be destroyed, at the time such action is designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in current
office files or equipment.
(Ord. No. 36-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-09)
Chapter 3
ADVERTISING
Sec. 3-1. Posting, tacking, etc., handbills, notices, etc.
No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp or put upon any house, fence, wall, pavement or any public or private place any written, printed
or painted advertisement, bill, notice or picture without the consent of the owner or other proper party.
No person shall post or tack up any loose handbills, dodgers, cards, sheets or advertising matter of any kind upon any post, wall, fence or
tree upon any street, alley or public highway within the city, or upon or within the private premises of another without the consent of the
owner or occupant of such premises or building.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to licensed billboards where advertising matter is posted or glued to the surface thereof.
(Code 1965, § 19-2)
Sec. 3-2. Distributing scattering handbills, dodgers, etc.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/648
No person shall distribute or scatter or cause to be distributed or scattered loose handbills, dodgers, cards, sheets or advertising matters of
any kind upon any street, alley or public highway, or upon or within the private premises or buildings of another without the consent of
the owner or occupant of such private premises or buildings.
(Code 1965, § 19-3)
Sec. 3-3. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 12-1988, § 1, adopted Mar. 10, 1988, repealed § 3-3, political signs, as derived from the 1965 Code, § 19-14.
Sec. 3-4. Placing on vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, stick, throw or deposit any handbill, poster or other advertisement in or upon any motor
vehicle without the consent of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located.
Chapter 4
AIRPORTS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Rules, regulations.
The airport manager shall have the power to prescribe and formulate reasonable rules governing the operation of the municipal airport
and the conduct of flying thereat.
(Code 1965, § 3-2)
Sec. 4-2. Publication, posting of rules, regulations.
The airport manager shall cause the rules and regulations for the use of the municipal airport facilities and terminal building to be
published and made available to the owners and operator of all aircraft and air carriers utilizing the municipal airport. These rules and
regulations shall be posted in a prominent place in the municipal airport terminal building.
(Code 1965, § 3-8)
Secs. 4-3–4-13. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LANDING FEES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 4-14. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Flight: The landing and taking off of one airplane not including tests or practice flights.
Nonscheduled commercial air carrier: Any aircraft operated for hire in which a pilot is provided either for passenger or cargo purposes
but not operating on any regular schedule.
Scheduled commercial air carrier: Any aircraft operated for hire in which a pilot is provided either for passenger or cargo purposes,
operating on scheduled flights.
Scheduled trip arrival: Each landing and take off of one airplane according to the current official schedule of the air carrier.
(Code 1965, § 3-9)
Sec. 4-15. Fees exclusive of other charges; exceptions.
(a) The landing fees established in this article shall be exclusive of and in addition to any other charges as may be imposed for the
parking, servicing or storage of aircraft at the municipal airport.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/648
(b) The fees levied by this article shall not be applicable to air carrier operations, whether scheduled or not, where such air carrier has a
valid written contract covering such fees with the city.
(Code 1965, § 3-16)
Sec. 4-16. Nonscheduled commercial aircraft.
Landing fees for nonscheduled commercial aircraft shall be set by city council resolution, and procedures to be followed in regard to fees
and bills [shall be provided for] in a “Schedule of Airport Landing Fees” for the airport and kept on file in the city secretary's office and
with the airport.
(Code 1965, § 3-15; Ord. No. 33-1985, pt. 1, 4-25-85)
Secs. 4-17–4-22. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SCHEDULED COMMERCIAL AIR CARRIERS
Sec. 4-23. Generally.
Landing fees for scheduled commercial air carriers shall be as listed in a “Schedule of Landing Fees” as set forth by city council
resolution.
(Code 1965, § 3-10; Ord. No. 33-1985, pt. 1, 4-25-85)
Editor's note: The schedule of landing fees referred to in § 4-23, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary and
with the airport.
Sec. 4-24. Computation of fees.
Landing fees shall be computed based upon the gross landing weight of the aircraft used by the air carrier as established by the federal
aviation administration. If the air carrier schedule involves the use of aircraft of different landing weights, the heavier aircraft will be
considered as being the first flight of the given day under the schedule and the lighter aircraft as the last flights in the air carrier schedule.
(Code 1965, § 3-11)
Sec. 4-25. Factors determining.
Fees under this article shall be paid on the basis of either all landings indicated in the schedule or time table of the scheduled commercial
air carrier as of the first day of the calendar month or the total number of actual revenue landings made during the calendar month,
whichever is greater, it being the intention to exclude from the operation and scope of this provision nonrevenue flights of the scheduled
commercial air carrier. If, during a calendar month, any flight is added to the service of the scheduled commercial air carrier, an
additional fee shall be payable covering the remaining portion of the calendar month.
In the event the gross weight of any type of aircraft shall be restricted by federal or city regulations to less than the manufacturer's gross
weight, then the landing fee shall be computed on the maximum weight allowed by such restrictions.
(Code 1965, § 3-12)
Sec. 4-26. When and where payable.
The fees for scheduled commercial air carriers shall be paid as set forth in the “Schedule of Airport Landing Fees” as set by city council
resolution.
(Code 1963, § 3-13; Ord. No. 33-1985, pt. 1, 4-25-85)
Editor's note: The schedule of airport landing fees referred to in § 4-26 is not set forth herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city
secretary and with the airport.
Sec. 4-27. Furnishing of schedule and statement of flights.
Each scheduled commercial air carrier shall on, or immediately prior to, the first day of each calendar month furnish the city treasurer and
the airport manager at the municipal airport a true copy of the schedule of flights then in effect, and shall, on the last day of the month or
within five (5) days thereafter, furnish such persons a correct statement of flights added to or taken off the schedule during the month just
passed and the date such changes were made, and a list of other landings and take offs of its aircraft engaged in revenue flights.
(Code 1965, § 3-14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/648
Chapter 5
AMBULANCE SERVICES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall have the following meanings:
Emergency medical service (EMS). The provision of basic or advanced life support and transportation of patients to an emergency room
of a hospital for emergency pre-hospital care.
Emergency pre-hospital care. Care provided to the sick or injured either on the scene or during emergency transport to an emergency
room at a hospital or a facility providing emergency medical care.
EMS provider. The entity under contract with the city that provides EMS services to residents of the city.
First responder. Members of the fire department who are assigned responsibility for responding to calls received from the city's 911
dispatch center for emergency medical service in cooperation with the city's EMS provider.
Non-emergency ambulance transfer service. The operation of a service to transport patients for non-emergency, previously scheduled,
medical treatment from a point originating and terminating within the city limits. The transport of a patient for unscheduled medical
treatment or evaluation at an emergency room at a hospital or a facility providing emergency medical care is not a non-emergency
ambulance transfer service, but rather is the provision of EMS.
Originates. For purposes of this chapter, a call for EMS services “originates” within the city limits if the person in need of EMS service
(emergency pre-hospital care or emergency ambulance transfer service) is physically located at an address within the city limits.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-2. Use of emergency and transfer service.
All calls for EMS that originate within the city limits shall be directed to the city's 9-1-1 communication center and responded to solely
by the city's first responders and the city's contracted EMS provider, except as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-3. EMS and non-emergency ambulance transfer service.
It shall be unlawful for any person or service to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the service or
operation of EMS or non-emergency ambulance transfer service that originates at an address within the city unless said person or entity
is:
(a) Rendering assistance to patients in case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the
city are unable to cope; or
(b) Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the limits of the city and transported to a location within
the city; or
(c) Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the limits of the city and transported to a location
beyond the limits of the city and only incidentally passing through the city; or
(d) Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location within the city limits and transported to a location beyond the
limits of the city; or
(e) Operated by an agent or employee of the federal or state government if such service is done in performance of his
official duties.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-4. Provision of EMS and first responder services.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/648
The city provides EMS to residents of the city through a contract with an EMS provider. The city provides first responder services for its
residents through services provided by its fire department under a first responder agreement with its EMS provider.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-5. Stand-by and special events coverage.
EMS or non-emergency ambulance transfer service shall not include any stand-by or special events coverage within the limits of the city,
but only if said stand-by or special events coverage does not result in any patient transfer within the limits of the city. If any stand-by or
special events coverage results in patient transfer within the limits of the city, it is considered EMS or non-emergency ambulance transfer
service for purposes of this chapter and regulated herein.
Upon request by law enforcement and fire department officers, the EMS provider shall furnish ambulance stand-by coverage at
emergency incidents involving a potential danger to the personnel of the requesting agency or the general public.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Secs. 5-6–5-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE
Sec. 5-21. Franchise required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the operation of EMS or
non-emergency ambulance transfer service from a point originating and ending within the streets of the city without a franchise as
provided by this article.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-22. Franchise application; requirements.
Applications for an EMS and non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise may be solicited by the city through a request for
proposals from time to time as deemed necessary by the city. The requirements and selection criteria will be included in any request for
proposals initiated by the city.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-23. Franchise fee.
(a) To compensate the city for the use of public streets and right-of-way, the non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise
holder shall, during the life of said franchise, pay to the city, at the office of the director of finance in lawful money of the United States,
three and one-half (3-1/2%) percent of the total amount billed for the ambulance service fees and other income derived from the operation
of the ambulance service within the city, which said remittance shall be made monthly on or before the tenth day of each calendar month.
The compensation provided for in this section shall be in lieu of any other fees or charges imposed by any other ordinance now or
hereinafter in force during the life hereof, but shall not release the franchise holder from the payment of ad valorem taxes levied, or to be
levied, on property it owns. It shall be the duty of a franchise holder to file with the director of finance a sworn statement for each
calendar quarter showing the total amount billed for service within the city for the preceding three (3) months which statement shall be
filed within ten (10) days following the end of the third month.
(b) A franchise holder herein shall be required to install and adequately keep a system of bookkeeping to be approved by the director of
finance, which books shall be subject to inspections of the governing body of the city and such person or persons as the city may
designate, or either of them, so as to enable the city to check the correctness of the accounts kept and to compute fairly and accurately the
amount billed that may be due to the city.
(c) The franchise fee established in subsection (a) shall not be collected for any operational year in which the city is not requested to
financially subsidize the operation of the ambulance service within the city.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-24. Transfer of franchise.
No assignment, sale or subletting of any part of this franchise shall ever be made by the franchise holder herein without first receiving
written approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-25. Inspection of books and records.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/648
The books and records of the EMS and non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder shall be open at any reasonable time
for inspection by the city manager or any official designated by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Sec. 5-26. Rates.
Any person who uses the ambulance services of the city's franchise holder shall be charged for such services. The franchise holder may
from time to time adjust certain rates if/as allowed by the contract or by filing an application with the city secretary for consideration of
the city council.
The city council hereby expressly reserves the right, power, and authority under any franchise granted, to review the charges for the
services of the franchise holder to its customers, fully reserving to the city council all the rights, powers, privileges, and immunities,
subject to the duties, limitations and responsibilities which the Constitution, the laws of the state, and the charter confer upon the city.
(Ord. No. 50-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-8-15)
Chapter 6
ANIMALS AND FOWL*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Animal: Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
At large: Any animal off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person.
Domestic animals: Those animals which are naturally tame and gentle or which by long association with man have become thoroughly
domesticated and are now reduced to such a state of subjection to his will that they no longer possess a disposition or inclination to
escape.
Kennel: Any place where more than four (4) dogs or more than four (4) cats, or any combination of cats and dogs where the total exceeds
four (4) animals over the age of ten (10) weeks, and where said animals are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept.
Necessary veterinary care: Veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to
have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuations, tremors,
swelling, broken bone, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or local paralysis,
abnormal discharge or bleeding, manage, or other signs of health problems.
Owner: The actual owner of an animal and/or the person who has the care, custody or control of such animal.
Restraint: An animal shall be deemed to be restrained when it is:
(1) Confined on the premises of the owner within a fence or enclosure; or
(2) Fastened or picketed by a lead, rope or chain so as to keep the animal on the premises; or
(3) Under the control of a person by a leash; or
(4) On or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or
(5) At heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command.
Wild animal: Those animals of wild nature or disposition so as to require to be reclaimed and made tame by art, industry, or education, or
else must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate control of the owner.
(Code 1965, § 5-1; Ord. No. 12-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-24-04; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-2. Violations–Citing to appear.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/648
(a) When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter and its ownership is known to the agent of the animal control
department, such animal need not be impounded by the agent. The agent may, if the owner agrees to sign a citation, issue a citation which
shall require the person to appear in court within ten (10) days to answer a charge of a violation of this chapter.
(b) Signing the citation shall only be a promise to appear and is not an admission of guilt.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued any citation to give the animal control employee a false name or address.
(d) It shall be unlawful to fail to appear in municipal court within ten (10) days of the signing of the citation.
(Code 1965, § 5-2; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-3. Same–Impoundment.
(a) When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter and its ownership is known to the agents of the animal control
department and the owner cannot be located or refuses to sign a citation, the agent may impound the animal or file a complaint against the
owner in municipal court.
(b) When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter and its ownership is not known to the agent of the animal control
department, such animal shall be impounded.
(Code 1965, secs. 5-3, 5-4; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-4. Interference with department.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the animal control department in the performance of any duty of the agent,
or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department, or its agents.
(Code 1965, § 5-5; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-5. Records.
It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of:
(1) Impoundment and disposition. Impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody.
(2) Bite cases. All bite cases reported to it and its investigation of same.
(3) Monies received. All monies received under this chapter.
Such records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by persons responsible for similar records of the city, and shall be audited by
the city auditor in the same manner as other city records which are audited.
(Code 1965, § 5-29; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-6. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or be in control of any animal which causes unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise that
causes material distress, or discomfort to persons, or persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(Code 1965, § 5-6; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-7. Keeping certain animals–Prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or maintain within the city limits the following animals:
(1) All high risk rabies carriers, as defined in state law, including bats, skunks, coyotes, raccoons, and foxes;
(2) Venomous reptiles and amphibians;
(3) Any wild animal whose normal mature weight exceeds forty (40) pounds; or
(4) Any “dangerous wild animal” as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
(b) A person shall not sell, exchange, give away, or transfer a prohibited animal to any person in the city for use, retention, resale, or
transfer as a pet or as a human's companion except as provided by state or federal law for:
(1) A federal, state, county, or municipal agency or an agent of such an agency acting in an official capacity;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/648
(2) A research facility licensed by the United States Secretary of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C.
section 2131, et seq.);
(3) A zoo;
(4) Transporting an injured, sick, orphaned, or abandoned prohibited animal for care or treatment;
(5) A licensed veterinarian, an incorporated humane society or animal shelter, or a person who holds a rehabilitation permit
issued under subchapter C, chapter 43 of the Parks and Wildlife Code, as amended, who is temporarily treating or caring for a
sick or injured prohibited animal;
(6) A transient circus company;
(7) A television or motion picture production company that has temporary custody or control of the prohibited animal
during the filming of a television or motion picture production in the city;
(8) A college or university that owns and has possession, custody, or control of the prohibited animal solely as a mascot for
the college or university;
(9) Transporting the prohibited animal in interstate commerce in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section
2131, et seq.), as amended;
(10) A person whose only business is to supply nonhuman primates directly and exclusively to biomedical research facilities
and who holds a Class “A” or Class “B” dealer's license issued by the United States Secretary of Agriculture under the Animal
Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131, et seq.), as amended;
(11) A participant in a species survival plan of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association for the species of prohibited
animal owned by or in the possession, control, or custody of the person;
(12) Exhibiting a prohibited animal at a special event conducted with written permission from the city.
(Code 1965, § 5-7; Ord. No. 22-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-02; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-8. Same–Exceptions.
The provisions of section 6-7 shall not apply to or prohibit the keeping of wild animals by the following:
(1) A publicly or privately owned zoo maintained or operated by a nonprofit organization or governmental entity.
(2) Publicly or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo which does not remain in this city longer than thirty
(30) days out of each year.
(3) Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals.
(Code 1965, § 5-7; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-9. Restraint of wild animals.
It shall be the duty of each owner of a wild animal in the city to keep the same under restraint at all times.
(Code 1965, § 5-7; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-10. Keeping swine restricted.
(a) No person who is the owner of any swine, or any person who has any swine under his management or control, shall keep the same
or allow the same to remain in any pen or in any other place within the city.
(b) This section shall not apply to or prohibit the keeping of swine by the following:
(1) A publicly or privately owned zoo maintained or operated by a nonprofit organization or governmental entity.
(2) Publicly or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo which does not remain in the city longer than thirty (30)
days out of each year.
(3) Slaughterhouses.
(4) Any person, persons, organization or corporation keeping swine in an agricultural open space district as provided by the
City of Abilene zoning ordinance and said swine is kept no closer than six hundred (600) feet from residential district, church
or school.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/648
(5) Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals.
(Code 1965, § 5-17; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-11. Running at large generally.
If any animal, other than dogs, cats or other domesticated pets, is found at large within the city limits, the owner thereof shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Code 1965, § 5-8; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-12. Herding.
The driving of herds of animals, other than dogs, cats or other domesticated pets, along or upon any street, avenue or alley of the city is
hereby prohibited. This section shall not apply to or prohibit the herding of animals along or upon any street, avenue or alley of the city
by:
(1) Publicly or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo which does not remain in this city longer than thirty
(30) days out of each year.
(2) Any officer, agent or employee of the federal, state or local government or agencies thereof, if such herding is done in
the performance of its official duties.
(Code 1965, § 5-8; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Editor's note–Ordinance 26-1981, pt. 1, adopted March 26, 1981, amended Ch. 5 of the 1965 Code with the addition of new secs. 5-45–5-47. At the editor's
discretion, said provisions have been included below as secs. 6-13–6-15 of the present Code.
Sec. 6-13. Dead animals–Leaving carcass exposed a nuisance.
(a) No person shall place or deposit the exposed carcass of any animal or fowl on any street, alley, highway or public place or upon
private property or shall stand or permit to stand any truck or other vehicle containing such carcass on any street, alley, highway or public
place or on private property within the city. The term “exposed” as used in this section is meant the exposure of the carcass of an animal
so that putrefying odors may escape therefrom and contaminate the air.
(b) The exposure of the putrefying carcass of a beast so that noxious or disagreeable odors may escape therefrom and contaminate the
air shall be a public nuisance, and the health officer or any police officer may summarily remove such carcass to a point outside the city
or may bury or burn the same, and the expense of such disposal shall be included in the fine collected from the person so violating this
section.
(Ord. No. 26-1981, pt. 1, 3-26-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-14. Same–Removal by owner.
No person shall allow or permit any animal or fowl which has died and which at the time of death was owned or controlled or kept by
such person to lie in or upon any street, alley, lot or other place in this city. Such person or persons shall cause the carcass of such animal
or fowl to be disposed of as the health officer may direct.
(Ord. No. 26-1981, pt. 1, 3-26-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-15. Same–Removal and disposal service, fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Ord. No. 26-1981, pt. 1, 3-16-81; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-16. Care and humane treatment of animals.
(a) For purposes of this section, “restraint” shall mean a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches a dog to a
stationary object or trolley system.
(b) It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person to:
(1) Fail to provide an animal with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, adequate housing consisting of a threesided
structure with a cover or roof, and a floor that is sufficient to keep the animals dry and ensure that they do not have to
lay in water, shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care
and treatment;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/648
(2) Beat, torment, abuse, overload, seriously overwork, maim, disfigure, burn or scald, mutilate, or torture an animal;
(3) Carry or transport an animal in any vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel or inhumane manner;
(4) Cruelly confine an animal;
(5) Crop a dog's ears, dock a tail, remove dew claws, or perform other surgical procedures on a dog or cat, except as
provided by the Veterinary Licensing Act;
(6) Use steel jaw or leg-hold traps or snares;
(7) Abandon an animal, including abandoning an animal in the owner's custody without making reasonable arrangements
for the assumption of custody by another person;
(8) Instigate or permit any dog fight, cock fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans;
(9) Leave any animal in a standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety, or welfare;
(10) Secure by use of a restraint a dog or other animal to a stationary object for a period of time or in a location so as to
create an unhealthy situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian.
(A) “Unhealthy situation” and “potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian” shall include, but not be limited to:
(i) Leaving a dog unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement:
a. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
b. Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; or
c. In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which the actual or effective outdoor
temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, a heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or
jurisdiction, or a hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the
National Weather Service.
(ii) Secure by use of a restraint an animal in such a manner as to permit the animal access upon any public
“right-of-way”;
(iii) Secure by use of a restraint an animal in such a manner that does not permit the animal to reach shelter,
food, or water;
(iv) Secure by use of a restraint an animal in such a manner that it is subject to attacks by persons or other
animals, stinging bites from outdoor insects, or other similar hazards that pose an unreasonable threat of injury to
the animal;
(v) Failing to remove waste on a daily basis from the area in which the animal is restrained;
(vi) Using a choke-type collar to on an animal in conjunction with a restraint.
(B) It shall be minimally required that the tether used must be at least ten (10) feet in length, equipped with swivel
ends, positioned in such a manner as to prevent the animal from becoming entangled with any obstruction, from partially
or totally jumping any fence, or from leaving any part of its owner's property, and that is secured to the animal using a
properly fitted collar or harness.
(C) For purposes of subsection (10), a restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint: uses a collar that
is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the dog; is a length shorter that the greater of five
times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail or 10 feet; is in an
unsafe condition; or causes injury to the dog.
(D) Notwithstanding subsections [sic] subsection (10) does not apply to:
(i) A dog restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system and that is not restrained to the running line,
pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type, or improperly fitted collar;
(ii) A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping or recreational area as defined by a
federal, state, or local authority or jurisdiction;
(iii) A dog restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three hours in a 24-hour period, and no longer than is
necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/648
(iv) A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted
pursuant to a valid license issued by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the
use or presence of a dog;
(v) A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of shepherding or
herding cattle or livestock; or
(vi) A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of cultivating
agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog.
(11) Kill an animal, except as allowed by law;
(12) Expose an animal to any poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poison is likely to be
ingested by an animal. Provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this section for a person, on his own property, to
expose rats or mice to common rat poison intended for the purpose of exterminating the rats or mice;
(13) Cause any of the enumerated acts (1)–(12) to be done;
(14) Owner, as defined in section 6-1, means the actual owner of an animal and/or the person who has the care, custody or
control of such animal.
(Ord. No. 12-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-24-04; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-17. Removal of animal in immediate danger and veterinary medical attention.
(a) Any animal observed by a peace officer or agent of the animal control department that appears to be in immediate danger may be
removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available.
(b) In the event the animal removed requires veterinary medical attention, the peace officer or agent of the animal control department
removing the animal is authorized to take the animal to a licensed veterinarian as soon as practicable for veterinary medical treatment.
The owner will be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of any veterinary medical treatment, and must pay the bill before
redeeming the animal, in the event the animal is allowed to be returned to the owner. If a person other than the owner is found to have
violated section 6-16, that person will be responsible for reimbursing the city for the amount of the veterinary medical bills. Such
reimbursement is required before the animal will be released to the owner.
(c) If the veterinarian determines that the animal is too severely injured, or is too ill, to have a reasonable chance of recovery, the
animal control department is authorized to have the animal humanely destroyed. Any costs incurred as a result of the humane destruction
of the animal may be recovered from the owner or other person who is found to have violated section 6-16.
(Ord. No. 12-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-24-04; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-18. Impoundment, release, and disposition of animal.
(a) Any peace officer or any agent of the animal control department may seize and impound any animal that appears to have been
cruelly treated in violation of section 6-16.
(b) If the animal is not in need of immediate veterinary medical attention as provided in section 6-17, the animal shall be held by the
animal control department while an investigation is conducted to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to proceed against the
owner or other person for a violation of section 6-16.
(c) If at the conclusion of the investigation the animal control department determines that there is not enough evidence to proceed
against the owner or other person for a violation of section 6-16, or other law prohibiting cruelty to animals, the animal shall be returned
to the owner upon payment of any veterinary medical bills as provided in section 6-17, and payment of impound fees and compliance
with the associated requirements set forth in section 6-93. Payment of the veterinary medical bills and impound fees is required before the
animal will be released.
(d) If at the conclusion of the investigation the animal control department determines that there is enough evidence to proceed against
the owner or other person for a violation of section 6-16, the animal control department may initiate a proceeding in the municipal court
to:
(1) Prosecute the owner or other person for a violation of section 6-16;
(2) Determine the appropriate disposition of the animal;
(3) Assess the appropriate amount of impound fees and veterinary medical bills required to be paid by the owner or other
person found to have violated section 6-16; and
(4) Impose a fine in accordance with section 1-9.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/648
(e) If, after prosecution for an offense under section 6-16, the municipal court finds the owner or other person prosecuted for a violation
of section 6-16 not guilty, the owner or other person prosecuted is still responsible for payment of any veterinary medical bills as
provided in section 6-17, and payment of any impound fees and compliance with the associated requirements set forth in section 6-93.
Full payment of veterinary medical bills and impound fees, and compliance with section 6-93 is required before the animal will be
released to the owner.
(f) Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the election by the animal control department to pursue criminal charges against
the owner or other person for violations of the applicable animal cruelty provisions of the Texas Penal Code.
(Ord. No. 12-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-24-04; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Secs. 6-19–6-28. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PETS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-29. Exemption.
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the
provisions of this article, except as otherwise stated.
(Code 1965, § 5-18; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-30. Reserved.
Editor's note–Ordinance 69-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 15, 2005, repealed § 6-30 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to number of animals kept
restricted as enacted by Code 1965, § 5-19.
Sec. 6-31. Vaccination.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city limits unless the dog or cat has a current
certificate of vaccination for an anti-rabies vaccine.
(Code 1965, § 5-20; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-32. Restraint of dogs.
Every person who owns, keeps or is in charge of a dog shall restrain his dog at all times.
(Code 1965, § 5-28; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-33. Special confinement requirement for fierce, dangerous, vicious dogs.
The owner shall confine within a building or a secure enclosure a fierce, dangerous or vicious dog and not take such dog out of such
building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled.
(Code 1965, § 5-27; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Secs. 6-34–6-44. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 6-45. Required.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city unless a license has been obtained for the
same.
(Code 1965, § 5-20; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-46. Administration by veterinarians.
The city animal control department will furnish licensed veterinarians who agree to follow the provisions of this division with application
forms and license tags for dogs and cats.
(Code 1965, § 5-21; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-47. Application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/648
Written applications for dog and cat licenses shall be made upon a printed application form provided by the city and shall state the name
and address of the owner or keeper of said dog or cat and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog or cat being licensed.
(Code 1965, § 5-23; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-48. Conditions for license.
The dog and cat license tags shall be issued upon payment of the license fee and the meeting of one of the following conditions:
(1) Vaccination by a licensed veterinarian with anti-rabies vaccine; or
(2) Presentation of a metal vaccination tag issued by a licensed veterinarian showing that such vaccination was given less
than three (3) months prior to date of application for such license.
(Code 1965, § 5-25; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-49. Fee.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 5-24; Ord. No. 21-1980, pt. 1, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-50. Issuance.
Dog and cat license tags shall be issued by the animal control department and authorized veterinarians licensed in the state and practicing
within the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Code 1965, § 5-22; Ord. No. 121-1982, pt. 1, 10-28-82; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-51. Collar, tag to be worn.
Every person who owns, keeps or is in charge of or in control of a dog or cat within the city shall provide and place on such dog or cat a
collar or harness which shall be worn by said dog or cat at all times when off the premises of said person, and shall attach to the collar or
harness the metal license tag obtained pursuant to this division.
(Code 1965, § 5-26; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-52. Transfer.
Each dog or cat license issued under this division shall be restricted to the animal for which the same was issued and shall not be
transferred.
(Code 1965, § 5-24; Ord. No. 21-1980, pt. 1, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-53. Duration.
Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance thereof.
(Code 1965, § 5-24; Ord. No. 21-1980, pt. 1, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-54. Reimbursement by city.
The city will reimburse authorized licensed veterinarians the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each dog or cat license issued by such
veterinarian, to help defray the cost imposed on such veterinarian for issuing said licenses in accordance with this article.
(Ord. No. 21-1980, pt. 1, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Editor's note–Ordinance 21-1980, pt. 1, adopted March 13, 1980, amended § 5-24 of the 1965 Code. Inclusion of a portion of said amendment as § 6-54 has been at
the editor's discretion.
Secs. 6-55–6-59. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DANGEROUS DOGS
Sec. 6-60. Authorization.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/648
The general laws of the state, except as specifically provided through proper ordinances and regulations of the city, shall control the
handling of dangerous dogs. There is adopted as part of this chapter all of the provisions of title 10, chapter 822, subchapter D, as
amended, of the Texas Health and Safety Code insofar as applicable.
(Ord. No. 40-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-20-01; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-61. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and/or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by the statute
except as provided below:
“Dangerous dog” as defined in §822.041 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, is amended to include the additional definition of:
(C) Makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal that causes serious bodily injury or death and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the
enclosure on its own.
(Ord. No. 40-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-20-01; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-62. Seizure.
(a) If a person reports an incident described by §822.041(2) of the Texas Health and Safety Code as codified and amended by section 6-
61 of the Abilene City Code, the animal control department may seize and impound the dog pending investigation of the incident.
(b) The animal control department shall release the dog to the owner if the animal control department has not made a determination that
the dog is a dangerous dog on or before the tenth (10th) business day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog, and if all fees have
been paid as required under subsection (d). Release of the dog does not prohibit the animal control department from receiving more
information and subsequently declaring the dog a dangerous animal.
(c) If the animal control department determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall continue to impound the dog until the owner
complies with § 822.042 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, or until such time as the dog may legally be destroyed.
(d) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the animal control department related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or
destruction of the dog. In the event that the dog is returned to the owner, all fees must be paid prior to release of the dog.
(Ord. No. 23-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-02; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Secs. 6-63–6-68. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. IMPOUNDMENT*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-69. Authorized.
Any peace officer or any agent of the animal control department may take up and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter.
(Code 1965, § 5-9; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-70. Pets.
The impoundment of dogs, cats or any other domestic pet shall be as provided in sections 6-89 through 6-99.
(Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-71. Confinement by private citizen.
If any animal, including any domestic pet, is found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the
right to confine such animal temporarily until he can notify the animal control department. When notified, it shall be the duty of the
department to impound such animal as provided in this chapter.
(Code 1965, § 5-16; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-72. Pound fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/648
(Code 1965, § 5-15; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-73. Disposition at city manager or his designee's discretion.
If any animal impounded is found to be affected with a contagious disease, or if the animal is seriously injured, or if it cannot be
otherwise placed for adoption, the animal shall become the property of the city and it may immediately be euthanized or otherwise
disposed of without notice or any waiting period. All decisions as to the condition, adoption or other disposition of the animals shall be
made by the city manager or his designee.
(Code 1965, § 5-11; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-74. Redemption.
The owner of any animal not affected with a contagious disease or seriously injured and impounded under the provisions of this chapter
may redeem the same within three (3) business days of its impoundment by paying the required pound fees.
(Code 1965, § 5-12; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-75. Disposition of impounded animals.
If not redeemed within the appropriate time period specified in section 6-74, the animal shall become the property of the city, and the
animal may be adopted, euthanized or otherwise disposed of as recommended by the city manager or his designee
(Code 1965, § 5-10; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-76. Reserved..
Editor's note–Former section 6-76 pertaining to “redemption after sale” was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 10-27-16. Prior to
the deletion, this section derived from the following: Code 1965, § 5-13 and Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15.
Sec. 6-77. Records of impoundment.
The animal control department shall keep a record for at least one year giving the description of all animals impounded, the date of
impoundment, the date of adoption or other disposition, the amount realized for such animal, and the name and address of the new owner.
(Code 1965, § 5-14; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Secs. 6-78–6-88. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PETS
Sec. 6-89. Authorized.
The agents of the animal control department are authorized to take up and impound:
(1) All dogs found not restrained by their owners; or
(2) All cats which do not have a vaccination tag as provided by sections 6-31 and 6-51 and found not restrained by their
owners.
(Code 1965, § 5-30; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-90. Redemption.
(a) The redemption period for an animal impounded other than for quarantine or pursuant to a court order, is:
(1) Three business days after the date of impoundment, unless subsections (b) or (c) apply to the animal.
(b) The redemption period for an animal impounded pursuant to a court order is the time set forth in the court order or, if no provision
is made in the court order, five days after the court proceedings are final.
(c) The redemption period for an animal impounded for quarantine is three days after completion of the quarantine period.
(d) If an animal is not redeemed within the appropriate time period specified in subsections (a) through (c), or the animal is voluntarily
surrendered by the owner, the animal shall become the property of the city and may be placed for adoption, euthanized, or otherwise
disposed of as recommended by the city manager or his designee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/648
(e) An owner of an impounded animal commits an offense if he removes or attempts to remove the animal from a city animal shelter
without first paying all applicable fees required in this chapter.
(f) Notice. Upon impounding a dog found with current vaccination tags or chip, the agents of the animal control department shall make
a reasonable effort to notify the owner his animal has been impounded and the conditions whereby he may regain custody of such animal.
(Code 1965, § 5-31; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-91. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 6-91 pertaining to “unvaccinated dogs and cats” was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 10-27-16.
Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: Code 1965, § 5-32 and Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15.
Sec. 6-92. Fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 5-34; Ord. No. 21-1980, pt. 2, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-93. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 6-93 pertaining to “redemption generally” was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 10-27-16. Prior to
the deletion, this section derived from the following: Code 1965, § 5-33 and Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15.
Sec. 6-94. Redemption of unvaccinated animal.
The owner of any animal over the age of four (4) months, which has not been vaccinated as required by this chapter, upon satisfactory
proof of ownership, shall pay to the city animal services applicable fees to cover the cost of rabies vaccination and city tag for the animal
before the animal can be redeemed. Upon payment of the fee, a receipt for the shots shall be given to the owner to be honored by the
veterinarian designated by the owner. The owner of the animal shall have seventy-two (72) hours from the time the receipt is issued to
take the animal and receipt to the veterinarian for vaccination. Failure to vaccinate within the stated time period will result in forfeiture of
the rabies vaccination and city tag fees to the city. Each month all veterinarians shall turn in all receipts that they have received and the
city shall reimburse them for the full value of each receipt.
(Code 1965, § 5-33; Ord. No. 69-2005, pt. 2(Exh. B), 10-25-05; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-95. Transfer of title; deposits for spaying and neutering.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 5-35; Ord. No. 59-1984, pt. 1, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-96. Placement with competent person.
The animal control department may place any animal, held at its animal shelter, in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible
and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code 1965, § 5-35; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-97. Placement with humane society, fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 5-35; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-98. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 6-98 pertaining to “destruction of unredeemed animals” was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 10-27-
16. Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: Code 1965, § 5-35 and Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15.
Sec. 6-99. Destruction of donated, sick, injured animals.
The animal control department may destroy any animal by a humane method if it has been donated to the shelter with the request that it
be destroyed, if the animal is so sick or injured that its cure is considered by the animal control department to be impractical or if its death
is imminent, or if it is found to be infected with a contagious disease. In any such event, the animal shall become the property of the city
and such destruction may be done immediately without notice or any waiting period.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/648
(Code 1965, § 5-35; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Secs. 6-100–6-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RABIES CONTROL*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-116. Report of rabies suspect by veterinarian.
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control department his diagnosis of any animal observed by him
as a rabies suspect.
(Code 1965, § 5-36; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-117. Report of bites or scratches by physicians.
It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the animal control department the names and addresses of persons
treated for bites or scratches inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
(Code 1965, § 5-37; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-118. Killing or removing rabid animal from the city.
No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal which
has bitten a human or suspected of having bitten a human, except as herein provided, nor remove same from the city limits without
written permission from the animal control department.
(Code 1965, § 5-40; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-119. Surrender of carcass.
The carcass of any dead animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control
department.
(Code 1965, § 5-40; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-120. Disposition of rabid animals.
The animal control department shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies.
(Code 1965, § 5-40; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-121. Duty to surrender animal.
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine, destruction or disposal as required herein when demand is made
therefor by the animal control department.
(Code 1965, § 5-40; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-122. Rabies control authority.
The animal services manager or designee shall be the rabies control authority authorized to quarantine an animal as provided in chapter
826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, and the rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health under that chapter.
(Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Secs. 6-123–6-132. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. QUARANTINE OF SPECIFIC ANIMAL
Sec. 6-133. Authorized; minimum time.
Upon being presented a sworn affidavit that an animal has bitten or scratched a person, the city manager or his designee shall quarantine
the animal so identified for a period of ten (10) days.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/648
Sec. 6-134. Places.
(a) Quarantine of an animal which has bitten or scratched a person shall be at the following:
(1) Animal shelter.
(2) A licensed veterinarian hospital in the city at the expenses of the owner, upon the owner's request.
(3) Home quarantine. Home quarantine is permissible when the city manager or his designee agrees that home quarantine is
warranted and believes the following requirements are satisfied:
(A) The owner of the animal is a resident of this city and agrees to keep the animal at his residence in this city;
(B) The animal was properly restrained at the time the bite occurred; and
(C) The animal was properly protected by rabies vaccination.
(b) Animals of unknown ownership will be quarantined at the animal shelter.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 6-135. Surrender by owner.
Upon the demand made by the animal control department, it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to surrender any animal which has
bitten or scratched a human being or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for quarantine, which expenses shall be borne
by the owner.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-136. Released to owner.
The quarantined animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the fees set forth in section 6-92,
upon compliance with the vaccination provisions set forth in section 6-31.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-137. Pathological examination–Death during quarantine.
When an animal under quarantine diagnosed by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid or suspected of being rabid dies while under
observation, the animal control department shall immediately send the head of such animal to the health department for a pathological
examination. The animal control department shall notify the proper health officer of reports of human contacts and then diagnosis made
of the suspected animal after the pathological examination has been made.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-138. Same–Emergency situation.
When an animal bites or scratches a person so that the director of the health department believes that the quarantine observation period
cannot be observed because of the danger of developing rabies, the health director shall order that the animal control department
immediately forward the animal's head for pathological examination.
(Code 1965, § 5-38; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15; Ord. No. 57-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Secs. 6-139–6-149. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CITY-WIDE QUARANTINE
Sec. 6-150. When authorized.
A city-wide quarantine may be invoked for a period of thirty (30) days by the city council upon the recommendation of the animal control
department after it has been notified by the health department of a positive diagnosis of rabies of an animal or after an investigation has
determined there exists an immediate threat of rabies.
(Code 1965, § 5-39; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-151. Extension of time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/648
In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring within the thirty (30) day period of the city-wide quarantine, such
period of quarantine shall be extended for additional reasonable period of time.
(Code 1965, § 5-39; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-152. Destruction of bitten animals.
During a period of city-wide rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by a rabid animal shall be destroyed.
(Code 1965, § 5-39; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-153. Confinement of animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal in the streets or any other public place during the period of quarantine.
(Code 1965, § 5-39; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Secs. 6-154–6-165. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TRAPS*
Sec. 6-166. Placement and baiting prohibited on streets and alleys.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place and bait or to permit the placing or baiting and placing of any trap, designed for trapping
animals, in any highway, street, alley, or other public place within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 14-1981, pt. 1, 2-12-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-167. Prohibited within city limits; exception, areas zoned agricultural open space.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set or bait or permit the setting or baiting or placing of any steel-jawed, killer-type, toothed trap
designed in such a fashion as to reasonably ensure the cutting, slicing, tearing, or otherwise traumatizing of entrapped prey and
commonly known as a “bear trap, wolf trap, or coyote trap” in any zoning district within the city limits, except in those districts zoned
agricultural open space. In agricultural open space districts, any trap must be more than three hundred (300) yards from the nearest
district zoned for residential, commercial, or industrial use.
(Ord. No. 14-1981, pt. 1, 2-12-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-168. When declared abandoned; impoundment.
Any traps mentioned in sections 6-166 and 6-167 found upon any public property shall be and the same are hereby declared to be
abandoned property and any animal control agent/police officer is hereby authorized and directed to impound any such trap and process
the same as abandoned property in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 14-1981, pt. 1, 2-12-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Sec. 6-169. Animal trapping by animal control.
It is hereby specifically provided that the city animal control division is exempted from any provision of these animal trapping sections in
the performance of their lawful duties.
(Ord. No. 14-1981, pt. 1, 2-12-81; Ord. No. 45-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-15)
Chapter 7
CIVIL DEFENSE*
Sec. 7-1. Organization.
There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the City of Abilene, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with
the state law.
(a) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/648
(b) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for
carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties
to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director.
(c) The operational emergency management organization of the City of Abilene shall consist of the officers and employees
of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The
functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms
of the emergency management plan.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-2. Emergency management director; powers and duties.
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(a) Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing
program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the
occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(b) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Abilene, and shall
recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such
plan.
(c) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of
seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city
secretary.
(d) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its
contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly
filed with the city secretary.
(e) Direction and control of the operations of the Abilene Emergency Management organization as well as the training of
emergency management personnel.
(f) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management
organization of the city.
(g) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management
organizations.
(h) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out
of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(i) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state
and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with
the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of
emergency management efforts.
(j) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including
acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the
city.
(k) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other
purposes.
(l) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster,
as provided for herein.
(m) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Texas Government Code Annotated section 418.001
et seq. (Vernon 1987), as amended.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-3. Emergency management plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/648
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the
form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate
officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria
established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas.
(b) Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of
emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the
plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be
considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-4. Interjurisdictional program.
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of the County of Taylor and the mayors of the other cities in said county in
the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Taylor, and shall have the authority to
cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency
management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as
said program may affect the City of Abilene.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-5. Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended.
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-6. No municipal or private liability.
(a) This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and
neither the City of Abilene, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order,
rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result
of said activity.
(b) Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of
Abilene a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate
or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster
shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-7. Commitment of funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the City in carrying out any Emergency Management activity authorized by
this chapter without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the City by contract, agreement, or
otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor
may expend and/or commit public funds of the City when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
(Ord. No. 8-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-10-94)
Sec. 7-8. Certain conduct unlawful.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in
the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as
a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Abilene, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by
the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a
warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/648
Chapter 8
CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 8-1, 8-2. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 112-1984, Exhibit A, pt. 1, adopted Nov. 15, 1984, provided that § 8-1, prohibiting deviations from provisions of the electrical code, as
derived from the 1965 Code, § 11-7, be deleted. Further, Ordinance 111-1984, Exhibit A, pt. 1, adopted Nov. 15, 1984, provided for the deletion of § 8-2, prohibited
plumbing acts derived from the 1965 Code, § 21-218.
Sec. 8-3. Penalty for violation of chapter.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of any such
violation, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. In any case of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter by any corporation, the officers
and agents actively in charge of the business of such corporation shall be subject to the penalty herein provided. Any offense defined
herein which has been defined by laws of the state as an offense and for which penalty has been prescribed shall be punished as provided
in state law, and nothing herein shall be held as fixing any penalty contrary to a penalty provided by the laws of the state.
(Code 1965, § 21-220)
Sec. 8-4. Form of complaints.
In any prosecution hereunder, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to negate any exceptions contained in this Code concerning any
prohibited act, but any such exception may be urged as a defense by any person charged by such complaint.
(Code 1965, § 21-221)
Sec. 8-5. Liability not assumed by city.
This chapter does not relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, controlling any structure; or
owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical fixture or outlet, or any plumbing, gas piping or gas fired appliances, for
damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be regarded as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection authorized herein or certificate of approval issued as herein provided.
(Code 1965, § 21-222)
Sec. 8-6. Emergencies.
Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists, which requires immediate action to protect the public welfare, health and
safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency, and requiring that such action be
taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the provisions of the minimum standards for buildings and
structures division and/or the building code, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the building official, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such
hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether the provision of the minimum standards for buildings and structures division and/or the
building code have been complied with, the building official shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
(Code 1965, § 16-14; Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 4 (Exh. C), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-7. Sale of accessory buildings; notice to buyer required.
Any person, within the city, selling or offering for sale any accessory building, including but not limited to sheds and storage buildings,
shall in writing advise the buyer that the building official of the city must be contacted by said buyer prior to installation of such building
to inquire of said official as to the necessity of a building permit being obtained therefor.
This provision shall not apply to the sale of accessory buildings sold as part of the realty to which said building is already affixed, or
installed.
The notice above required shall be given at the time that a sale agreement is reached between buyer and seller.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/648
It is specifically provided however, that this section shall not be construed so as to provide a basis for imposing a penalty for any violation
hereof.
(Ord. No. 3-1980, pt. 1, 1-10-80)
Editor's note: Ordinance 3-1980, pt. 1, enacted Jan. 10, 1980, amended the 1965 Code with the addition of a new Art. 7, § 8-82 to Ch. 8. At the discretion of the
editor, said provisions have been included as § 8-7 of this Code.
Secs. 8-8–8-15. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BONDS
Sec. 8-16. Bond required of contractors.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of a general contractor or engage in the business of altering, repairing, constructing or
removing houses or buildings or any construction work generally followed by building contractors in the city shall first file with the
building inspector of the city, a surety bond in the amount required by the governing code applicable to the contractor, to be approved by
the city manager, payable to the city and conditioned on a faithful performance of all of the provisions and regulations of the building
code, this chapter and all other ordinances of the city, and the surety on such bond shall be a company authorized to transact business in
the state.
(Code 1965, § 7-2; Ord. No. 17-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Sec. 8-17. Reserved.
Editor's note: Former § 8-17 which pertained to the bond required for operating a plumbing business, as derived from the 1965 Code, was deleted by Ordinance
111-1984, Exhibit A, pt. 1, adopted Nov. 15, 1984.
Sec. 8-18. Same–For appliance dealers.
Any person engaged in the installation of appliances which require connections to the sanitary sewer, water or gas system, shall furnish to
the city a good and sufficient surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), such surety shall be a surety company duly
authorized to do business in the state conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work entered upon or contracted for in strict
accordance and compliance with the terms, requirements and provisions of this chapter and such future ordinances of the city as may
hereinafter be passed. Said bond shall be further conditioned that such person shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the
work is done, remedy any defects therein due to faulty workmanship or faulty materials furnished by or used by such person. All sureties
on any bond required by the city shall be liable for breach thereof to the owner.
(Code 1965, § 21-34)
Secs. 8-19–8-25. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. FIRE ZONES
Sec. 8-26. Fire Zone No. 1.
All of the following described property shall be Fire Zone Number 1:
Beginning at the centerline intersection of North 7th and Hickory Streets; thence east along the centerline of North 7th Street to the
centerline of Mesquite Street; thence south along the centerline of Mesquite Street to the centerline of North 6th Street; thence east along
the centerline of North 6th Street to the centerline of Ash Street; thence south along the centerline of Ash Street to the centerline of North
2nd Street; thence west along the centerline of South 2nd Street to the centerline of Plum Street; thence in a southerly direction to the
centerline intersection of South 1st and Locust Streets; thence south along the centerline of Locust Street to the centerline of South 6th
Street; thence west along the centerline of South 6th Street to the centerline of Sycamore Street; thence north along the centerline of
Sycamore Street to the centerline of South 3rd Street; thence west along the centerline of South 3rd Street to the centerline of Butternut
Street; thence north along the centerline of Butternut Street to the centerline of South 1st Street; thence in a northerly direction to the
centerline intersection of North 1st and Hickory Street; thence along the centerline of Hickory Street to the place of beginning.
(Code 1965, § 7-3; Ord. No. 1120, pt. 1, 9-28-78)
Sec. 8-27. Fire Zone No. 2.
All of the following described property shall be Fire Zone Number 2:
All areas presently zoned O, LC, SC, CB, CG, HC, LI, HI, PDI, PDS and PDO under the zoning ordinance of the city as presently
existing or as may hereafter exist.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/648
(Code 1965, § 7-4)
Sec. 8-28. Fire Zone No. 3.
All of the following described property shall be Fire Zone Number 3:
All areas presently zoned AO, RS-6, RS-8, RS-12, RM-3, RM-2, RM-1, MH, CU, PDR, PDMH and PDREC under the zoning ordinance
of the city as presently existing or as may hereafter exist.
(Code 1965, § 7-5)
Sec. 8-29. Exceptions–Authorized.
The city council, upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board or upon their own motion may at any time make an
exception to the above fire zone designations when, in their opinion, the safety and the orderly development of the city requires such an
exception.
(Code 1965, § 7-6)
Sec. 8-30. Same–Residences.
(a) If a residence be erected within the limits of either Fire Zone Number 1 or Fire Zone Number 2, and if it has one thousand (1,000)
square feet or less of livable area, and if it is set back at least five (5) feet from the side property lines, then it shall be exempted from the
requirements of Fire Zone Numbers 1 and 2 and may be erected in conformance with the requirements it would have to meet if erected in
Fire Zone Number 3; provided, however, that any such residence shall be required to use fire resistant material in the construction of its
roof.
(b) If two (2) or more residences on the same lot together total twelve hundred (1200) square feet of livable area, or less, and meet the
other requirements of subsection (a) above, then such residences shall be likewise exempted as above set forth in subsection (a).
(c) If at any time such exempted residence be changed, as to use, to any purpose other than residential, then it must be modified or
changed so as to conform to the construction requirements of the fire zone in which it is located.
(d) All structures herein exempted from the operation of all or part of the fire zone construction requirements shall meet all other
applicable regulations in regard to construction, electrical work or plumbing.
(Code 1965, § 7-6)
Secs. 8-31–8-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. INSPECTORS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 8-41–8-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-51–8-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-71–8-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 8-91–8-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-101–8-123. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RESERVED*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/648
Secs. 8-124–8-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 8-151. Demolition permit conditions.
When a permit is issued for the demolition of a house, building or other structure, the permit holder shall do all of the following:
(1) Remove all slabs, sidewalks, fences and posts, provided any slabs, sidewalks, fences or posts may remain, in either
residential or nonresidential zoning, upon approval of the board of building standards; and in nonresidential zoning, any
sidewalks or slab(s) on grade that are free and clear of, without limitation, construction debris, vertical concrete, pipe risers
and anchor bolts, may remain only upon the request, prior to final inspection, of the property owner(s) to the building official
and subsequent approval by the building official;
(2) Clear and remove all loose tree limbs, appliances and all other personalty, trash, weeds, tall grass and other debris;
(3) Fill in all holes or depressions remaining at the building site and level the area so as to facilitate future mowing
maintenance; and
(4) Mow the grass.
(Code 1965, § 7-2; Ord. No. 56-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Sec. 8-152. Definitions.
Slab on grade. A slab on grade is any slab that is poured onto earth materials that are in direct contact with the slab and which are used to
support the slab. This process may be flat on the ground or foundation walls can be constructed to any engineered height and backfilled
with sand to the bottom of the slab to be poured to support the slab.
(Ord. No. 56-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16)
Secs. 8-153–8-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. LICENSES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-161. Registration.
(a) General. Any person submitting application or validation to obtain a permit in the City of Abilene, shall be registered as a
contractor.
Exception: Homeowners may obtain permits to do work at their residence, at which they own and reside, without being registered.
(b) Registration requirements. Contractors may register by making application on forms provided by the building official. Electrical,
irrigation, mechanical and plumbing contractors shall provide proof of required license.
(c) Revocation/suspension. A contractor's registration may be suspended for the following causes:
(1) The contractor fails to finalize permits by obtaining the required, approved inspections.
(2) The contractor allows use or occupancy of the structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the
required authorization.
(3) The contractor has been found, by the board of building standards, or mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and swimming
pool board of appeals, to have violated Construction Regulations, Chapter 8, of the City Code.
(4) Expiration, suspension or revocation of required license, bond or insurance.
(Ord. No. 31-1993, § 1, 5-27-93)
Sec. 8-162. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Electrical license is authorization issued by the state pursuant to the Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, Texas Occupations Code,
Chapter 1305, and as amended.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/648
Mechanical license is authorization issued by the state pursuant to the Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law, Texas
Occupations Code, Chapter 1302, and as amended.
Plumbing license is a license issued by the state pursuant to the Plumbing License Law, Texas Occupations Code, Chapter 1301, and as
amended.
Registration is a contractor's registration obtained from the city.
(Ord. No. 31-1993, § 1, 5-27-93; Ord. No. 17-2014, pt. 3 (Exh. C), 3-27-14)
Sec. 8-163. Permits and inspections.
Registration required. No person shall be allowed to obtain a permit for the purpose of contracting any general, electrical, mechanical or
plumbing work unless that person holds the appropriate registration for that work.
Exception: Registration is not required for a homeowner to obtain a permit to do work at their residence, at which they own and reside.
(Ord. No. 31-1993, § 1, 5-27-93)
Sec. 8-164. Fee.
Fees shall be assessed according to city council resolution.
(Ord. No. 31-1993, § 1, 5-27-93)
Secs. 8-165–8-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-171–8-330. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-331–8-350. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ADVISORY BOARDS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 8-351–8-360. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS
Sec. 8-361. Established.
There is hereby established a board of building standards in and for the city.
(Code 1965, § 16-3)
Sec. 8-362. Composition.
The board of building standards shall be composed of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the city, and three (3) ex
officio members who shall have no voting privileges.
The seven (7) voting members shall not be employees of the city and shall include the following:
(a) A registered architect who has had at least five (5) years experience in the construction of all types of buildings.
(b) A registered engineer who has had at least five (5) years experience in construction of all types of buildings.
(c) A mortgage loan banker who has engaged in mortgage loan banking for at least five (5) years.
(d) A licensed real estate broker who has had at least five (5) years experience in the appraisal of real estate.
(e) A building contractor who has had at least five (5) years experience in the construction of all types of buildings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/648
(f) A homebuilder who has had at least five (5) years experience in the construction of homes.
(g) A person who is engaged in social or welfare work who has had at least five (5) years experience in such work.
The ex officio members, whose only function shall be to render advice to the regular members of the board, shall include the following:
(a) A representative from the planning and zoning department.
(b) A representative from the fire department.
(c) A representative from the health department.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-363. Appointment.
The members of the board of building standards shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-364. Terms.
The members of the board of building standards shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council with four (4) of the
members appointed for a term of one year and three (3) of the members appointed for a term of two (2) years. Each member of the board
thereafter shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-365. Removal.
Any member of the board of building standards who shall be absent from the regular monthly meeting of the board for three (3)
consecutive times shall be removed from the board.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-366. Filling vacancies.
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board of building standards shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-367. Alternate members.
The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall also appoint an alternate member for each of the seven (7) voting members of the board
of building standards which alternate shall serve in the absence of the designated voting member when requested to do so by the mayor or
the city manager. Each alternate member shall meet the requirements for appointment that apply to the voting member for whom he shall
be the alternate and shall be appointed for the same term as that voting member.
(Code 1965, § 16-4)
Sec. 8-368. Quorum.
Four (4) voting members of the board of building standards shall constitute a quorum, and the board shall act by a majority vote of those
present.
(Code 1965, § 16-5)
Sec. 8-369. Chairman.
A chairman shall be selected by the board of building standards from its membership, who shall preside over its meetings, and have the
same voting rights as other members. In the absence of the chairman, the board shall select an acting chairman to preside until the return
of the regular chairman.
(Code 1965, § 16-5)
Sec. 8-370. Meetings.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/648
The board of building standards shall meet at least once a month at a day and time to be determined by the board and at the call of the
chairman. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
(Code 1965, § 16-6)
Sec. 8-371. Records.
The board of building standards shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent
or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall also keep a record of its other official actions, all of which shall be public record.
(Code 1965, § 16-6)
Sec. 8-372. To hear appeals.
The board of building standards shall hear appeals from any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official concerning the
building code and/or the minimum standards for buildings and structures division and shall also hear all cases wherein the building
official has determined that the repair or rehabilitation of a building, residential or nonresidential, is impractical and that such substandard
building should be demolished.
(Code 1965, § 16-3; Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 3 (Exh. B), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-373. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies nor constitute an exclusive remedy for the removal or
demolition of any buildings which are deemed a nuisance.
(Code 1965, § 16-15)
Secs. 8-374–8-390. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MECHANICAL, PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND SWIMMING POOL BOARD OF APPEALS*
Sec. 8-391. Established.
There is hereby established a mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals in and for the city. (Ord. No. 13-
1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-392. Composition.
The mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals shall be composed of seven (7) voting members, and four (4)
ex officio members who shall have no voting privileges.
The seven (7) voting members shall not be employees of the city and shall include the following:
(a) A registered architect;
(b) A registered mechanical or electrical engineer;
(c) A licensed master plumber;
(d) A licensed mechanical contractor;
(e) A licensed master electrician;
(f) A licensed swimming pool contractor;
(g) A bonded building contractor.
The ex officio members, whose only function shall be to render advice to the board, shall include the following:
(a) The building official;
(b) A representative from the planning and zoning department;
(c) A representative from the fire department;
(d) A representative from the health department.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/648
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-393. Appointment.
The members of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-394. Terms.
The members of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council with four (4) of the members appointed for a term of two (2) years and three (3) of the members appointed for a term of three (3)
years. Each member of the board thereafter shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-395. Alternate members.
The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall also appoint an alternate member for each of the seven (7) voting members of the
mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals, which alternate shall serve in the absence of the designated voting
member when requested to do so by the mayor or the city manager. Each alternate member shall meet the requirements for appointment
that apply to the voting member for whom he shall be the alternate and shall be appointed for the same term as that voting member.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-396. Removal.
Any member of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals who is absent from the regular monthly
meeting of the board for three (3) consecutive meetings shall be removed from the board.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 88-397. Filling vacancies.
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall be filled by appointment
for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-398. Quorum.
Four (4) voting members of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall constitute a quorum, and the board shall
act by a majority vote of those present.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-399. Officers.
A chairman shall be selected by the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board from its membership, who shall preside
over its meetings, and have the same voting rights as other members. The board shall also select a vice-chairman to preside over its
meetings in the absence of the regular chairman. The building official shall act as secretary of the board.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-400. Meetings.
The mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall meet at least once a month at a day and time to be determined by
the board and at the call of the chairman. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-401. Records.
The mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon question and if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall also keep a record of its other official actions, all of which
shall be public record.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/648
Sec. 8-402. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 2 of Ordinance 39-2012, adopted Sept. 13, 2012, deleted § 8-402 in its entirety and reserved the section. Formerly, § 8-402 pertained to the
electrical licensing subcommittee and derived from Pt. 5 of Ordinance 13-1991, adopted March 11, 1991; and Pt. 1(Exh. A) of Ordinance 56-1999, adopted Nov. 11,
1999.
Sec. 8-403. Responsibilities.
The mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals shall be charged with the responsibilities of hearing cases of
appeal and reviewing codes and ordinances that pertain to the mechanical code, the plumbing code, the electrical code, and the swimming
pool code.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-404. Right of appeal.
Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by an interpretation of the mechanical code, the plumbing code, the electrical code, or the
swimming pool code or by any decision or ruling relating to these codes made by the building official or his authorized representative
shall have the right to make an appeal to the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals. Appeals shall be
made in writing and received in the office of the building official no later than ten (10) days prior to a regular meeting of the mechanical,
plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91; Ord. No. 56-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-11-99)
Sec. 8-405. Hearings before the board.
Within a period of thirty (30) days from the filing of the appeal, the board shall hear the appeal, together with the testimony of all parties
concerned and render a decision. In hearing such an appeal, the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals
shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of any code, but shall have the power to interpret its provisions and, in
case of alternate types of installation or material, shall determine whether or not such alternate type of installation or material is, in fact,
equal to the standards of the applicable code considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation, and safety for the public health and
welfare.
The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required to substantiate his claims. The appellant may
appear in person before the board or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-406. Appeal from board decision.
Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decisions of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool
board of appeals shall have a right of appeal to the city council within ten (10) days from notice addressed to the city secretary asking for
a hearing by the council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final; except that due process shall not be denied and further
appeal may be made to the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Sec. 8-407. Advisory responsibility.
The mechanical, plumbing, electrical and swimming pool board of appeals shall submit to the city council recommendations for
improvement and revision of the mechanical code, the plumbing code, the electrical code, and the swimming pool code as it may from
time to time deem necessary in light of new materials, new methods or techniques to result in better, safer, or more economical
installations.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, pt. 5, 4-11-91)
Secs. 8-408–8-430. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RESERVED*
Secs. 8-431–8-470. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CODES AND OTHER REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 8-471–8-480. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/648
DIVISION 2. BUILDING CODE
Sec. 8-481. Adopted.
The International Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a building code pamphlet
amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the building code for the city, and is hereby
incorporated herein. The building code pamphlet, along with the International Building Code, are on file in the building official's and city
secretary's offices.
(Code 1965, § 7-1; Ord. No. 129-1981, pt. 1, 11-19-81; Ord. No. 42-1986, pt. 1, 6-12-86; Ord. No. 35-1989, pt. 1, 8-24-89; Ord. No. 10-
1992, pt. 1, 3-26-92; Ord. No. 6-1995, pt. 1, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 51-1998, pt. 1, 10-8-98; Ord. No. 31-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-11-01; Ord.
No. 40-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-11-05; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-24-11; Ord. No. 42-2014, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 8-482. Amendments.
The building code adopted by the provisions of this division has been amended by the city in the following aspects:
411.9 Temporary Amusement Buildings. Temporary Amusement Buildings are not required to be fire sprinklered if the area does not
exceed 5000 square feet and the maximum travel distance from any point in the area does not exceed 75 feet to a lighted exit way and
does not exceed 150 feet to an exterior exit. The areas are required to meet the exit width and door requirements in Chapter 10 of this
Code, and the alarm requirements in Amusement Buildings in Section 907.2.1 of the 2000 International Fire Code.
(Ord. No. 8-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-02)
Sec. 8-483. Penalties for violation.
Any person violating the provisions of the building code adopted by the provisions of this article, or any amendment thereto, shall be
punished as provided by section 1-9 of this Code.
Sec. 8-484. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 32-1997, pt. 1, adopted July 10, 1997, repealed former section 8-484 in its entirety which pertained to temporary buildings and derived
from Ordinance 52-1989, pt. 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1989.
Secs. 8-485–8-495. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 8-496. Adopted.
The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association together with standards of the National
Electrical Manufacturers Association and the American National Standards Institute, together with an electrical code pamphlet amending
and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the electrical code for the city, and is hereby incorporated
herein. The electrical code pamphlet, along with the National Electrical Code, are on file in the building official's and city secretary's
offices.
(Ord. No. 60-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87; Ord. No. 13-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-24-94; Ord. No. 54-1996, pt. 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 56-1999, pt.
2(Exh. B), 11-11-99; Ord. No. 43-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-21-02; Ord. No. 17-2006, pt. 1(Exh. 1), 4-27-06; Ord. No. 10-2009, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 4-23-09; Ord. No. 39-2012, pt. 1, 9-13-12; Ord. No. 04-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-16)
Sec. 8-497. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 2(Exh. B) of Ordinance 56-1999, adopted Nov. 11, 1999, repealed § 8-497 in its entirety. Formerly, § 8-497 pertained to the amendments to the
electrical code and derived from Pt. 1(Exh. A) of Ordinance 13-1994, adopted March 24, 1994; Pt. 1(Exh. A) of Ordinance 30-1995, adopted June 8, 1995; and Pt.
1(Exh. A) of Ordinance 18-1999, adopted May 27, 1999. Subsequently, Ordinance 30-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 11, 2001, provided for the amendment of the
electrical code. The user is directed to the office of the city secretary for a current copy of the electrical code and any subsequent amendments.
Secs. 8-498–8-510. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PLUMBING CODE*
Sec. 8-511. Adopted.
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a plumbing code
pamphlet amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the plumbing code for the city, and is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/648
hereby incorporated herein. The plumbing code pamphlet, along with the International Plumbing Code, are on file in the building
official's and city secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 111-1984, pt. 1, 11-15-84; Ord. No. 4-1990, pt. 1, 2-8-90; Ord. No. 8-1996, pt. 1, 3-14-96; Ord. No. 48-1996, pt. 1, 9-26-96;
Ord. No. 49-1996, pt. 1, 9-26-96; Ord. No. 23-1998, pt. 2(Exh. B), 4-23-98; Ord. No. 31-2001, pt. 2(Exh. B), 10-11-01; Ord. No. 40-
2005, pt. 2(Exh. B), 8-11-05; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. 2(Exh. B), 3-24-11; Ord. No. 42-2014, pt. 2(Exh. B), 7-24-14)
Secs. 8-512–8-525. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 8-526. Adopted.
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a mechanical code
pamphlet amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the mechanical code for the city, and is
hereby incorporated herein. The mechanical code pamphlet, along with the International Mechanical Code, are on file in the building
official's and city secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 84-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 34-1987, 6-25-87; Ord. No. 5-1990, pt. 1, 2-8-90; Ord. No. 21-1992, pt. 1, 5-14-92; Ord. No.
23-1998, pt. 3(Exh. C), 4-23-98; Ord. No. 31-2001, pt. 3(Exh. C), 10-11-01; Ord. No. 40-2005, pt. 3(Exh. C), 8-11-05; Ord. No. 10-2011,
pt. 3(Exh. C), 3-24-11; Ord. No. 42-2014, pt. 3(Exh. C), 7-24-14)
Sec. 8-527. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 23-1998, pt. 3(Exhibit C), adopted April 23, 1998, repealed former section 8-527 in its entirety which pertained to the availability of the
mechanical code and derived from Ordinance 84-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82; Ordinance 34-1987, 6-25-87; Ordinance 5-1990, 2-8-90; Ordinance 21-1992, pt. 1, 5-14-92)
Secs. 8-528–8-550. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES*
Sec. 8-551. Purpose and scope.
(a) This division is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, chapter 54 and
chapter 214. The purpose of this division is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with the provisions of this
division shall be altered, repaired or demolished to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
(b) This division shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and to all existing premises. This division shall be
the minimum standard for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings, property or structures, regardless of when they were
constructed. This division establishes the minimum requirements and standards for light, ventilation, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. This division prescribes the
responsibility of owners, the authority to direct the securement, occupancy, repair, and demolition of structures and premises, and
establishes civil and criminal penalties for violations of this division.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-552. Definitions.
Building official. Includes the building official or any employee assigned by the director of planning and development services to work
under the authority of the building official for the purpose of enforcing this division.
Condemn. To adjudge unfit for human occupancy.
Dilapidated. The state of a building or structure that has deteriorated or is in disrepair.
Owner. Includes record property owner, mortgagee, lienholder, any individual, agent, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
having legal or equitable interest in the property.
Vermin. Small common objectionable animals such as insects or rodents, that are difficult to control, may spread disease, or may compete
with domestic animals for food or other resources.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-553. Authority of building official.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/648
(a) The building official is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this division and shall have the power to render
interpretations of this division, including but not limited to the decision to condemn property.
(b) The building official is authorized to make inspections pursuant to complaints or visual observations of deficiencies, to determine
the condition of all existing residential and nonresidential structures, and all premises located within the city without prior notice to the
owner, manager, or occupant of the property. If the property is occupied, the building official shall present credentials to the occupant and
request entry. If unoccupied, the building official must first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control. If
entry is refused, the building official, or his or her designee who is a code enforcement official, shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry, including making application for an administrative search warrant pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure section 18.05, unless an exception to the warrant requirement exists.
(c) Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing structure or for the public safety, health and
welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official.
(d) In the event the building official deems a building or structure with historic overlay zoning to be safe and not a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare, the provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for the building or structure.
(e) The building official is authorized to require a condemned structure to be secured from outside entry and shall bill the owner for the
costs associated with securing the structure if the costs are borne by the city.
(f) The building official may order a structure to be demolished immediately if the structure has sustained damage by fire, explosion,
wind, vandalism, or elements of nature or by other means to the extent that it is likely to fall in the immediate future and is unable to be
secured from entry or is likely to fall in the immediate future on another inhabited area or structure.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13; Ord. No. 64-2018, pt 1(Exh. A), 10-25-18)
Sec. 8-554. Substandard structures.
Any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms on the premises on which the same is located,
in which there exists any of the following conditions, may be deemed to be substandard and condemned if the condition(s) exists to an
extent that it endangers the health safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof:
(1) Inadequate sanitation. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are unsanitary. Inadequate
sanitation shall include but not be limited to the following:
a. Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
b. Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of hotel guests in a hotel.
c. Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
d. Lack of hot or cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit, lodging house or hotel.
e. Lack of adequate heating facilities.
f. Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment.
g. Lack of minimum amounts of natural light or ventilation required by this code.
h. Room and space dimensions less than required by this code, including chapter 8, construction regulations.
i. Lack of required electrical lighting.
j. Dampness of habitable rooms.
k. Infestations of vermin as determined by the public health authority or designee, or environmental enforcement
officer.
l. General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
m. Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
n. Sewage flowing across the ground, into the right-of way, or open sewage.
o. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the public health authority or
designee, or environmental enforcement officer.
p. Absence of electric, gas, or water utility for forty-eight (48) hours or more.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/648
(2) Structural hazards. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are or contain structural
hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following:
a. Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
b. Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
c. Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size or construction to carry imposed loads with safety.
d. Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle.
e. Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are loose, crumbling, rotten or warped or that contain
parts that may fall.
f. Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
g. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle.
h. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are loose, crumbling, rotten
or warped or that contain parts that may fall.
i. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to
carry imposed loads with safety.
j. Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle.
k. Fireplaces or chimneys that are loose, crumbling, rotten or warped or that contain parts that may fall.
l. Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.
m. Antennas, towers, flagpoles, wind turbines, solar panels or similar components attached to a structure, which are
warped, listing, corroded or otherwise deteriorated.
(3) Nuisance. Buildings or portions thereof in which there exists any nuisance as defined in this code, including chapter 19,
nuisances and illegal dumping.
(4) Hazardous electrical wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time
of installation, or electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no
codes were in effect, or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not being used in a safe manner shall be
considered substandard.
(5) Hazardous plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation, or plumbing not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes
were in effect, or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage
between fixtures shall be considered substandard.
(6) Hazardous mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect
at the time of installation, or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices
in areas where no codes were in effect, or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered
substandard.
(7) Faulty weather protection. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they have faulty weather
protection which shall include but not be limited to the following:
a. Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
b. Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows
or doors.
c. Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including the absence of paint where paint is
needed to prevent weathering, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.
d. Broken, rotted, split, buckled, or missing exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
(8) Fire hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in
the opinion of the fire marshal, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the
spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause shall be considered a substandard building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/648
(9) Faulty materials of construction. The use of materials of construction, except those which are specifically allowed or
approved by this code and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition, shall cause a building to be
substandard.
(10) Inadequate exits. Buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in violation of code requirements in
effect at the time of their construction, or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number or width in relation to any
increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction, or
whose required exit facilities have been rendered inoperable or unsafe for any reason shall be considered substandard.
Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of their construction, buildings and portions
thereof shall be considered substandard when the building official finds that an unsafe condition exists through an
improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of exits, or when other conditions exist which are
dangerous to human life.
(11) Inadequate fire-protection or firefighting equipment. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard
when they are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or the fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this
code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and
whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in
relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration, or addition, or any change in occupancy.
(12) Improper occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which
are not designated or intended to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard.
(13) Improper demolition. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the partial demolition or
destruction of the building or structure.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-555. Imminent hazards.
The fire chief or police chief, with the concurrence of the building official, shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any
structure which in his or her opinion is unsafe due to hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to the structure's occupants.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-556. Owner responsibility.
(a) The owner of any premises within the city shall be responsible for maintaining the premises in compliance with the minimum
standards of this division. The standards of this division are intended to complement the requirements of any other applicable code or
ordinance of the city, and shall not be deemed to lower any more restrictive standard required by the codes at the time of original
construction or subsequent remodeling. The duty of an owner to maintain premises in compliance with this division is not affected by any
duty this division creates upon the tenants thereof, even if the owner has, by agreement, imposed upon the tenants the duty of maintaining
the premises and complying with this division.
(b) If a notice of violation or notice of condemnation has been posted in a conspicuous place on or about the structure affected by the
notice, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain such notice. In the event the notice fails to remain in a conspicuous place on
or about the affected structure, the city may replace the notice and bill the owner for the cost of posting notice. Failure to maintain posted
notice shall constitute a class C criminal offense.
(c) The owner shall not transfer condemned property without first providing the transferee a copy of the notice of violation and any
compliance order, and the transferee accepts in writing a receipt of the above documents and accepts the responsibility for the property.
Failure to do so shall constitute a class C criminal offense. It is a defense to prosecution if the transferee refuses to provide written
acknowledgment of the above documents.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-557. Remedies.
(a) The city may require the vacating, relocating of occupants, securing, nuisance abatement, repair of a building, or condemn a
building that is:
(1) Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare;
(2) Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and unsecured from
unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage
or could be entered or used by children; or
(3) Boarded up, fenced, or secured, but:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/648
(A) Constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building by
vagrants, children, or other uninvited persons.
(b) Costs borne by the city pursuant to this division shall be assessed against the property and shall constitute a lien against the property
in accordance with state law. The city manager or his or her designee shall cause a written notice of such imposition of a lien to be filed in
the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The amount of such debt shall accumulate interest at the rate
of ten (10) percent per annum from the date on which payment was due.
(c) In addition to the authority given above, the city may secure a building that the city manager or his or her designee determines:
(1) Violates the minimum standards; and
(2) Is unoccupied, or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building.
(d) For any building which the city secures to which subsection (c) applies, the city shall give notice to the owner, before the 11th day
after the date the building is secured, by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which
the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post
office address is unknown.
(e) The notice provided under subsection (d) must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure, or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing of the
building.
(f) A hearing shall be conducted at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to
the securement of the building if, within 30 days after the date the building is secured, the owner files with the city manager a written
request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted before the board of building standards within 20 days after the date the request is
filed.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13; Ord. No. 34-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-24-17)
Sec. 8-558. Notice of violation regarding condemned property.
(a) When the building official finds that any building, structure, or portion thereof is substandard or dilapidated, in violation of this
division, and should be condemned the building official shall issue to the owner a written notice of violation. Such notice shall include a
statement regarding presumption of ownership, and the city hereby adopts the process as stated in Texas Local Government Code section
54.005, and as amended.
(b) Such notice shall specify the conditions causing the violation, each ordinance provision that is violated, the corrective measures
required, and shall provide a reasonable time for such corrective measures to be commenced and completed.
(c) Upon the issuance of a notice of violation of this division, occupancy of any building or portion thereof in violation shall be
prohibited until corrective measures have been completed.
(d) No later than the thirtieth (30th) calendar day after receipt of the notice, the owner may submit to the building official, a written
response which describes a plan of action to correct or abate violations identified in the notice of violation. The plan shall include specific
actions to be taken by the owner, cost estimates for required repair work, and a specific completion date in which violations will be
corrected or abated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/648
(e) Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against taking any other action against the person, nor shall issuance of a notice
of violation be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the person.
(f) A notice of violation may be served either by personally serving the owner with written notice, or by mailing such notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested to the person's last known address as shown on the tax rolls of either the Taylor County Central
Appraisal District or the Jones County Appraisal District, and a copy of the notice of violation may be posted in a conspicuous place on
or about the structure affected by the notice. Notice of violation shall be deemed to have been served (3) calendar days after mailing.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-559. Appeal to the board of building standards.
(a) Any owner aggrieved by a decision of the building official may appeal the decision to the board of building standards. An appeal
shall be filed in the office of planning and development services, in writing, within ten (10) calendar days from the date service of the
notice of violation of a standard of this division. No appeal shall be considered that is filed after the ten (10) calendar-day period expires.
(b) Failure to appeal within such ten (10) day period shall make the determination and requirements of the building official final.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-560. Submission of cases to the board of building standards by the city.
The building official may place a condemned property on the agenda of a meeting of the board of building standards for consideration in
the event the building official has determined that the board should consider demolition or the imposition of civil penalties.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-561. Compliance agreement.
(a) Where the owner demonstrates the ability, resources and a reasonable plan of action commensurate with the action necessary to
comply with this division, the building official may enter into a compliance agreement with any owner that is not in compliance with this
division.
(b) The compliance agreement shall include a specific corrective plan of action to be taken by the property owner to correct all
violations of this division within a time period specified in the compliance agreement.
(c) A compliance agreement shall not be a bar against taking any other action against the owner, nor shall a compliance agreement be a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the owner.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-562. Notice of hearing before the board of building standards.
(a) Notice of hearing before the board of building standards shall be given:
(1) By personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each record owner of affected property; and
(2) To all other persons by posting a copy of the notice on a conspicuous place on or about the main structure on the
property affected by the hearing.
(b) Notice must be mailed and posted on or before the tenth (10th) calendar day before the date of the hearing. In addition, notice must
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality on one occasion on or before the tenth (10th) day before the date
fixed for the hearing.
(c) Notice shall state the date, time, and place of hearing and shall include a statement that the owner shall be required to submit at the
hearing proof of the scope of work, including cost estimates, that may be required to comply with this article and the time in calendar
days in which it will take to reasonably perform the work. The notice shall also inform the owner of his or her right to hire an attorney to
represent him or her at the hearing, his or her right to inspect the file on the property at the office of planning and development services
prior to the hearing, and his or her right to request the presence of city staff for the purpose of questioning at the hearing.
(d) Notice of hearing may additionally be filed in the official public records of real property in the county in which the affected
property is located. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined from a reasonable
search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the property and a description of the proceedings.
Such filing of notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such
interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceedings.
(e) The city must exercise due diligence to determine the identity and address of a property owner or lienholder to whom the city is
required to give notice. The city exercises such due diligence when it searches the following records:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/648
(1) County real property records of the county in which the property is located;
(2) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located;
(3) Records of the secretary of state and assumed name records of the county in which the property is located, if the
property owner, lienholder, or registered agent is a corporation, partnership, or other business association;
(4) Tax records of the municipality; and
(5) Utility records of the municipality.
(f) When a municipality mails a notice in accordance with this section to a property owner, lienholder, or registered agent and the
notice is returned, marked as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-563. Action of the board of building standards.
(a) Pursuant to Texas Local Government chapter 54, subchapter C and chapter 214, and as amended, the board of building standards is
hereby authorized, after proper notice and hearing to:
(1) Enforce this division, minimum standards for buildings and structures;
(2) Enforce ordinances relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates
breeding and living places for vermin; and
(3) Enforce ordinances relating to a building code condition, use or appearance of property.
(b) After notice and hearing the board of building standards may enter into the minutes any of the following findings:
(1) The property is substandard or dilapidated due to any condition listed in section 8-554. If the board makes a finding that
a property is substandard, the board shall reference in its finding each condition that exists to cause the property to be
substandard.
(2) The property should be demolished. If the board makes a finding that a property should be demolished, the board shall
reference in its finding each condition that exists to cause the property to be substandard and dangerous, as the standard is
described in section 8-554.
(c) After making findings the board of building standards may make any of the following orders:
(1) Order the vacating, relocating of occupants, securing, nuisance abatement or repair of a building that is:
a. Dilapidated or substandard;
b. Unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it
could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by
children;
c. Boarded up, fenced, or secured but, either constitutes a danger to the public even though it is secured from entry, or
the means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use as described in subsection b.
above;
d. In a condition caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that create breeding and living places
for vermin; or
e. In violation of the city's Code of Ordinances, including the Land Development Code, due to the condition, use, or
appearance of property is [sic].
(2) Order demolition pursuant to section 8-564;
(3) Order the repair or removal, within a fixed period, of violations of an ordinance and further order that the city may
repair or remove the violation if the board's order is not followed within the allotted time;
(4) Order the repair or removal of a nuisance, within a fixed period, of property found to be in violation of an ordinance
related to a building code or condition or use, or appearance of property;
(5) Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the city may recover pursuant to section 8-568;
(6) Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/648
(7) Order the entrance on private property to secure the removal of a condition if it is determined that a condition exists on
the property that constitutes a violation of this code; and
(8) Issue orders or directives to the city to enforce and carry out the lawful orders of the board of building standards.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-564. Demolition.
After notice, hearing, and appropriate findings, the board of building standards may order an owner to demolish a condemned structure
that is substandard and dangerous. Demolition shall be a remedy only in cases in which the board of building standards has found that a
condemned structure is so deteriorated or dilapidated or is in such ill-repair as to be a public nuisance in that it is a hazard to the public
health safety and welfare and repair of the structure would be unreasonable. In the event the owner fails to demolish pursuant to an order
of the board, the city may demolish or seek a court order to demolish.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-565. Time limits for repair, removal or demolition.
(a) An order may require that a building must be repaired, removed or demolished within thirty (30) days unless the owner establishes
at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days.
(b) If the board of building standards allows the owner more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board
shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner to secure the
property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
(c) The board of building standards shall not allow the owner more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove or demolish the building or
fully perform all work required to comply with the order of the board unless the owner executes a compliance agreement which requires
progress reports to the city and includes the specific corrective plan of action to be taken by the owner the within the time period as
specified by the board and written into the compliance agreement.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-566. Notice of findings and orders of the board of building standards.
(a) Findings and orders shall be recorded in the minutes of each meeting of the board of building standards. Within ten (10) days after
the meeting, findings and orders shall be filed in the office of the city secretary.
(b) Within ten (10) days after the date of the meeting, orders of the board of building standards shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation. The notice shall state the street address or legal description of each property, the date of the order(s), a statement
indicating the results of the order(s), and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order(s) may be obtained.
(c) Findings and orders of the board shall be delivered by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each record
owner of affected property to whom notice of the meeting was sent.
(d) Findings and orders of the board of building standards may additionally be filed in the official public records of real property in the
county in which the affected property is located.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-567. Criminal penalties.
(a) Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order of the board of building standards shall be deemed guilty of a class
C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day the violation continues.
(b) The imposition of criminal or civil penalties shall not stay any action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy or use of a structure or premises.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-568. Civil penalties.
(a) Civil penalties may be assessed by the board of building standards in amounts not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
day for each day a property is in noncompliance with an order of the board or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful
homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day the property owner is in violation, if the city proves:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/648
(1) The property owner was notified of the requirements of this division and the owner's need to comply with the
requirements; and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of the chapter or failed to take an action necessary
for compliance with this division.
(b) A determination of civil penalties made by the board of building standards is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence
of the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in accordance with the
established penalty.
(c) Civil penalties and expenses assessed herein shall constitute a personal liability of the property owner and a lien against the
property.
(d) All civil penalties shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum.
(e) A property owner against whom a civil penalty is assessed shall be given notice of such order pursuant to section 8-566, herein.
(f) Promptly after the imposition of a lien for the assessment of a civil penalty, the building official shall cause a written notice of such
imposition of a lien in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-569. Judicial review.
(a) Any owner jointly or severally aggrieved of an order of the board of building standards may file a verified petition in a Taylor or
Jones County District Court, as applicable:
(1) Setting forth that the decision of the board is illegal, either in whole or in part; and
(2) Specifying the grounds of the illegality.
(b) The petition must be filed by an owner within thirty (30) calendar days after a copy of the order is delivered to the owner
personally, by certified mail return receipt requested or by signature confirmation service.
(c) The order of the board of building standards becomes final thirty (30) days after a copy of the order is delivered to the owner.
(d) Costs may not be allowed against the municipality.
(e) The city may seek attorney's fees, costs and other expenses as allowed by state law.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Sec. 8-570. Civil action without board hearing.
(a) The city may bring suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties against the owner of property in violation of this division, or to
compel the demolition or repair of buildings or structures, as provided for by Texas Local Government Code chapter 54, subchapter B.,
and as amended.
(b) Filing a suit for civil penalties, injunctive relief, or other remedies shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking other action
against a violator.
(Ord. No. 54-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Secs. 8-571–8-580. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. RESIDENTIAL CODE*
Sec. 8-581. Adopted.
The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a residential code
pamphlet amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the residential code for the city, and is
hereby incorporated herein. The residential code pamphlet, along with the International Residential Code, are on file in the building
official's and city secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 31-2001, pt. 4(Exh. D), 10-11-01; Ord. No. 40-2005, pt. 4(Exh. D), 8-11-05; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. 4(Exh. D), 3-24-11; Ord.
No. 42-2014, pt. 4(Exh. D), 7-24-14)
Secs. 8-582–8-600. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/648
DIVISION 8. FUEL GAS CODE†
Sec. 8-601. Adopted.
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a fuel gas code pamphlet
amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the fuel gas code for the city, and is hereby
incorporated herein. The fuel gas code pamphlet, along with the International Fuel Gas Code, are on file in the building official's and city
secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 31-2001, pt. 5(Exh. E), 10-11-01; Ord. No. 40-2005, pt. 5(Exh. E), 8-11-05; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. 5(Exh. E), 3-24-11; Ord. No.
42-2014, pt. 5(Exh. E), 7-24-14)
Sec. 8-602. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. ENERGY CODE
Sec. 8-603. Adopted.
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with an energy
conservation code pamphlet amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the energy
conservation code for the City of Abilene, and is hereby incorporated herein. The energy conservation code pamphlet, along with the
International Energy Conservation Code, are on file in the building official's and city secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 44-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-21-02; Ord. No. 42-2014, pt. 6(Exh. F), 7-24-14)
Secs. 8-604–8-611. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sec. 8-612. Adopted.
The International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with an existing
building code pamphlet amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the existing building
code for the city, and is hereby incorporated herein. The existing building code pamphlet, along with the International Existing Building
Code, are on file in the building official's and city secretary's offices.
(Ord. No. 35-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-18-04; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. 6(Exh. F), 3-24-11; Ord. No. 42-2014, pt. 7(Exh. G), 7-24-14)
Sec. 8-613. Penalties for violation.
Any person violating the provisions of the existing building code adopted by the provisions of this article, or any amendment thereto,
shall be punished as provided by section 1-9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 35-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-18-04)
Secs. 8-614–8-700. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. MOVING BUILDINGS*
DIVISION 1. PERMIT AND GENERAL CONDITIONS
Sec. 8-701. Route and permit requirement and exceptions.
No person shall move any house, building, structure of any kind, or any commodity over, along or across any street, highway, alley or
public way, unless such route is expressly approved and a permit is issued by the city building official.
Exceptions:
No permit or route approval shall be required for:
(1) Manufactured housing as defined and provided for Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated article 6701 1/2(Vernon
Supplement 1993), or as amended, when operated on state highways or streets or roads of the City of Abilene.
(2) The following, when operated on state highways, including those state highways that pass through the City of Abilene:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/648
a. Super heavy loads, as defined and provided for by the Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated articles 6701a and
6701d-11, sections 3 and 5 (Vernon Supplement 1993), or as amended.
b. Portable buildings, as defined and provided for by Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated article 6701a-2 (Vernon
Supplement 1993), or as amended.
(3) Portable buildings that do not exceed a loaded height of fourteen (14) feet, or a maximum loaded width of fourteen (14)
feet, or a maximum loaded length of forty (40) feet, and are only moved over city street or roads.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-702. Application.
Before a permit is granted under this division, the person desiring such permit shall make an application, in writing, on forms furnished
by the building inspection department.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-703. Fee.
Fees shall be assessed according to city council resolution.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-704. Payment of taxes required.
No permit shall be issued to move any house, building or other structure from any location until the applicant furnishes the building
official with certificates from all applicable taxing authorities showing that ad valorem taxes on the structure and land have been paid.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-705. Notice to utilities companies; removal and replacement of utility wires.
Before a permit shall be issued, under this article, authorizing any proposed moving or relocating and before the moving is begun, if the
loading height is over fifteen (15) feet, the permittee shall notify each utility company which has wires and poles or other instruments
used as an electrical generating, transmission, or distribution system, or as a communication system, located on, over or across any street
in the city along, over or across which the proposed moving operation is routed. Within forty-eight (48) hours (Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excluded) after the permittee shall have notified any such utility company of the issuance by the building official of a permit for
the moving of a house, building or structure, the utility company shall cut, move and repair all wires, cables, poles, or other instruments
necessary to be altered in the furtherance of the proposed moving operation. The permittee requesting such services on the part of the
utilities companies shall pay to such utilities companies a sum of money, in cash, sufficient to defray the actual expense of performing
any such services, including all repairs necessary to restore such instruments as they were; provided, that no charge shall be made to the
permittee for the removal or replacement of wires across streets, alleys or other public ways lower than the required minimum height set
up by the electrical ordinances of the city. Such payment may be required to the utilities companies in advance. It shall be the duty of
such utility company to make all necessary repairs and alterations, mentioned in this section, in a safe and workmanlike manner and
restore its utility system to a safe condition.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-706. Issuance.
When all facts and information and approvals, required by this article have been furnished by the applicant for a permit under this article
to the building official, the building official shall grant issuance of the permit.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-707. Inspections; completion of certain work required.
No building or structure shall be moved from a lot, or relocated on a lot, until a permit card has been placed on the side of the building or
structure to be moved.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-708. Obligation of permittee.
When a permit is issued for the moving of a house, building, structure, or other commodity, the permittee shall do all of the following:
(a) Remove all floor slabs, foundations, footings, sidewalks, fences and posts; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/648
(b) Clear and remove all loose tree limbs, appliances and all other personalty, trash, weeds, tall grass and other debris,
within twenty-five (25) feet of the building perimeter; and
(c) Fill in all holes or depressions, remaining at the building site, and level the area so as to facilitate future mowing
maintenance; and
(d) Mow the grass; and
(e) Plug all sewer lines with concrete; and
(f) Complete all of the above within thirty (30) days of actual moving of building or structure from the property.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Sec. 8-709. Appeal of denial.
Should the building official refuse to issue any permit under this division, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to district court
within ten (10) days after the building official notifies the applicant that the permit will not be granted. Otherwise the action of the
building official shall be final.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93)
Secs. 8-710–8-717. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BOND
Sec. 8-718. Bond required.
A bond is required in accordance with section 8-16.
(Ord. No. 41-1993, pt. 1, 8-26-93; Ord. No. 17-2014, pt. 2 (Exh. B), 3-27-14)
Secs. 8-719–8-740. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. INDOOR SHOOTING RANGES–DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION*
Sec. 8-741. Special considerations.
(a) Range. The range must be totally enclosed.
(b) Length. The length of the range must be sufficiently great that the shooters will never be closer than thirty-five (35) feet to the
bullet trap (as measured by the longest projection of the bullet trap upon the floor) and sufficient for proper door placement as defined
later.
(c) Width. The width must be sufficient to provide three-foot minimum width shooting points for ranges with shooting separators and
five-foot minimum width points for those without separators. (There is no maximum width.)
(d) Height. The height at the firing line must be eight-foot minimum from floor to ceiling. (The purpose of this requirement is to
discourage attempts to build ranges in spaces that cannot be responsibly equipped and supervised.)
(e) Downrange doors. There shall be no downrange doors into occupied areas. Downrange shall be understood to be from a point threefoot
behind the firing line to the bullet trap. If there is more than one firing line the most distant one from the trap governs.
There may be downrange doors into unoccupied areas if human egress is not possible. (This provides for electrical and plumbing
cabinets, etc. Of course, it is prudent that these be protected.)
There may be downrange doors into normally unoccupied areas that permit human egress providing that they are equipped with electrical
safety devices that will provide an alarm to the firing line if the area is occupied and that will provide an alarm in the area if any of the
ordinary range functions are commenced (turning on target lights, target systems, etc.). (This makes possible the use of storage areas that
can only be reached through the range.)
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.1), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-742. Windows.
There shall be no windows into contiguous areas not controlled by the owner. Downrange windows shall be governed as stipulated for
downrange doors.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/648
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.3), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-743. Ballistical security.
If the range is situated so that an escaped bullet cannot fall into or pass through occupiable areas there is no ballistical security
requirement for the structure separating the range from such areas. The range design manuals of the regular military services shall govern
the amount of secure area required in such cases.
(1) Earth separation. Earth separation of three (3) feet or greater is sufficient to eliminate any ballistical security
requirement of the structure in that particular direction.
(2) Critical zones. Critical zones must be penetration proof for the heaviest ammunition that might be used on the range
fired point blank into it (at ninety (90) degrees to the surface). Bullet traps are required to be installed within the critical zones,
in accordance with section 8-748.
The horizontal critical zone is any surface that a shooter in any shooting point can hit from forty-five (45) degrees downrange on either
side to twenty (20) degrees behind him on either side.
The vertical critical zone is any surface that a shooter in any shooting point can hit when facing downrange from straight down to straight
up.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.4), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-744. Constructional requirements.
(a) Wall construction.
(1) In the critical zone. Walls in the critical zone may be standard grade concrete blocks with their cavities filled with
crushed rock of three-fourths ( 3/4) inch or smaller screen. Sand is not acceptable. Concrete of any density is acceptable as the
fill. Other suitable construction are: Four (4) degrees of reinforced concrete, one-fourth ( 1/4) inch of mild steel over an
appropriate supporting surface, single layer of face brick.
(2) In the secondary zone. Walls in the secondary zone may be standard grade concrete blocks without filled cavities. Other
suitable constructions are: Three (3) inches of reinforced concrete, one-eighth ( 1/8) inch of mild steel over an appropriate
supporting surface. Wood planking, plywood and gypsum board may be used in sufficient thicknesses to be ballistically
equivalent, but may result in excessive maintenance.
(3) Baffles. Wall baffles may be used in lieu of the above constructions for either zone. When used there is no ballistical
security requirement for the walls. (The baffles are vertical steel members angled out from the side walls.) When used the
following requirements must be met:
a. The baffles must shelter the wall so that misdirected shots from all shooting points are interrupted by the baffles
before striking the wall.
b. The baffles must be so angled that no bullet may hit any baffle at a greater angle than forty-five (45) degrees.
c. The baffle steel must be of sufficient thickness that it is not dented by the heaviest ammunition if left bare. Or if
covered with a wood surface it must be of sufficient thickness that even if dented its structural integrity is maintained.
(Note–See later requirements for wood facings.)
(b) Floor construction. In the critical zone floors shall be reinforced concrete of four (4) inches minimum thickness. The minimum
thickness for the other floors is determined by the structural needs of the building and exceeds that required for ballistical security. In new
construction the floor shall be graded to a downrange floor drain.
(c) Ceiling and roof construction.
(1) Exposed slab ceiling or roof. Exposed slab ceiling or roof must be governed by the same requirements as floors. If the
bottom surface of the slab is not smooth the following shall govern.
(2) Baffles.
a. Ceiling baffles must be provided to protect any item that may interrupt the downrange travel of bullets from an
angle of forty-five (45) degrees to the vertical ahead of the shooter to the bullet trap.
1. If the ceiling baffles protect the entire overhead area (each baffle starting its protection where the previous one
left off) then there is no ballistical security requirement for the ceiling or roof above.
2. The baffle construction must otherwise comply with the requirements for wall baffles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/648
b. Columns, pilasters, exposed piping and other protuberances downrange shall be protected from damage and
prevented from causing ricochets.
1. Angled steel plates may be used for all protuberances. The requirements for wall baffles shall govern.
2. Pilasters may be faired to the wall with concrete so that the angle to the wall of the surface of the fairing
concrete is thirty (30) degrees or less.
(d) Plumbing (for flushing out the unburned gunpowder).
(1) In new construction there shall be a floor drain downrange and a hose bib in the range area.
(2) In existing construction the floor drain may be waived if a slop sink is located within fifty (50) feet of the range.
Wood facings are not allowed for protection of surfaces unless they are separated from any hard surface (steel or masonry) behind them
by an air space of at least one inch.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.5), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-745. Noise attenuation.
(a) The maximum noise that may escape the range into areas not controlled by the owner is forty (40) dB.
(b) Sufficient acoustical treatment shall be provided to reduce the sound level from magnum ammunition by ten (10) dB minimum.
(c) Acoustical materials subject to splaying (i.e., the sprayed on type) shall not be used.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.6), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-746. Ventilation.
(a) The permissible exposure to toxic lead products of gunfire shall be governed by current U.S. Department of Labor standards.
(b) There must be positive flow of air past the shooter in a downrange direction, with all exhaust downrange.
(c) The minimum operating temperature shall be fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit and the maximum ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.7), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-747. Lighting.
(a) There shall be general illumination in the firing line area of thirty (30) MFC as measured at the floor. The minimum downrange
general illumination shall be ten (10) MFC at the floor.
(b) At least one circuit must be on dual switches so that it may be turned on from the door.
(c) There shall be emergency lighting that will automatically illuminate if the lights fail. This must be a standby power.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.8), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-748. Equipment selection.
(a) Generally. The bullet trap shall be from an established manufacturer of range equipment with five (5) years or more successful
experience, and for which evidence is submitted of successful applications in other ranges of the same general type.
(1) The bullet trap shall be an area type, i.e., a trap that covers the entire butts end of the range.
(2) The butts end of the range is defined as the total space between the two (2) side walls and from the floor to the sheltered
area created by the ceiling system; or in the case of a flat slab roof, up to that roof.
All ranges shall have physical separation between the shooting points unless positive reasons are established to show that this cannot be
provided.
The separators shall be structurally sound and functional for the type of range. The separators shall be so designed that any misdirected
shot sixty (60) degrees to the right or left of a shooter that hits any portion of the stall will be deflected downrange without further
interruption to its line of travel that may cause ricochet back towards the shooters.
(b) Target retrieval system.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/648
(1) A mechanical means for transporting the targets between the firing line and the one or more target lines shall be
provided.
(2) All portions of the target retrieval system(s) that may be hit by a shooter(s) from an angle of sixty (60) degrees to the
vertical to its furthest end are to be armored to prevent damage and suitably angled to redirect the bullets downrange. (This
includes the target carrying car, any tracks that may be used, and all supporting hardware.)
(3) If electrically powered the target system shall not have any high voltage (over fifty (50) volt) wiring extending
downrange of the firing line; and all metal parts shall be earth grounded.
(4) Any controls beyond the shooting point (i.e., to a rangemaster's control console) shall be on low voltage circuits.
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.9), 6-23-88)
Sec. 8-749. Special requirements.
Rifle ranges (centerfire rifles, not required for rimfire rifles). The minimum ballistical security requirements shall be increased to six (6)
inches of reinforced concrete in the critical zone and four (4) inches elsewhere. (Applies to all separating surfaces except those backed by
earth or an adequate secure area.)
(Ord. No. 31-1988, pt. 1(Exh. A, § 8.10), 6-23-88)
Chapter 9
COURTS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL*
Sec. 9-1. Purpose.
The municipal court shall exist for the disposition of misdemeanor criminal matters arising within its jurisdiction under the laws of the
state or this Code or any other ordinances of the city.
(Code 1965, § 10-6; Ord. No. 136-1983, pt. 1(3), 12-15-83; Ord. No. 14-1992, § 1, 4-23-92)
Sec. 9-2. Created.
There is hereby created a municipal court in and for the city.
Sec. 9-3. Jurisdiction.
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the city with the power to hear and determine all cases of violation of this Code, the
ordinances of the city, and all other cases of which municipal courts are given jurisdiction by state law.
Sec. 9-4. Deputy clerks–Appointment.
There shall be appointed such number of deputy municipal court clerks as may be necessary for the municipal court to properly perform
its functions.
The appointment of deputy municipal court clerks shall be by the clerk of the municipal court, with approval by the city manager.
(Code 1965, § 10-11)
State law references: Municipal court clerks, deputies, election, duties, etc., Vernon's Ann. Civ. Sts., art. 1200; vacancy in office, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Sts., art. 1199.
Sec. 9-5. Same–Powers and duties.
The deputy clerks of the municipal court shall perform all the duties and have all the powers bestowed upon clerks of municipal courts by
state law. Any clerk or deputy clerk so appointed may act as the official clerk of the municipal court and perform all acts incident to such
office.
Sec. 9-5.1. City marshal–Authority.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/648
(a) City marshals shall serve as peace officers and have full police authority in the exercise of their assigned duties.
(b) City marshals are paid law enforcement officers for the purpose of qualifying for survivor's assistance benefits under the provisions
of article 6228f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes or any other applicable statutes.
(Ord. No. 4-1982, pt. 1, 1-28-82)
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 4-1982, adopted Jan. 28, 1982, amended the 1965 Code with the addition of new §§ 10-22 and 10-23. At the discretion of the
editor, said provisions have been codified as §§ 9-5.1 and 9-5.2 of this Code.
Sec. 9-5.2. Same–Duties.
The city marshals, acting under the direction of the municipal court clerk, deputy court clerk or municipal judge shall perform the
following duties:
(1) Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process issuing out of the municipal courts;
(2) Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and legal process as determined by the municipal court clerk or deputy
court clerk;
(3) Maintain the warrant list and physical warrants in the court office;
(4) Collect and receipt money for bonds;
(5) Perform such duties as delegated by the municipal court clerk, deputy court clerk or municipal judge.
(Ord. No. 4-1982, pt. 1, 1-28-82)
Note: See the editor's note following § 9-5.2.
Sec. 9-6. Seal.
The municipal court shall have a seal having engraved thereon a star of five (5) points in the center and words “Municipal Court in
Abilene, Texas” around the margin thereof, the impress of which shall be attached to all proceedings, except subpoenas, issued out of said
court, and shall be used to authenticate the official acts of the clerk and of the judge, where he is authorized or required to use the seal of
office.
Sec. 9-7. Rules of practice and procedure.
The rules of practice and procedure as prescribed by state law governing trials in the state justice of the peace courts shall govern the
procedure and practice of the municipal court; and the city council may prescribe such additional rules of practice and procedure as may
not be inconsistent with state law.
Sec. 9-8. Notice to appear tickets.
(a) Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of law punishable by a fine in the municipal courts of the city, the arresting officer
may prepare a written notice to appear which
shall require the person to appear in municipal court within ten(10) days to answer the charges listed and shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name of the person arrested.
(2) Address of the person arrested.
(3) Driver's license or other identification.
(b) The following information may be included for informational purposes, but shall not nullify any promise to appear:
(1) Date of violation.
(2) Place of violation.
(3) Offense charged.
(4) Name of arresting officer.
This subsection shall not preclude the filing of any additional charges nor the filing of another offense.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/648
(c) Notice to appear, incorrect name and address:
(1) The above notice to appear shall only be a promise to appear and is not an admission of guilt.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the arrested person to violate his written notice to appear in municipal court, regardless of the
disposition of the charges upon which he was originally arrested.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued a notice to appear to give the arresting officer other than his true
name and correct address.
(d) The above procedure shall not be applicable:
(1) When the person arrested demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate.
(2) When the arrested person shall refuse to sign the notice to appear or furnish any of the information in subsection (a).
(3) When the offense is a violation of the traffic laws or is covered by a specific provision of state law dictating the
following of a procedure contrary to the above subsections.
(e) The above procedures in subsections (a), (b) and (c) shall not be mandatory upon the arresting officer. The arresting officer shall
have authority to consider all the circumstances relevant to the arrest and any police departmental regulations or policies in choosing
whether or not to issue a notice to appear.
(Code 1965, § 19-42; Ord. No. 136-1983, pt. 1(3), 12-15-83)
Sec. 9-8.1. Citations for violation of city codes and state laws.
(a) When any person is found in violation of any provision of the codes adopted by the City of Abilene or of the laws of the State of
Texas, an agent or employee of the City of Abilene may, if the person agrees to sign a citation, issue a citation which shall require the
person to appear in court within the time provided on the citation. The citation shall give the person at least ten (10) days to answer any
charge of violation of any provision of the codes adopted by the city.
(b) Signing the citation shall only be a promise to appear and is not an admission of guilt.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being issued any citation, to give the City of Abilene's agent or employee a false name or
address.
(d) It shall be unlawful to fail to appear in municipal court within the time provided in the citation, provided the citation gave the
person at least ten (10) days to answer any charge of violation of any provision of the codes adopted by the city.
(e) The following information shall be contained on the citation:
(1) Name of the defendant;
(2) Address of the defendant;
(3) Driver's license or other identification.
The following information may be included for informational purposes, but shall not nullify any promise to appear:
(i) Date of violation;
(ii) Place of violation;
(iii) Offense charged;
(iv) Name of person issuing citation.
Additional or other charges shall not be precluded by the issuance of citation.
(Ord. No. 10-1987, pt. 1, 3-19-87)
Sec. 9-9. Compensation for jurors.
Each juror sworn to serve in a case pending in the municipal court shall be entitled to receive five dollars ($5.00) in each case in which he
actually serves as such juror, to be paid out of the city treasury. Before any juror shall be entitled to receive his fee as provided in this
section, he shall make an affidavit before the clerk of the municipal court that he actually served in such case as a juror, and the clerk shall
keep a record of all such fees paid by him, on file.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/648
(Code 1965, § 10-14; Ord. No. 136-1983, pt. 1(3), 12-15-83)
Sec. 9-10. Municipal court building security fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to Article 102.017 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The municipal court of the City of Abilene, Texas (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal
court building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by
the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
(c) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so
collected and paid over to the treasury of the city, shall be segregated in the fund.
(d) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or
buildings housing the municipal court of the city. “Security devices and/or services” shall include any and all items described in Article
102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(e) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ord. No. 41-1996, pt. 1, 8-8-96)
Sec. 9-11. Municipal court child safety fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court child safety fund pursuant to article 102.014 of the Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) The municipal court of the City of Abilene, Texas is hereby authorized and required to assess a $5.00 fee on each parking violation
finding of liability in municipal court.
(c) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee assessed under this section as if it were a fine in a case.
(d) The clerk of the court clerk shall pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Abilene, who shall deposit the fee into the child
safety fund.
(e) The child safety fund shall be used for the purpose of funding a school crossing guard program so long as the City of Abilene
operates one.
(f) In the event the City of Abilene ceases to operate a school crossing guard program, or if the money collected in the fund exceeds the
amount necessary to fund the school crossing guard program, the City of Abilene may either deposit the money in an interest-bearing
account or expend it for programs designed to enhance child safety, health, or nutrition, including child abuse prevention and intervention
and drug and alcohol abuse prevention or as allowed under article 102.014 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(g) The child safety fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Abilene, Texas.
(Ord. No. 5-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-25-10)
Secs. 9-12–9-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 9-21. Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund.
There is hereby reauthorized a municipal court technology fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to be
maintained as allowed there.
(Ord. No. 38-2000, pt. 1, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 5-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-25-10)
Sec. 9-22. Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection.
(a) The municipal court of the City of Abilene is authorized and required to assess a municipal court technology fee in the amount of
$4.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to
a separate assessment of the technology fee. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/648
(b) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Abilene, who shall deposit the fee
into the municipal court technology fund.
(Ord. No. 38-2000, pt. 2, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 5-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-25-10)
Sec. 9-23. Designated use of the fund and administration.
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the City of Abilene,
Texas, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Abilene.
(Ord. No. 38-2000, pt. 3, 9-7-00; Ord. No. 5-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-25-10)
Chapter 10
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Reserved.
Editor's note: Section 10-1, “Arson reward,” has been deleted pursuant to Ordinance 10-1984, pt. 1(1), adopted Jan. 26, 1984. Said former section derived from
Code 1965, § 12-8.
Sec. 10-2. Powers and duties of chief of fire department.
The chief of the fire department shall have supervision of the fire department of the city.
The chief of the fire department shall be charged with the duties of superintending and directing the extinguishing of fires. In connection
therewith, he shall have the power and duty to keep away from the vicinity of any fire all idle, disorderly and suspicious persons and to
control and compel all officers of the city and other persons to aid in the extinguishing of fires and the preservation of property exposed to
danger thereat, and in preventing goods from being stolen; and to that end the chief of the fire department is granted the powers of a peace
officer.
(Code 1965, § 12-11)
Editor's note: Ordinance 98-1984, pt. 2, adopted Sept. 27, 1984, provided that the fire and police chiefs are hereby authorized to prepare such departmental rules as
may be necessary subject to approval by the city manager.
Sec. 10-3. Authority to destroy building on fire or likely to communicate fire.
When any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief or acting chief of the fire department to direct such building or any
other building which he may deem hazardous and likely to take fire and to communicate fire to other buildings, to be torn down, blown
up or otherwise destroyed.
(Code 1965, § 12-15)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/648
Secs. 10-4–10-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 10-16. Office created.
The office of fire marshal is hereby created in and for the city.
Secs. 10-17–10-19. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ordinance 1-1990, pt. 2, adopted Jan. 25, 1990, repealed §§ 10-17 and 10-19. Such sections, which bore no history notes, pertained to the
independency of the fire marshal's office and to the appointment of a fire marshal by the city manager. Sec. 10-18 was nonsubstantive.
Sec. 10-20. Taking of testimony generally.
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause
the same to be reduced to writing.
(Code 1965, § 12-13)
Sec. 10-21. Duty to investigate fires.
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been
destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such
investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire.
(Code 1965, § 12-13)
Secs. 10-22, 10-23. Reserved.
Sec. 10-24. Summon witnesses, obtain evidence, oaths.
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of
this chapter subject to inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent
thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses
before him.
(Code 1965, § 12-13)
Sec. 10-25. Private investigations, separate witnesses.
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those
required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart
from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.
Sec. 10-26. Duty when evidence indicates arson.
If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt
to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to
be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such
evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material
testimony taken in the case.
(Code 1965, § 12-13)
Sec. 10-27. Misconduct of witnesses.
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who
fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous
conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give
testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of
the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.
Sec. 10-28. Right of entry.
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him
by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and
premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/648
(Code 1965, § 12-14)
Sec. 10-29. Pre-fire planning and fire safety inspection of premises.
(a) The fire marshal, shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings
and premises within the city.
(b) Pre-fire plan examination. The fire chief, or other fire department personnel under his direction, shall have the right to annually or
more often, enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto, for the purpose of recommending building safety precautions, and updating
content, and contact information. A fire safety inspection may be substituted for a pre-fire plan examination.
(c) Fire safety inspection. The fire marshal, or other certified fire inspector under his direction, shall have the right to annually or more
often, enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. A pre-fire plan examination may be substituted for the fire safety inspection.
(Code 1965, § 12-12; Ord. No. 37-2011, pt. 1(EXH. A), 9-22-11)
Sec. 10-30. Correction of dangerous conditions.
Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition, or for any cause is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied
that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges,
furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected,
or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum,
gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes or combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions
which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he
shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said
building or premises; provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5)
days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked within
fourteen (14) days, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant.
(Code 1965, § 12-12)
Sec. 10-31. Record of fires.
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires occurring within the city, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances,
including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article.
(Code 1965, § 12-13)
Sec. 10-32. Reserved.
Sec. 10-33. Monthly report.
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal, with copies to the city manager and city council, all
existing hazardous conditions together with separate reports on each fire in the city during the month.
Secs. 10-34–10-45. Reserved.
Editor's note: Former § 10-34 pertained to the powers and duties of the fire marshal at fires as derived from the 1965 Code, § 12-16, and was repealed by Ordinance
1-1990, pt. 2, adopted Jan. 25, 1990. Secs. 10-35–10-45 were nonsubstantive.
ARTICLE III. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 10-46. Adopted.
(a) The International Fire Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with a fire code pamphlet
amending and supplementing that code, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference, as the fire code for the City of Abilene, and is here
by incorporated herein. The fire code pamphlet, along with the International Fire Code, are on file in the fire marshal's and city secretary's
offices.
(b) Any cross-reference to other codes contained herein shall be construed to mean those codes as adopted by the City of Abilene and
amended by local ordinance.
(c) Any cross-reference to specific state agencies tasked with duties or oversight under the International Fire Code shall be construed to
mean the agency in the State of Texas then tasked with the duties or oversight referenced, even if such agency might change from time to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/648
time.
(Ord. No. 85-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 8-1987, pt. 1, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 13-1990, pt. 1, 4-12-90; Ord. No. 16-1992, pt. 1, 4-23-92;
Ord. No. 11-1995, pt. 1, 3-9-95; Ord. No. 7-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-14-02; Ord. No. 17-2011, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-24-11; Ord. No. 03-2017, pt.
1(Exh. A), 1-26-17)
Sec. 10-47. Amendments.
The fire code adopted by the provisions of this article has been amended by the city, such amendments and deletions as set out in
Attachment “A” are hereby adopted, being on file with the code in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 85-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 8-1987, pt. 1, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 16-1992, pt. 1, 4-23-92; Ord. No. 11-1995, pt. 1, 3-9-95; Ord.
No. 7-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-14-02; Ord. No. 14-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-11-02; Ord. No. 03-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-26-17)
Editor's note: Formerly, provisions derived from Ordinance 77-1983, pt. 1, adopted July 14, 1983, which pertained to references to the “fire chief” in the 1979
Uniform Fire Code had been included as § 10-47.1. Such section has been deleted as being superseded by §§ 10-46 and 10-47.
Sec. 10-48. Enforcement.
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the fire marshal's office of the city.
(Code 1965, § 12-21)
Sec. 10-49. Modification.
The fire marshal shall have power to modify any provisions of the code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code;
provided, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire marshal thereon, shall be entered upon the records of his department
and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Code 1965, § 12-22)
Sec. 10-50. Appeals.
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision appealed.
(Code 1965, § 12-23)
Sec. 10-51. Penalties.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city,
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Code 1965, § 12-24)
Sec. 10-52. Burning paper, etc., in streets.
No person shall burn paper or trash or miscellaneous waste of any kind in the streets or alleys of the city.
(Code 1965, § 12-5)
Sec. 10-53. Accumulation or storage of waste combustible matter.
No person shall accumulate, allow to be accumulated or store or allow to be stored on any premises within the city more than forty (40)
bales of loose cotton burrs, cotton waste or any other waste combustible matter. Any such combustible matter stored under this section
shall be stored in a metal, fireproof burr hopper or metal-lined enclosure equipped with suitable fire prevention and control devices,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/648
including adequate water supply and hoses or sprinklers capable of extinguishing any accidental fires therein. In no case shall such waste
combustible matter be allowed to accumulate to such extent as to create or cause a danger of fires.
Such waste material shall not be disposed of by burning.
(Code 1965, § 12-6)
Sec. 10-54. Blocking aisles, passageways, exits, etc., in theaters, auditoriums, etc.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any public theater, moving picture show, exhibition or public amusement which
is held in a building in the city, to place chairs, seats or other obstructions in the aisles or public passageways of the auditorium or
exhibition hall, or to permit the same to be and remain in such aisles or passageways during the performance of such show or exhibition,
or while people are assembled in the building, or entering or leaving the same. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or operator of
such place of public amusement to lock or latch any public exit door of such building, or permit the same to be locked or latched, during
such show or performance or until after patrons have left the building or to fasten the door in any manner so that it cannot be easily
opened from the inside of the building.
The fire marshal, chief of police or any police officer, shall at all times be permitted to enter such buildings to inspect the safety of the
same, and they may summarily remove all obstructions in aisles and passageways, and remove locks, latches or fastenings to exit doors
which prevent the easy exit of patrons of such shows or exhibitions from such buildings.
(Code 1965, § 12-3)
Secs. 10-55–10-79. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SMOKING RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 10-80. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Improve and protect the public's health by eliminating smoking in public places and places of employment;
(2) Promote the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and
(3) Recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the choice to smoke.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-81. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this division, shall be construed as defined in this section:
Bar means an area that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A “bar” includes those facilities located within a restaurant,
hotel, motel or other similar transient occupancy establishment and those establishments that allow guests to bring their own alcoholic
beverages for consumption on premises. For purposes of this division, a bar includes any place where alcohol is consumed, whether
purchased on or brought to the premises.
Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making
purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.
Electronic cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which
provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substance, and the use or inhalation which simulates the smoking of a tobacco cigarette, pipe or
cigars. “Electronic cigarette” includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or under any other similar product name or descriptor. The
term electronic cigarette does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that may be specifically approved by United States U.S.
Food and Drug Administration as a nicotine delivery device.
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or non-profit entity, which employs the services
of one or more individual persons.
Enclosed Area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or
passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the
ceiling or are not solid.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/648
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms,
employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is a “place of employment” if it is used as a child care, adult day care or health
care facility.
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof
used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent,
or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and
management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted
an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. section 501.
Private place means any enclosed area to which the public is not invited or in which the public is not permitted, including but not limited
to, personal residences, private clubs or personal automobiles. A privately-owned business, open to the public, is not a “private place.”
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to,
banks, educational facilities, health facilities, laundromats, public transportation and affiliated facilities, reception areas, production and
marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores and malls, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a
“public place.”
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public
school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in
which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. For purposes of this division, other products that are merely incidental means not exceeding ten percent
(10%) of gross sales. Sales of incidental products shall not include the sale of alcohol regardless of percentage of total gross sales.
Service line means any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such
service involves the exchange of money.
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, or plant in any manner or in any form.
Sports arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic
competition, or witness sports events.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-82. Prohibition of smoking in public places.
(a) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places, as well as those outdoor areas designated in sections 10-84 and 10-85,
within the city, including, but not limited to, the following places:
(1) Elevators.
(2) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other common-use areas.
(3) Buses, bus terminals, taxicabs, train stations, airports and other facilities and means of public transit under the authority
of the city, as well as ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities.
(4) Service lines.
(5) Retail stores, shopping malls and restaurants.
(6) All enclosed areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses, including but not limited to,
attorneys' offices and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels.
(7) Bars.
(8) Galleries, libraries, and museums.
(9) Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other
similar performance, except that performers may smoke when the smoking is part of a stage production.
(10) Indoor sports arenas and convention halls.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/648
(11) Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any board,
council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state
during such time as a public meeting is in progress.
(12) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals,
clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, and dentists' offices.
(13) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities,
nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities.
(14) Polling places.
(15) Bingo facilities.
(16) Adult entertainment enterprises.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-83. Prohibition of smoking in places of employment.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free place of employment for all employees.
(b) Each employer having any enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement and maintain a written
smoking policy, which shall contain the following requirements:
(1) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment without exception. This includes
common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical
facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.
(2) Additionally, smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of not less than 20 feet outside entrances, operable
windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited.
(c) The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within four (4) weeks of its adoption.
(d) All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-84. Prohibition of smoking at public outdoor events.
Smoking shall be prohibited at all public outdoor events, including seating areas for use by spectators. (Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A),
12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-85. Reasonable distance.
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of not less than 20 feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems
of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. (Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-86. Application of article to city-owned facilities.
All facilities, including zoos, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the city, shall be
subject to the provisions of this division. City-owned facilities shall not be construed to include private boating on city lakes. (Ord. No.
69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-87. Exemptions from prohibition.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this division to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking
restrictions of this division:
(1) Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility.
(2) Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that no more
than twenty percent (20%) of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same
floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this division. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional
nonsmoking rooms.
(3) Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more
persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/648
that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this division.
(4) Outdoor areas at places of employment except those covered in sections 10-84 and 10-85 and subsection (b), below.
(5) Retail tobacco stores:
a. In stand alone physical facilities or other retail space provided that smoke from the subject store does not infiltrate
areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this division; and
b. Where sales of incidental products shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of total gross sales; sales of incidental
products shall not include the sale of alcohol regardless of percentage of total gross sales; and
c. Where no alcohol is consumed on the premises.
(6) Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. This
exemption shall not apply to any organization that is established for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this division.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any public place or
place of employment described in this section may declare the entire establishment to be non-smoking.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-88. Posting of signs.
(a) The owner, manager or other person having control of a public place or place of employment or other area where smoking is
prohibited by this division shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating “NO SMOKING” or displaying the international “No
Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with red bar across it). The signs
shall have bold lettering of not less than 1 inch in height and must be posted at each entrance and within the building or other areas where
smoking is prohibited.
(b) All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be limited in facilities to that required for the enforcement of extinguishing of
smoking materials in public places and places of employment.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-89. Public health authority program.
The public health authority shall promote the purposes and requirements of this division to the public affected by it, and guide owners,
operators and managers in their compliance with it. Such promotion may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and
individuals explaining the provisions of this division. (Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-
14)
Sec. 10-90. Enforcement.
(a) Enforcement of this division shall be by the public health authority or designee, environmental enforcement officers, building
official or designee, city firefighters, peace officers, code enforcement officers and the city manager or designee.
(b) Notice of the provisions set forth in this division shall be given to all applicants for a certificate of occupancy or any other license to
operate a business in the city.
(c) Any person may register a complaint under this division to initiate enforcement with any agency or official designated herein.
(d) The public health authority or its designee, building inspections division and the fire department shall, while an establishment is
undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this division.
(e) Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this division shall be responsible for informing
persons violating this division of the provisions.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-91. Non-retaliation.
No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or
customer because such employee, applicant or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this division. (Ord.
No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-92. Violations and penalties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/648
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other person having control of a public place or place of employment or other area
where smoking is prohibited by this division to fail to comply with all of its provisions.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this division.
(c) Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as set forth in section
1-9 of this code.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-93. Possession, purchase, consumption or receipt of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine by minors
prohibited.
(a) A person who is younger than 18 years of age commits an offense if the individual:
(1) Possesses, purchases, consumes or accepts an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine; or
(2) Falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older by displaying proof of age that is false, fraudulent or
not actually proof of the individual's own age in order to obtain possession of, purchase or receive an electronic cigarette, ecigarette
or liquid nicotine.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the individual younger than 18 years of age possessed the
electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in the presence of:
(1) An adult parent, a guardian or a spouse of the individual; or
(2) An employer of the individual, if possession or receipt of the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine is
required in the performance of the employee's duties as an employee.
(c) It shall also be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that the individual younger than 18 years of age is
participating in an inspection or test of compliance in accordance with section 161.088, Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-94. Sale of electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to persons younger than 18 years of age prohibited; proof
of age required.
(a) A person or retailer commits an offense if the person or retailer with criminal negligence:
(1) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to someone who is
younger than 18 years of age; or
(2) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to another person who
intends to deliver it to someone who is younger than 18 years of age.
(b) If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale by an employee of the owner of a store in which electronic
cigarettes, e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold at retail, the employee is criminally responsible for the offense and is subject to
prosecution.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) that the person to whom the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine
was sold or given presented to the defendant apparently valid proof of identification.
(d) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) if it contains a physical description and photograph consistent
with the person's appearance, purports to establish that the person is 18 years of age or older and was issued by a governmental agency.
The proof of identification may include a driver's license issued by this state or another state, a passport or an identification card issued by
a state or the federal government.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-95. Vendor assisted sales required; self-service merchandising prohibited.
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b), a retailer or other person may not:
(1) Offer electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for sale in a manner that permits a customer direct access to the
electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine;
(2) Offer for sale or display for sale electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by means of self-service
merchandising; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/648
(3) Install or maintain an open display unit containing electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if:
(1) A facility or business is not open to persons younger than 18 years of age at any time;
(2) A facility or business is a premises for which a person holds a package store permit issued under the Alcoholic Beverage
Code; or
(3) An open display unit is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers.
(Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-96. Other applicable laws.
This division shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. No.
69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-97. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this division or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this division which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this division are declared to be severable. (Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord.
No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-98. Effective date.
This division shall be effective on and after January 3, 2007. Signage as required by section 10-88 shall be in place within four (4) weeks
after the effective date. (Ord. No. 69-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-21-06; Ord. No. 41-2014, pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-24-14)
Sec. 10-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS*
Sec. 10-100. Adoption of liquefied petroleum gas safety rules.
The city hereby adopts the liquefied petroleum gas safety rules previously adopted by the Texas Railroad Commission as set forth in title
16 of the Texas Administrative Code, chapter 9, including any and all future amendments thereto. The rules hereby adopted are on file in
the fire marshal's office and city secretary's office all such copies shall be open to public inspection during business hours of the offices
where they are maintained. (Ord. No. 22-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 10-101. Enforcement.
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the city's fire marshal's office. (Ord. No. 22-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 10-102. Construction of city codes.
All ordinances, orders, rules, or codes adopted by the city shall be construed in a manner consistent with this article on all matters relating
to liquefied petroleum gas. (Ord. No. 22-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 10-103. Conflict with city codes.
In the event of conflict between any ordinance, order, rule, or code adopted by the city and this article, this article shall control. (Ord. No.
22-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 10-104. Adoption of rules, regulations, policies, practices, procedures, or standards.
City staff shall not adopt or enforce any rule, regulation, practice, policy, procedure, or standard that conflicts with this article. A violation
under this section shall not constitute a misdemeanor and shall not be subject to section 1-9 of this code. (Ord. No. 22-2017, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 10-105. Construction with other law.
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with the Texas Railroad Commission Liquefied Petroleum Gas Safety Rules, including
any and all future amendments thereto, or the Constitution and laws of the United States and the state. (Ord. No. 22-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A),
7-13-17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/648
Chapter 11
FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Purpose; scope.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules to safeguard public health and to provide consumers food that is safe,
unadulterated, and honestly presented.
(b) Scope. The rules in these sections shall cover food establishments and food processing plants operating and conducting business
within the city. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee (the “administrator”) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-2. Penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of any such
violation, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. In any case of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter by any corporation, the officers
and agents actively in charge of the business of such corporation shall be subject to the penalty herein provided. Any offense defined
herein which has been defined by laws of the state as an offense and for which penalty has been prescribed shall be punished as provided
in state law, and nothing herein shall be held as fixing any penalty contrary to a penalty provided by the laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99)
Sec. 11-3. Adopted.
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules, and as amended by the Executive Commissioner of the Health and
Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this
jurisdiction, and the rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, subchapter K, regarding the regulation of accreditation
and certification of food managers and food handlers, and as amended. Copies of these rules are on file with the administrator.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-4. Appeals; administrator; department of state health services; generally.
(a) Administrator. Any person dissatisfied with an order or ruling of the environmental health inspector in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter may appeal for an administrative review by the administrator.
(b) Department of state health services. Any person dissatisfied with an order or ruling of the administrator in the enforcement of this
chapter, and all amendments thereto, may appeal to the Department of State Health Services, Bureau of Food and Drugs, Retail Food
Division, 1100 West 49th Street, Austin, Texas 78756. Pending a decision of this appeal, the director of the administrator may issue a
provisional permit to operate. The provisional permit to operate shall be good for a period of sixty (60) days from date of issuance and
may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days from date of issuance and may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days.
(c) Generally. A person desiring to so appeal shall file in the office of the administrator, within fifteen (15) days of the ruling or order
appealed from, a copy of the written appeal which shall include a brief statement of the reasons and a detailed statement of the facts
supporting the appeal. Upon the expiration of the fifteen-day period without a written appeal being filed with the administrator, as herein
provided, the order or ruling of the environmental health inspector shall become final and non-appealable.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 42-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-25-05; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-5. Dogs in food establishments.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a food establishment with an outdoor patio may allow dogs to be present in the outdoor
patio of the food establishment if the food establishment obtains from the regulatory authority a variance waiving the prohibition against
allowing a dog on the premises of the food establishment and complies with the following conditions and standards:
(1) Except as allowed under 228.186(o)(2) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER), no dog may be present in the
interior of the food establishment or on any playground area designated for children on the premises of the food establishment.
(2) The term “outdoor patio” means an outdoor service area that is:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/648
(A) Under the exclusive ownership or control of a food establishment;
(B) Attached or adjacent to the food establishment; and
(C) Separated from the public areas with a barrier.
A public sidewalk is not considered an “outdoor patio” for the purposes of a variance referenced in this section.
(3) A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to the outdoor patio so that a dog has
direct access to the outdoor patio without entering the interior of the food establishment or any playground area of the food
establishment. A dog may not be allowed within seven feet of any entrance to the interior of the food establishment, except
when necessary to enter or exit the outdoor patio.
(4) An approved sign shall be posted at the front or each entrance of the food establishment and at each outdoor patio
entrance so that it is easily visible to the public. The sign must state in clearly visible type, in English and Spanish, “DOG
FRIENDLY PATIO: DOG ACCESS ONLY THROUGH OUTDOOR PATIO. - PATIO APTO PARA PERROS - ACCESO DE
PERROS SOLAMENTE POR EL PATIO EXTERIOR.” and “To report a dog incident, please contact Abilene Animal
Services - Para reporter algun incidente de perros, favor de comunicarse con el departamento de animals, Abilene Animal
Services.”
(5) Doors equipped with self-closing devices must be provided at all entrances to the outdoor patio from the interior of the
food establishment and must be kept closed when not in use.
(6) No food preparation may be performed in the outdoor patio area, except that a beverage glass may be filled on the
outdoor patio from a pitcher or other container that has been filled or otherwise prepared inside the food establishment.
(7) The outdoor patio must be maintained to be free of visible dog hair, dog dander, and other dog-related waste or debris.
(8) All table and chair surfaces must be easily cleanable, non-absorbent material and cleaned and sanitized with a product
approved under the TFER. Spilled food and drink must be removed from the floor or ground within five minutes of the spill.
(9) Waste resulting from a dog's bodily functions must be cleaned up with a product approved under the TFER within five
minutes of each occurrence of the emission of such waste. All dog waste must be disposed of outside of the food
establishment and outside of any outdoor patio in an appropriate waste receptacle. Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio
must be kept outside of the food establishment.
(10) While on duty, wait staff and other food handlers at the food establishment may not pet or otherwise come into contact
with any dog located on the premises of the food establishment.
(11) Dogs shall not be allowed on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface in the outdoor patio. Dogs shall also not be
allowed in a patron's lap while in the outdoor patio.
(12) A dog may not have contact with any dishes or utensils used for food service or preparation at the food establishment.
A dog may not be given food, but may be given water in a disposable container.
(13) The food establishment shall notify and maintain written procedures to notify the animal services director of any local
rabies control incident, or any other incident as described under chapter 6-61 of the Abilene Code of Ordinances. All dogs
must be wearing a collar or harness with a clearly visible and current rabies tag. While in the outdoor patio, all dogs must be
under the control of the owner by a leash, or at heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command.
(14) The flooring of the outdoor patio where dogs are permitted must be constructed of non-porous, approved material and
have no covering that would inhibit cleaning.
(15) (A) A food establishment shall not permit dogs to be present in the outdoor patio of the food establishment if:
(i) The administrator determines that a health hazard or nuisance will or has resulted; or
(ii) The administrator determines that the food establishment is in violation of this title or state law.
(B) Any food establishment that allows dogs on its premises without a variance is in violation of this section. The
owner or operator of a food establishment with an outdoor patio may apply to the administrator for a variance waiving
the prohibition against allowing dogs on the premises of a food establishment.
(C) The applicant must provide a completed application on a form provided by the administrator and the application
must be approved before a variance is granted. An inspection must be performed by the administrator to ensure that the
food establishment complies with the conditions and standards set forth in this title and state law.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/648
(D) A variance granted under this section is nontransferable and shall expire two (2) years after the date it is granted,
unless sooner revoked or terminated by the regulatory authority for noncompliance with this section. A variance that is
revoked or terminated may not be reinstated for a time period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation or
termination. A variance may be renewed by completing the application process previously described.
(E) An application for variance may be denied if the administrator finds that a health hazard or nuisance will result
from the variance or the applicant is not in compliance with this section or the requirements of state law. If the
administrator revokes or denies a variance, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, explaining the reasons
for the revocation or denial.
(Ord. No. 46-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-18)
ARTICLE II. PERMIT
Sec. 11-6. Issuance.
Prior to beginning operation as a food establishment or food processing plant, a person shall contact the administrator and request an
inspection for permit. This inspection for permit shall only be made if a current certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city
building official to the building or structure where the food establishment or food processing plant is located. At the time of the inspection
for permit the administrator shall determine that the facility meets all of the rules and regulations of this chapter. Upon such
determination, the person shall submit the completed application for permit and the required permit fee to the administrator for a permit
to be issued.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-7. Permit fee.
The fee for a food establishment permit or a food processing plant shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office
of the city secretary. State law provides that the fee may be waived for a food establishment owned by a charitable nonprofit organization.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99)
Sec. 11-8. Term; transfer; renewal.
A permit for a food establishment or a food processing plant shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued ending
December 31st, unless sooner revoked. The permit shall not be transferred or assigned, and shall be considered revoked should the
location of the food establishment be changed or should same be sold or otherwise disposed of by the owner thereof. The permit shall be
renewed annually by submission of a completed application and the required permit fee to the administrator.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-9. Revocation or suspension; reinstatement.
Any permit granted herein, at the direction of the administrator, shall be subject to revocation or suspension for failure of the grantee
named therein or any of his employees, agents or representatives to operate the food products establishment in accordance with this
chapter and all food and sanitary laws of the state. The permit shall be considered revoked if the city building inspections department
revokes the certificate of occupancy for the building or structure in which the food establishment or food processing plant is located.
Upon notice of revocation or suspension, the operation of the food establishment or food processing plant shall be immediately
discontinued until there is compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. An application for reinstatement of this permit shall
be made under the same terms and conditions as the original application.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-10. Operation near schools.
No person shall operate a vehicle on the public streets of the city and sell food products therefrom within three hundred (300) feet of any
public or private school grounds during school hours.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99)
Sec. 11-11. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
Sec. 11-12. Permit required.
No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a temporary food establishment in the city who does not possess a valid permit from the
administrator as herein provided. Such permit is valid for up to fourteen (14) days and must be kept posted in the temporary food
establishment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/648
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-13. Requirements.
Requirements for a temporary food establishment shall be developed and provided by the administrator in accordance with the
requirements of state law.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-14. Issuance.
Prior to beginning operation as a temporary food establishment, a person shall contact the administrator and request an inspection for
permit. At the time of the inspection for permit, the administrator shall determine whether the facility meets all of the rules and
regulations pertaining to temporary food service, as required by the administrator. Upon such determination, the person shall submit the
completed application for permit and the required permit fee to the administrator for a permit to be issued.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99; Ord. No. 01-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-14-16)
Sec. 11-15. Permit fee.
The fee for a temporary food establishment permit shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary. State law provides that the fee may be waived for a temporary food establishment owned by a charitable nonprofit organization.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99)
Sec. 11-16. Revocation or suspension; reinstatement.
Any permit granted herein, is subject to revocation or suspension as provided in section 1-9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 5-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-99)
Sec. 11-17. Reserved.
Chapter 12
FRANCHISES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 12-1–12-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RIGHT-OF-WAY USE FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-31. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to:
(1) Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the use of
city property and public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications service within the city;
(2) Permit and manage reasonable access to the property of the city and public rights-of-way within the city on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis;
(3) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city;
(4) Assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of granting and managing private access to and use of city property and
public rights-of-way are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and assigning such costs on a nondiscriminatory and
competitively neutral basis;
(5) Secure fair and reasonable compensation on a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis to the city and the
residents of the city for use of city property and public rights-of-way;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/648
(6) Assure that all certificated telecommunications providers providing facilities or services within the city comply with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;
(7) Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(8) Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies,
industry competition and technological development.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.1, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-32. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
Acceptance means written notification provided to the city secretary, in a form acceptable to the city, of a certificated telecommunications
provider's acknowledgement of the terms and conditions of the article.
Access lines:
(1) means, unless the PUC adopts a different definition under Section 283.003 of the Local Government Code, a unit of
measure representing:
a. Each switched transmission path of the transmission media that is physically within a public right-of-way extended
to the end-use customer's premises within the city, that allows the delivery of local exchange telephone services within
the city, and that is provided by means of owned facilities, unbundled network elements or leased facilities, or resale;
b. Each termination point or points of a nonswitched telephone or other circuit consisting of transmission media
located within a public right-of-way connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end-use customer
for delivery of nonswitched telecommunications services within the city; or
c. Each switched transmission path within a public right-of-way used to provide central office-based PBX-type
services for systems of any number of stations within the municipality, and in that instance, one path shall be counted for
every ten (10) stations served; and
(2) may not be construed to include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-use
customer's premises or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access line rates on the provision of a single service.
Affiliate means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with another person.
Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
Cable operator means any person or persons who (1) provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system, or (2) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
Cable service means:
(1) The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, defined as programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station, or (ii) other programming service, defined
as information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally, and
(2) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service.
Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within a community, but such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (3) a facility of a common
carrier subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of subchapter II of Chapter V of Title 47, U.S.C., except that such facility shall be
considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of section 541(c) of Title 47, U.S.C.) to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services; (4) an open video system that complies with section 573 of Title 47, U.S.C.; or (5) any facilities of any electric utility used
solely for operation of its electric utility system.
Certificated telecommunications provider means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of
operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the PUC to offer local exchange telephone service and who
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/648
has provided written acceptance of this article to the city.
City means the City of Abilene, Texas, in its present incorporated form or as it may be changed by annexation.
City property means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way as that term is defined herein, and
all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city.
Excess capacity means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within
the public rights-of-way that is or will be available for use for additional facilities.
Facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, poles, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service.
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and
oversee telecommunications and cable carriers, services and providers on a national level.
Governing body means the mayor and city council of the city.
Law means any and all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104 § 110 Stat. 70, codified at 47 U.S.C. and subsequent amendments, and all orders,
rules, tariffs, guidelines, and regulations issued by the Federal Communications Commission or the governing state authority pursuant
thereto, as well as all applicable state and city law. The term law encompasses statutory law, administrative regulations, and case law.
Overhead facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
Person means and includes corporations, companies, associations, organizations, joint stock companies or associations, firms,
partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
Private line service means a non-switched telephone circuit dedicated for use between specific locations identified by an end-user
customer.
Private line termination point means the physical end point or points of a private line service within the city.
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility
easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless
telecommunications.
PUC or Public Utility Commission of Texas means the state administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications and cable carriers, services and providers in the state.
State means the State of Texas.
Surplus space means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users to allow its
use for a pole attachment.
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the
transmittal of, or of facilities for the transmittal of, voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between or among points by
wire, fiber optics or similar facilities, but does not include the provision to the public of any “wireless service,” “long distance” or “toll”
service, as defined by law.
Underground facilities means facilities and utility facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
Usable space means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the
minimum necessary vertical clearance.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.2, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-33. Registration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all certificated telecommunications providers engaged in the business of providing, transmitting,
supplying or furnishing of telecommunications service in the city, with the exception of those that already hold a current city
telecommunications franchise, or acceptance under this article, or have a pending application under this article on file with the city, shall
register with the city pursuant to division 2 of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.3, 6-24-99)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/648
Sec. 12-34. Acceptance of right-of-way use ordinance required.
Any certificated telecommunications provider who desires to construct, install, control, operate, maintain, use, or otherwise locate
facilities in, under, over or across any city property or public rights-of-way for the purpose of providing telecommunications service
within the city shall first file an acceptance of this article as provided in section 12-62.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.4, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-35. Cable franchise required.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any certificated telecommunications provider who desires to operate a cable system on city property
or in any public rights-of-way within the city for the purpose of providing cable service to subscribers in the city as a cable operator shall
first obtain a cable franchise from the city as provided in the city's current cable franchise ordinances in effect at the time the cable
franchise is sought.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.5, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-36. Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements.
This article shall have no effect on a certificated telecommunications provider subject to any existing franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement until:
(1) The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
(2) An amendment is added to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer
full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.6, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-37. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article
after receiving written notice of same from the city manager or his or her designated representative shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.7, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-38. No waiver for nonenforcement.
No certificated telecommunications provider shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this article by any
failure or omission of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon, enforce, or otherwise seek compliance with such terms and
conditions.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.8, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-39. Other remedies.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any remedies that the city or a certificated telecommunications provider may have at
law or in equity for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.9, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-40. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this article, or its application to any person is, for any reason
declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.10, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-41. Reservation of rights.
The city hereby reserves to itself all rights, privileges, and interests which it has or may hereafter acquire, and nothing in this article shall
be construed otherwise unless it is specifically set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.11, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-42. Amendment to article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/648
The city shall have the right to amend this article, and any amendment pursuant to this right shall be fully incorporated into any
acceptance of this article. Such amendment shall not materially alter the terms of acceptance without a certificated telecommunications
provider's approval.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 1.12, 6-24-99)
Secs. 12-43–12-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. REGISTRATION OF CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
Sec. 12-51. Registration required.
All certificated telecommunications providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public within
the city, with the exception of those certificated telecommunications providers that already hold a current telecommunications franchise
or an acceptance under this article on file with the city, shall register with the city pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days
following the date of final adoption of this article, and shall thereafter register annually on or before January 30 of each calendar year.
The annual registration shall include the following, or as allowed by PUC guidelines:
(1) The identity and legal status of the registrant.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
registration statement.
(3) A general description, including location, of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the
city.
(4) A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or
providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.
(5) Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to the acceptance requirements of this article.
(6) Information indicating whether the registrant intends to provide cable service as a cable operator over a cable system
and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to a cable franchise.
(7) Information sufficient to determine that the registrant has applied for and received any certificates of convenience and
necessity, certificate of operating authority, service provider certificate of operating authority, construction permit, operating
license or other approvals required by the PUC and/or the FCC to provide telecommunications service or telecommunications
facilities within the city.
(8) The number and type of access lines the registrant provides to end users in the city as of the end of the preceding
calendar year, only when subject to PUC confidentiality protections.
(9) Such other and further information as may reasonably be requested by the city manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 2.1, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-52. Purpose of registration.
The purpose of registration under this section is to:
(1) Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the certificated telecommunications providers who
offer or provide telecommunications service within the city, or that own, control, or operate telecommunications facilities
within the city;
(2) Assist the city in enforcement of this article;
(3) Assist the city in the collection and enforcement, on a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis, of any rightof-
way use fees or other charges that may lawfully be due the city;
(4) Assist the city in monitoring compliance with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 2.2, 6-24-99)
Secs. 12-53–12-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RIGHT-OF-WAY USE
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/648
Sec. 12-61. Right-of-way use acceptance.
Acceptance of the terms of this right-of-way use ordinance shall be required of any certificated telecommunications provider who desires
to occupy city property or public rights-of-way for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to any person or area within the
city.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.1, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-62. Form and content of acceptance of terms of article.
Acceptance shall consist of written notification provided to the city secretary, in a form acceptable to the city, of a certificated
telecommunications provider's acknowledgement of the terms and conditions of this article. All initial acceptances shall be accompanied
by the registration information described in section 12-51.
Upon receipt of acceptance by the city secretary, the certificated telecommunications provider shall be provided access to the public
rights-of-way within the city according to the terms and conditions of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.2, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-63. Nonexclusive access to public right-of-way.
No acceptance of this article shall confer any exclusive rights, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use city property or public
rights-of-way for delivery of telecommunications service or any other purposes.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.3, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-64. Term.
Acceptance of this article shall be valid for a maximum term of three (3) years. In addition to the provisions of applicable law, any
certificated telecommunications provider that desires to renew its acceptance of this article shall, not more than ninety (90) days nor less
than thirty (30) days before expiration of the current term, file written notification with the city for renewal of its term which shall include
the information required pursuant to section 12-6, as may be required by the city.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.4, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-65. Rights granted.
No acceptance of this article shall convey any right, title or interest in city property or public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed entry
only to use and occupy city property and public rights-of-way. Further, no acceptance of this article shall be construed as any warranty of
title.
The city assumes no responsibility for securing any franchises, rights-of-way, permits, or easements that the city does not already own;
but a certificated telecommunications provider assumes the duty and responsibility for securing the same. The permission granted herein
is subject to applicable law and regulations now in force or which may be enacted or promulgated by any governmental body or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.5, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-66. Compensation to city.
Each acceptance of this article is subject to the city's right to fair and reasonable compensation, as specified in division 4 herein, on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis, for a certificated telecommunications provider's use and occupancy of city property
and public rights-of-way as well as the city's supervision and management of the same.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 3.6, 6-24-99)
Secs. 12-67–12-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FEES AND COMPENSATION
Sec. 12-71. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to provide for reasonable and adequate compensation to the city for the use and occupancy of city property
and public rights-of-way for the provisioning of telecommunications service, and to further provide for the payment and recovery of all
direct and indirect costs and expenses of the city related to the enforcement and administration of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 4.1, 6-24-99)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/648
Sec. 12-72. Calculation of base amount.
Effective September 1, 1999, pursuant to Section 283.053, Local Government Code, or as amended, the base amount shall be determined
by the PUC.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 4.2, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-73. Compensation for use of public rights-of-way.
Effective March 1, 2000, pursuant to Section 283.055, Local Government Code, or as amended, rates per access line by category for the
use of the rights-of-way by the city shall be established by the PUC. Certificated telecommunications providers shall pay to the city a
quarterly amount calculated monthly based on the access line rates established by the PUC. Payment terms, annual increases, and other
conditions related to this payment shall be as specified in Section 283.055, Local Government Code, or as amended or specified by PUC
regulation.
From the effective date of this article until the date PUC-established rates are implemented, if a certificated telecommunications provider
is subject to a franchise agreement or obligations under an ordinance in the city, the term of which expires in this interim period, the
affected certificated telecommunications providers operating in the city shall continue paying municipal fees at the rates required under
the terms of the expired agreement or ordinance until the PUC's determination and the certificated telecommunications provider's
implementation of appropriate rates under this section. The rates required shall include any rate escalation provisions that are or were in
effect prior to and during this interim period.
From the effective date of this article until the date PUC-established rates are implemented, if a certificated telecommunications provider
is not subject to a franchise agreement or obligations under an ordinance in the city and wants to construct facilities to offer
telecommunications services in the city, the affected certificated telecommunications provider shall pay right-of-way fees that are
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory, consistent with the charges of the most recent franchise agreement or ordinance between the
city and the certificated telecommunications provider serving the largest number of access lines within the city. The certificated
telecommunications provider shall pay those fees until the right-of-way fees established by PUC rule take effect.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 4.3, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-74. Right to initiate legal action for compensation.
Pursuant to Section 283.051(b), Local Government Code, or as amended, the city reserves the right to initiate legal action against a
certificated telecommunications provider that uses a public right-of-way to provide local exchange telephone service within the city and
has not compensated the city in accordance with this section and Chapter 283 of the Local Government Code, or as amended.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 4.4, 6-24-99)
Secs. 12-75–12-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. CONDITIONS OF GRANT
Sec. 12-81. Location of facilities.
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following guidelines:
(1) A certificated telecommunications provider shall install its facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit
whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility, absent the submission by a certificated telecommunications
provider or an affected person of satisfactory evidence to the city manager or his or her designee that this requirement is not
reasonable or feasible in any specific instance.
(2) A certificated telecommunications provider with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its facilities on pole
attachments to existing utility poles only, provided surplus space is available. If the installation of a new pole or poles is
necessary, the number, location and installation of same shall be as designated by the city.
(3) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within
a public right-of-way of the city, a certificated telecommunications provider with permission to occupy the same public rightof-
way must also locate its facilities underground, absent a compelling demonstration by a certificated telecommunications
provider or an affected person that this requirement is not reasonable or feasible in any specific instance.
(4) Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated
underground within a public right-of-way, a certificated telecommunications provider that currently occupies the same public
right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground when the facilities' usefulness has expired and replacement of existing
facilities becomes necessary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/648
(5) In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or infeasible, the city manager or his or her
designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject certificated telecommunications provider
or other affected person to an unreasonably increased risk of service interruption, or to an unreasonably increased liability for
accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in the availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable
technical or economic burden.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.1, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-82. Construction permits.
Certificated telecommunications provider is required to obtain construction permits to the extent and in the manner required in division 6
of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.2, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-83. Interference with the public rights-of-way.
(a) No certificated telecommunications provider may locate or maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of city
property or public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon city
property or public rights-of-way. In the event of unreasonable interference, such facilities shall be moved by certificated
telecommunications provider, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city manager or his or her designee upon reasonable
notice and opportunity to be heard.
(b) If the temporary removal of certificated telecommunications provider's overhead facilities is necessary to permit the moving of
houses or other bulky structures, certificated telecommunications provider shall be required to temporarily remove the same upon not less
than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice by a party permitted to move a building, house or other bulky structure pursuant to sections 8-
701 through 8-709, Abilene Municipal Code. The expenses of such temporary relocation or removal of overhead facilities shall be paid
by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from such temporary relocation or removal.
(c) Certificated telecommunications provider shall have the authority to trim trees so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the facilities of certificated telecommunications provider. The city shall have the option to perform, supervise and
direct such trimming. Any trimming shall be at the expense of certificated telecommunications provider.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.3, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-84. Damage to property.
Except as provided herein, no certificated telecommunications provider nor any person acting on certificated telecommunications
provider's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any city property, public rights-ofway,
or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.4, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-85. Notice of work.
(a) Unless otherwise provided in this article, no certificated telecommunications provider nor any person acting on a certificated
telecommunications provider's behalf shall commence any work involving disruption or damage to hard surface in or about city property
or public rights-of-way without the provision of notice or permit to the city, as follows:
(1) A permit shall be required for asphalt or concrete cuts.
(2) Notification shall be required for all other hard surface cuts.
(b) Within five (5) working days after submission of the permit request, the city manager or his or her designee, if satisfied that the
applications, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this article, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the
facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as he
or she may deem necessary or appropriate. The city manager's approval, or that of his or her designee, will not be unreasonably withheld.
(c) A certificated telecommunications provider or person acting on a certificated telecommunications provider's behalf shall receive a
copy of the city's current excavation and surface restoration standards with each permit.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.5, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-86. Maintenance of facilities.
All certificated telecommunications providers shall maintain their facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with
all applicable law.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/648
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.6, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-87. Relocation or removal of facilities.
(a) Within one hundred twenty (120) days following written notice from the city and after an opportunity to be heard, a certificated
telecommunications provider shall, without claim for reimbursement or damages against the city, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way whenever the governing body
shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance
or installation of any city improvement.
(b) In any instance in which operation of subsection (a) is deemed by a certificated telecommunications provider to impose a financial
hardship, the certificated telecommunications provider shall have the right to present alternative proposals to the city, and the city shall
give due consideration to any such alternative proposals.
(c) If the city requires a certificated telecommunications provider to adopt or conform its facilities to enable any other entity or person,
except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, public rights-of-way or city property, the certificated telecommunications
provider shall not be required to make any such changes until such other entity or person shall reimburse or make arrangements
satisfactory to the certificated telecommunications provider to reimburse the certificated telecommunications provider for any loss and
expense caused by or arising out of such change; provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement.
(d) If after proper notice a certificated telecommunications provider fails or refuses to remove or abate the facilities in question, the city
retains the rights and privilege to remove or abate any such facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way, at the sole cost
and expense of the certificated telecommunications provider. In performing or permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable
to any person for any damages to any facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way unless directly and proximately caused
by the willful intentional or malicious act by the city, and shall not be liable in any event for any consequential damages relating to
service interruptions.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.7, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-88. Removal of unauthorized facilities.
Within sixty (60) days following written notice from the city, a certificated telecommunications provider or other person that owns,
controls or maintains any unauthorized facilities or related appurtenances on city property or within the public rights-of-way shall, at its
own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from city property or the public rights-of-way. Facilities are unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon abandonment of facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way.
(2) If the facilities were constructed or installed without the prior grant of a franchise or acceptance under this article.
(3) If the facilities were constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.
If after proper notice the owner fails or refuses to remove or abate the facilities in question, the city retains the rights and privilege to
remove or abate any such facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way, at the sole cost and expense of the owner. In
performing or permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable to any person for any damages to any facilities on city property
or within the public right-of-way unless directly and proximately caused by the willful intentional or malicious act by the city, and shall
not be liable in any event for any consequential damages relating to service interruptions.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.8, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-89. Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.
The city retains the rights and privilege to cut or move any facilities located on city property or within the public rights-of-way, as the city
may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the
extent possible with certificated telecommunications provider in such instances to assure continuity of service, and to afford certificated
telecommunications provider the opportunity to make such relocation and/or removal itself where deemed reasonable, at the city's sole
discretion.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.9, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-90. No waiver of sovereign immunity.
Nothing in this article shall waive sovereign immunity as it relates to any part of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.10, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-91. Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/648
(a) When a certificated telecommunications provider, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public
rights-of-way, or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such public rights-ofway
or city property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken. The certificated telecommunications provider, or
any person acting on its behalf, must complete all restoration work prior to vacating the job site.
(b) If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this subsection, the certificated
telecommunications provider shall temporarily restore the affected public rights-of-way or city property. Such temporary restoration shall
be at certificated telecommunications provider's sole expense and the certificated telecommunications provider shall promptly undertake
and complete the required permanent restoration within five (5) days after the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such
permanent restoration.
(c) A certificated telecommunications provider or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable protective measures and devices
consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize
disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(d) If, within one hundred and eighty (180) days of completion of construction, restoration of the public rights-of-way or city property
is found not to meet the city's excavation and/or surface standards, written notice will be sent to certificated telecommunications provider
with information concerning the location and condition of the deficient restoration. Certificated telecommunications provider will then
have thirty (30) days to remove the substandard restoration and restore the public rights-of-way or city property in compliance with city
standards. If certificated telecommunications provider has not complied within thirty (30) days, the city retains the rights and privilege to
remove the substandard restoration and restore in compliance with city standards at the sole cost and expense of certificated
telecommunications provider.
(e) Certificated telecommunications provider shall be responsible for all maintenance costs incurred as a result of any defects,
impairments or other substandard condition in the public rights-of-way caused by the construction, maintenance, or restoration work of
certificated telecommunications provider or any person acting on certificated telecommunications provider's behalf for a period of one
year from the date the surface of the public rights-of-way is restored by certificated telecommunications provider or person acting on
certificated telecommunications provider's behalf.
(f) No street, alley, highway or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work and
restore the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.11, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-92. Facilities maps.
(a) A certificated telecommunications provider shall maintain maps of all of certificated telecommunications provider's facilities
located on city property or within the public rights-of-way. Such maps shall be made available for review by the city, upon reasonable
request. Certificated telecommunications provider shall also promptly locate any underground facilities at the city's request at no cost to
the city.
(b) A certificated telecommunications provider shall coordinate with the city in the development of data for general purpose use to be
linked to the city's geographical information system (GIS) to the mutual benefit of the city and the certificated telecommunications
provider. Such data will be provided on a voluntary basis and will be maintained by the certificated telecommunications provider.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.12, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-93. Duty to provide information.
Within thirty (30) days of a written request from the city manager or his or her representatives, certificated telecommunications provider
shall:
(1) Furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate that:
a. Certificated telecommunications provider has complied with all requirements of this article.
b. All municipal fees due the city in connection with the use of public rights-of-way for telecommunications service
and facilities provided by certificated telecommunications provider have been properly calculated and paid by
certificated telecommunications provider.
(2) Make available all books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by certificated telecommunications provider
with respect to its facilities on city property or within the public rights-of-way.
(3) Make available to the city attorney, upon written request specifying the documents sought, copies of notices of all initial
petitions, applications, and reports submitted by certificated telecommunications provider to the FCC, the PUC, the state
legislature or the Congress of the United States relating to any matters affecting both the use of public rights-of-way and
telecommunications service within the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/648
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.13, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-94. Certificated telecommunications provider insurance.
(a) General requirements: Certificated telecommunications provider must maintain the types and amounts of required insurance
throughout the term of the acceptance. Certificated telecommunications provider is solely responsible for providing a certificate of
insurance or other evidence of financial responsibility evidencing the required coverage types and amounts.
Required insurance must be issued by a company or companies of sound and adequate financial responsibility and authorized to do
business in the State of Texas. All policies are subject to examination and approval by the city's office of risk management for their
adequacy as to content, form of protection, and providing company.
Required insurance naming the city as additional insured must be primary insurance and not contributing with any other insurance
available to the city, including under any third party liability policy.
Before the acceptance is effective, certificated telecommunications provider must provide to the city secretary an original certificate of
insurance, a certified copy of the insurance policy, certificate of self-insurance, or other evidence of financial responsibility evidencing
the required coverage. Thereafter, certificated telecommunications provider must furnish new certificates or copies of the policy before
any existing certificate expires.
(b) Additional requirements: The required liability coverages and their certificates must:
(1) Name the city as an additional insured with respect to operations for which this agreement is made.
(2) Provide for thirty (30) days advance written notice of cancellation or material change.
(c) Required coverages and amounts:
Type Amount
(1) Workers' compensation
employers' liability
Statutory one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence
(2) Commercial (public) liability
including but not limited to:
One million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage (per occurrence)
Premises/operations
Independent contractors
Products/completed operations
Contractual liability (insuring
above indemnity)
And where the exposures exist:
Explosion, collapse and
underground
(3) Business automobile liability to
include coverage for:
One million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage (per occurrence)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/648
Owned/leased autos
Non-owned autos
Hired cars
(d) Unless otherwise precluded by law, certificated telecommunications provider may satisfy one or more of the insurance requirements
specified in subsection (c) through self-insurance, provided, however, that no certificated telecommunications provider may self-insure
without the prior approval of the city. In no event shall a self-insurance proposal be approved absent a showing to the city's satisfaction
that certificated telecommunications provider is in a sound financial condition, and that certificated telecommunications provider
maintains a dedicated reserve in an amount sufficient to ensure that certificated telecommunications provider's outstanding potential
claims do not at any time exceed fifty (50) per cent of the value of the reserve, or as accepted by the city's risk manager.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.14, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-95. General indemnification.
As specified in section 283.057, Local Government Code, or as amended, when effective:
(1) Certificated telecommunications providers shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless
against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and
costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including
personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that is
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the certificated
telecommunications provider, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the
certificated telecommunications provider, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives, while
installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way. The indemnity provided by this subsection does not
apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. If a
certificated telecommunications provider and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability
shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental
immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. This section is
solely for the benefit of the city and certificated telecommunications provider and does not create or grant any rights,
contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.
(2) A certificated telecommunications provider or the city shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or
demand against the certificated telecommunications provider or the city related to or arising out of the certificated
telecommunications provider's activities in a public right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.15, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-96. Performance and payment bonds.
(a) Performance and/or payment bonds may be required for any proposed construction activities by a certificated telecommunications
provider's contractors or subcontractors. Within thirty (30) days after the notification of a need for a performance and/or payment bond,
the certificated telecommunications provider's contractor or subcontractor shall obtain and maintain at its sole cost and expense, and file
with the city secretary, the appropriate bond in the amount to be specified to guarantee the timely construction and/or reconstruction and
full activation of the facilities and the safeguarding of damage to private property and restoration of damages incurred with other persons
in the public rights-of-way.
(b) If the value of the construction and/or reconstruction contemplated is below twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), or as
amended by law, performance and payment bonds are not required.
(c) If required under Subsection (a), the following will apply:
(1) If the value of the construction and/or reconstruction contemplated exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00),
certificated telecommunications provider must furnish a payment bond.
(2) If the value of the construction and/or reconstruction contemplated exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00),
certificated telecommunications provider must also furnish a performance bond prior to the start of the work and delivered to
the city.
(3) The bonds, for the full construction amount, must be executed by a corporate surety company authorized to do business
in the state and acceptable to the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/648
(4) Bonds for projects using federal dollars must be underwritten by a surety named in the current list of “Surety Companies
Acceptable on Federal Bonds” as published in the Federal Register by the Audit Staff Bureau of Accounts, U.S. Treasury
Department.
(d) The city may require additional security if the initial surety becomes insolvent, bankrupt, or otherwise financially unable to protect
the city under the terms of this article. The city's requiring new or additional security relieves neither the original surety nor certificated
telecommunications provider of its obligations under this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.16, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-97. Coordination of construction activities.
All certificated telecommunications providers are required to cooperate with the city and with each other.
(1) A certificated telecommunications provider shall provide the name and contact information for a single point-of-contact
for all construction projects undertaken by the certificated telecommunications provider or any person acting on its behalf.
(2) A certificated telecommunications provider shall meet with the city manager or his or her designee, other certificated
telecommunications providers, and users of city property and public rights-of-way as determined by the city manager or his or
her designee, but in no case less than once a calendar year or more frequently than once per quarter, to schedule and
coordinate construction on city property and in the public rights-of-way.
(3) All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city manager or his or her
designee, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.17, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-98. Assignments or transfers of franchise.
Certificated telecommunications provider shall provide written notification of a transfer of ownership or control of certificated
telecommunications provider's business and new point of contact information, if point of contact changes, within a reasonable time,
within ninety (90) days of the proposed date of transfer. Any new owner or controller agrees to comply with the terms and conditions of
this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 5.18, 6-24-99)
Secs. 12-99–12-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Sec. 12-111. General.
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of facilities on city property or within the public
rights-of-way except as provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.1, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-112. Construction codes.
(a) Facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes,
rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code.
(b) So as to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages, all excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way
shall be performed with the use of trenchless technology whenever possible and economically feasible.
(c) When trenchless technology cannot be used or is not economically feasible, trenches shall be required to comply with OSHA
standards.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.2, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-113. Compliance with permit.
All construction practices and activities shall be in substantial compliance with the construction permit. The city manager and his or her
representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with this
article and any other city construction provisions.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.3, 6-24-99)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/648
Sec. 12-114. Display of permit.
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and
made available for inspection by the city manager or his or her representatives at all times when construction work is occurring.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.4, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-115. Noncomplying work.
Upon order of the city manager or his or her designee, all work that does not comply with the permit or the requirements of this article,
shall be removed and replaced substantially with conforming work, removal and replacement of substandard work will be performed
prior to advancing the construction to the next phase.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.5, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-116. Completion of construction.
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the public rights-of-way and other public
and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit within public rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed
within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the date of issuance, or by such other date as may be agreed upon by the city manager or his
or her designee.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.6, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-117. Restoration of improvements.
Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair or restore any and all public rights-of-way, including any
and all public and private fixtures, structures and facilities therein, and staging or stockpile areas, to as good or better a condition as
before the start of construction and in compliance with city standards.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.7, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-118. Landscape restoration.
(a) All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair
or replacement of facilities, shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to at least as good condition than prior to
performance of work.
(b) All restoration work within the public rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city manager
or his or her designee.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.8, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-119. Construction surety.
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance and/or payment bond, if required, as provided in
section 12-96 of this article.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.9, 6-24-99)
Sec. 12-120. Responsibility of owner.
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the certificated telecommunications provider, are responsible for
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 30-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), § 6.10, 6-24-99)
Chapter 13
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/648
Secs. 13-1–13-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 13-16. Removal of officers from office.
Any office created under this article, and the term of any officer holding such office, shall be subject to abolishment and termination at
any time by joint action of the city council and the commissioners court of the county.
(Code 1965, § 15-12)
Secs. 13-17–13-23. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED*
Secs. 13-24–13-43. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH
Sec. 13-44. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of director of public health in and for the city.
(Code 1965, § 15-8)
Sec. 13-45. Appointment.
The director of public health shall be appointed by the city council and the commissioners court of the county upon recommendation by
the board of health from an approved list of qualified health officers furnished by the commissioner of health of the state.
(Code 1965, § 15-8)
Sec. 13-46. Qualifications, devotion to duty.
The director of public health shall be a thoroughly qualified physician and also qualified in public health work. Such director shall be
qualified under and shall conform to the merit system prescribed by the state board of health.
(Code 1965, § 15-9)
Sec. 13-47. Powers and duties generally.
The director of public health shall be in complete charge of all public health activities of the health department and shall direct the
personnel in the employ of such department. The director of public health shall appoint all employees of such department subject to the
approval of the city and county and such employees shall be thoroughly qualified to perform their respective duties.
(Code 1965, § 15-10)
Secs. 13-48–13-58. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. VITAL STATISTICS*
Sec. 13-59. City constitutes local registration district.
The city shall constitute a local registration district for the purpose of gathering of birth, death and stillbirth statistics and disseminating
the same to the state department of health in accordance with the provisions of rules 34a through 55a of article 4477 of the Revised Civil
Statutes of the state.
(Code 1965, § 15-13)
Sec. 13-60. Local registrar.
The city manager shall name, appoint and designate by proper resolution a person to act as local registrar of vital statistics for the city.
After his appointment, the local registrar shall have authority to designate a member of his staff as deputy registrar in accordance with the
provisions of article 4477 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the state.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/648
(Code 1965, § 15-14)
Sec. 13-61. Records and reports.
It shall be the duty of the local registrar of vital statistics to keep in his office permanent records of all births, deaths and stillbirths
occurring within the city and to make reports thereof as provided by article 4477 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the state.
(Code 1965, § 15-15)
Sec. 13-62. Fee for birth and death certificates.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 15-16; Ord. No. 1125, 11-9-78; Ord. No. 3-1982, pt. 1, 1-14-82; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
ARTICLE IV. RESERVED*
ARTICLE V. STANDARDS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES*
Sec. 13-70. Preamble and purpose.
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality has established rules for on-site sewage facilities (OSSF) to provide the citizens of this
state with adequate public health protection and a minimum of environmental pollution.
The legislature has enacted legislation, codified as Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 366, which authorizes a local government to
regulate the use of on-site sewage facilities in its jurisdiction in order to abate or prevent pollution or injury to public health arising out of
the use of on-site sewage facilities.
The City of Abilene desires to enact regulations controlling or prohibiting the installation or use of on-site sewage facilities in the city,
and the City Council of the City of Abilene finds that the use of on-site sewage facilities in the city may cause or is causing pollution, and
may injure or is injuring the public health. As such, the city council desires to regulate on-site sewage facilities to abate or prevent
pollution or injury to public health in the incorporated limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-71. [Reserved.]
Sec. 13-72. Adoption of state law and rules for on-site sewage facilities.
The City of Abilene hereby adopts:
(1) Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (H&SC) (as it exists or as may hereafter be amended),
(2) Chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC) (as they exist or as may hereafter be amended), and
(3) The Rules, Title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) §§ 285.1–285.91 and TAC 30, (as they exist or as may hereafter
be amended), promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality for on-site sewage facilities, as the official
rules and regulations for on-site sewage facilities located in the City of Abilene and will enforce said rules and abide by the
technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage
facilities as listed therein; subject to the local amendment listed below in section 13-73.
The above mentioned H&SC and TWC laws, and rules–30 TAC, Chapters 30 and 285 and all future amendments and revisions thereto
are incorporated by reference herein as if set forth in their entirety and are made a part of this article. A copy of the current laws and rules
is on file at the Health Department of the City of Abilene.
All officials and employees of the City of Abilene, having duties under these rules, are authorized to perform such duties as are required
of them under the rules.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-73. Local amendments.
The following rule is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Abilene as a more stringent rule for its on-site sewage facility and
shall take precedence over the corresponding Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Requirement.
All on-site sewage facilities within the City of Abilene must be permitted regardless of lot size or acreage on which the system is
installed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/648
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-74. Area of jurisdiction.
The rules listed in sections 13-72 and 13-73, and as amended, shall apply to the entire incorporated city limits of the City of Abilene,
Texas.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-75. Compliance and permits.
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the area of jurisdiction of the City of Abilene must comply with the laws and rules
as stated in sections 13-72 and 13-73 of this article.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-76. Certification requirements.
The OSSF inspectors of the City of Abilene, (a/k/a designated representatives) must be approved and certified by the Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality before assuming any duties and responsibilities.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-77. Fees.
Any fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the City of Abilene. Fees are set by the city council and may
be amended as necessary.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-78. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the City Council of
the City Of Abilene, Texas. All appeals must be in writing and filed with the city secretary within fifteen (15) calendar days of decision of
the inspectors.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Sec. 13-79. Penalties.
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which include, but are not
limited to, those found In Chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health And Safety Code; Chapters 7, 26, And 37 of the Texas Water Code
and 30 TAC, Chapters 30 And 285.
(Ord. No. 4-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-13-03)
Secs. 13-80–13-95. Reserved.
Chapter 14
RESERVED*
Chapter 15
LAKES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1. Definitions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/648
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Lake: Any body of water owned or coming under the control of the city.
(Code 1965, §§ 20-10, 20-25; Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-2. Water pollution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, any lake under the ownership or control of this
city.
(Code 1965, §§ 20-22, 20-29, 20-34; Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-3. Use of firearms.
The firing of any firearm over the waters of any lake and on the land around the waters edge is prohibited. In other areas, firearms may be
fired only in accordance with applicable city, state and national laws and regulations.
(Code 1965, § 20-20)
Cross references: Discharge of firearms generally, § 20-21.
Sec. 15-4. Fishing regulations.
The general laws of the state, shall control the taking of fish from any lake.
(Code 1965, § 20-21; Ord. No. 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-1-16)
Sec. 15-5. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 15-5 pertaining to fishing from bridges, culverts, prohibited and deriving from the 1965 Code, § 20-21; was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 12-1-16.
Sec. 15-6. Public launching ramps.
(a) No person shall park, place, or leave standing any unattended motor vehicle or trailer, in or on any portion of any publicly owned
launching ramp for a period of more than fifteen (15) continuous minutes.
(b) Swimming and wading, except as necessary for launching and retrieving water vessels, are prohibited within fifty (50) feet of a
public launching ramp.
(Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-7. Operation of water vessels.
(a) The general laws of the state, in accordance with the Texas Water Safety Act, except as specifically provided through proper
ordinances and regulations of the city, shall control the operation of water vessels on any lake.
(b) No person shall operate any water vessel on any lake at a speed which produces a white wake within any harbor or within one
hundred (100) feet of any shoreline, dock, or other permanent structure, or within one hundred (100) feet of any approved and clearly
designated swimming areas, unless a vessel is outbound more than seventy-five (75) feet from the shore or dock.
(c) No person shall operate a water vessel while towing a water skier in such a manner as to allow the skier to come within fifty (50)
feet of any other vessel, person, stationary platform, or other object except in order to dismount from skis.
(Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-8. Destruction of property.
No person shall go into or upon any city owned and controlled premises or enclosures of any lake, and there tear down, damage, or
destroy any fences, trees, or any improvements or fixtures situated upon such premises, including pumping facilities, and any other
machinery, apparatus or pipe lines in any way connected with any lakes as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-9. Enforcement.
Peace officers shall have full power and authority to enforce this chapter and other ordinances made in relation to the regulation of
activities and conditions on Lake Fort Phantom Hill, Lake Abilene, Lake Kirby, Cameron Lake, and Nelson Park Lake. Violations of any
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/648
provision of this chapter are declared a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-9 of this code.
(Ord. No. 16-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A-1), 6-8-17)
Secs. 15-10–15-16. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LAKE FORT PHANTOM HILL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 15-17. High water line.
The high water line of Lake Fort Phantom Hill is hereby designated as the uncontrolled spillway elevation of one thousand six hundred
thirty-five and nine-tenths (1,635.9) feet above mean sea level enclosing that lake.
(Code 1965, § 20-10; Ord. No.16-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A-1), 6-8-17)
Sec. 15-18. Prohibited areas.
(a) A prohibited area is hereby established surrounding the water intake pump station on the east shore of Lake Fort Phantom Hill,
within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the pump station. Boating, skiing, swimming, or any other activity is hereby prohibited within
the buoys marking the boundary of this area. However, persons owning or leasing property along the shoreline of which is within the two
hundred (200) foot area shall be allowed to operate a boat at a speed which produces no white wake from their property to the nearest
point outside the prohibited area, and return only.
(b) A prohibited area is hereby designated within a fifty (50) foot radius of the control tower located near the east end of the dam at
Lake Fort Phantom Hill. No boating, skiing, swimming, or any other activity is allowed in the prohibited area.
(c) A prohibited area is hereby designated within a one hundred (100) foot radius of the indirect reuse discharge point structure (Outfall
003) located near the shoreline south of the east boat ramp (marked with a buoy).
(Code 1965, § 20-19; Ord. No. 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-1-16; Ord. No. 16-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A-1), 6-8-17)
Sec. 15-19. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 23-1994, adopted May 26, 1994, repealed § 15-19 in its entirety. Formerly, § 15-19 pertained to speed of boats and derived from §
20-19 of the 1965 Code.
Sec. 15-20. Swimming areas.
(a) Any public swimming areas shall be approved by city council and clearly designated as such.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a water vessel within, or otherwise allow any water vessel to enter, any approved and
clearly marked swimming area.
(Code 1965, § 20-19; Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94)
Sec. 15-20.1. Placing motor vehicles or other obstructions upon Lake Fort Phantom Hill prohibited.
No person shall drive, park or otherwise place a motor vehicle, nor place any other obstruction, upon the bed of Lake Fort Phantom Hill,
or within the high water line of said lake.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the operation of boats upon the waters of said lake, nor the launching of boats at
boat launching ramps at said lake through the use of a motor vehicle or through the use of other lawful means.
(Ord. No. 22-1980, pt. 1, 3-27-80; Ord. No. 1-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-11-01)
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 22-1980, enacted March 27, 1980, amended the 1965 Code with the addition of a new § 20-24. Said provisions have been
codified as § 15-20.1 of this Code at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 15-21. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 23-1994, adopted May 26, 1994, repealed § 15-21 in its entirety. Formerly, § 15-21 pertained to unattended vehicles in public boat
ramps and derived from § 20-24.1 of the 1965 Code.
Sec. 15-22. Lot leases to be subject to article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/648
Any lease covering any of the lots of Lake Fort Phantom Hill shall be subject to all of the terms and conditions of this article and the
same shall be considered a part of such lease as though written therein.
(Code 1965, § 20-17)
Sec. 15-23. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 23-1994, adopted May 26, 1994, repealed § 15-23 in its entirety. Formerly, § 15-23 pertained to erection of slaughterhouses and
derived from § 20-18 of the 1965 Code.
Secs. 15-24–15-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS*
Sec. 15-31. Lot locations and restrictions.
The contour map containing the lot numbers and location of the lots along the banks of Lake Fort Phantom Hill as the same appears in the
office of the city secretary is referred to and made a part of this article for all purposes, and the designation of the use of lots as provided
thereon is a part of this article. No building permit will be issued for the erection of any structure other than in compliance with such lot
designations; where any lot is restricted as to a particular use, such use restriction shall be fully complied with.
(Code 1965, § 20-16)
Sec. 15-32. Building permit–Required.
No person shall erect or structurally alter any pier, dock, wharf, float island or other structure or do any plumbing or electrical work
thereon in Lake Fort Phantom Hill or along the shores of such lake without first having applied for and obtained a permit for such
construction or alteration from the building official of the city.
(Code 1965, § 20-11)
Sec. 15-33. Same–Application; plans and specifications.
Every application for a permit to erect or structurally alter any pier, dock, wharf, float island, building or other structure or to do any
plumbing or electrical work thereon in or along the shore of Lake Fort Phantom Hill shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the
proposed layout of such structural alteration, together with a legal description of the property on which the proposed new construction or
alterations are to be made. Designation by lot number as assigned by the city shall be a sufficient legal description.
(Code 1965, § 20-12)
Sec. 15-34. Same–Approval of electrical plans and work required.
Prior to the issuance of any permit for the building, construction or alteration of any structure in or on the shores of Lake Fort Phantom
Hill there shall be submitted to the building official a plan outline of the wiring to be used in such structure and the same shall first be
approved as to its safety for the intended use before the issuance of any building permit shall be authorized. No electrical service wires
shall be attached to any building until the same has been inspected and passed by the building inspection department.
(Code 1965, § 20-13)
Sec. 15-35. Same–Compliance with division.
No building permit shall be issued under the provisions of this division unless the proposed construction or alteration shall be in
compliance with the provisions of this division.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-36. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 1 of Ordinance 23-1994, adopted May 26, 1994, repealed § 15-36 in its entirety. Formerly, § 15-36 pertained to building permit and appeal of
decision of building official and derived from § 20-15 of the 1965 Code.
Sec. 15-37. Location of structures generally.
Any structure erected or structurally altered in or along the shoreline of Lake Fort Phantom Hill, including residential and commercial
structures, but excluding boat houses, docks and other nonresidence structures which must have water contact, shall be situated so that the
floor of such building shall be [as shown on] the FIRM maps plus one foot and alterations shall be allowed as per the zoning ordinance
and building codes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/648
(Code 1965, § 20-14; Ord. No. 88-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82)
Sec. 15-38. Location of certain businesses restricted.
No business such as a restaurant, dance hall, concession stand or any other enterprise for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
except marine supplies and tackle, shall be erected on any pier, dock, wharf, float island, piling or other structure extending into or above
Lake Fort Phantom Hill.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-39. Extension into lake restricted.
No structure shall be erected in any part of Lake Fort Phantom Hill or any channel or arm thereof so as to extend a distance of more than
two hundred (200) feet into the lake or channel or arm thereof, or a distance of more than one-third the distance from shore to shore of
such lake, arm or channel at the point where the structure is erected, whichever shall be the lesser distance. Such distance shall be
measured from the high water line.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-40. Proximity to property line.
No structure shall be erected nor structurally altered to be nearer than five (5) feet to any property line of the owner or applicant.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-41. Resistance to wind, water pressures.
Construction of any piers, wharves, floats or docks shall be well braced to withstand the pressure of wind and water with boats tied to
such pier, dock, wharf, float or other structure.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-42. Metal barrels, drums prohibited.
In no event shall metal barrels or oil drums be used in the installation, repair or remodeling of a pier or dock. The property owner or
lessee shall maintain all piers and docks in a safe condition for their intended use at all times.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-43. Septic tanks restricted.
No existing septic tanks or drain lines shall be permitted either below elevation 1642.0 mean sea level or within twenty-five (25) feet
horizontally of the elevation 1635.9 mean sea level (uncontrolled spillway elevation) contour line and no new septic tanks or new or
additional drain lines shall be installed closer than seventy-five (75) feet of elevation 1635.9 feet mean sea level; provided that any septic
tank or drain line existing on July 1, 1977, that does not meet these requirements but is in use at such time may continue to be used and
maintained contingent upon proper maintenance as determined by periodic inspection and subject to all existing and future federal, state
and city rules, regulations, laws and ordinances.
(Code 1965, § 20-14; Ord. No. 16-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A-1), 6-8-17)
Sec. 15-44. Inspections.
All piers, wharves, floats and docks shall be inspected by the lake patrol officers during the month of July of each year.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-45. Notice of noncompliance.
The owner or lessee of the property on which a structure is situated at Lake Fort Phantom Hill shall be notified in writing if such structure
does not meet the provisions of this division.
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Sec. 15-46. Compliance with notice.
If a structure at Lake Fort Phantom Hill does not meet the provisions of this division, repair or alteration shall be required at the owner's
or lessee's expense to bring such structure into compliance with this division within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of
noncompliance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/648
(Code 1965, § 20-14)
Secs. 15-47–15-53. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY
Sec. 15-54. Definition.
For the purposes of this division, the term “recreational activity” shall mean and include any water carnival, power boat race, sailboat
race, trade show, water skiing competition or exhibition or any other such activity at Lake Fort Phantom Hill or on the lake shore.
(code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-55. Agreement, permit required.
No person shall conduct any recreational activity at the lake or lake shore without having entered into a recreational activity agreement
with the director of water utilities or his designated representative. This agreement shall constitute a permit for the requesting
organization to hold such activity.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-56. Compliance with agreement.
No person shall conduct any recreational activity in violation of any term or condition specified in the agreement therefor.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-57. Application for agreement.
The person or entity proposing to hold a recreational activity shall make application to the director of water utilities for an agreement for
such program or event. Such application shall be signed by the person or entity making application and shall state all details of the
proposed program or event. All applications shall be in writing and shall be submitted thirty (30) days in advance of the planned activity.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-58. Fee.
The fee for any permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each recreational activity.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-59. Insurance.
The applicant for an agreement permit required by the provisions of this division shall obtain insurance in at least an amount meeting the
requirements of the state torts claim act; and shall furnish a certificate of such insurance before the permit shall be issued. The city shall
be named in such insurance policy as an additional insured.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Sec. 15-60. Rescission.
The director of water utilities or his designated representative shall have the right to rescind any permit granted under this division and to
require the removal of any and all equipment to be used by the applicant, upon his failure to comply with the terms and conditions in this
chapter or in the recreational activity agreement, or if weather conditions or some other conditions should arise which would require that
activity not be permitted at the lake because the public safety would be jeopardized by such recreational activity.
(Code 1965, § 20-23)
Secs. 15-61–15-71. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. LAKE ABILENE, LAKE KIRBY, CAMERON LAKE, AND NELSON PARK LAKE
Sec. 15-72. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 15-72 pertaining to enforcement, was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 16-2017 adopted 6-8-17. Prior to the deletion this section
derived from the following: Code 1965, § 20-32; Ord. No. 29-2012, pt. 1, 6-28-12; and Ord. No. 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-1-16.
Sec. 15-73. Prohibited activities, areas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/648
(a) No person shall operate a personal water vessel, watercraft or surf craft in the waters of Lake Abilene at a distance of less than two
hundred (200) feet from the water intake.
(b) Swimming is prohibited in all areas of Lake Kirby and Nelson Park Lake.
(c) Operation of personal water vessels, is prohibited at Lake Abilene, Cameron Lake, and Nelson Park Lake. Personal water vessel
means a motorized vessel that is specifically designed to be operated by a person or persons sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel or
in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel.
(d) No person shall drive, park or otherwise place a motor vehicle, motorcycle, dirt bike, 4-wheeler or other wheeled-recreational
vehicle, nor place any other obstruction, upon the bed of Lake Abilene, Lake Kirby, Cameron Lake or Nelson Park Lake.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any use authorized by the city or the operation of water vessels (other than
those listed in subsections (c) or (f)) upon the waters of said lakes nor the launching of water vessels at launching ramps at said lakes
through the use of a motor vehicle or through the use of other lawful means.
(f) Operation of wind craft and surf craft is prohibited at Nelson Park Lake. Wind craft and surf craft means nonmotorized canoes,
punts, rowboats, sailboats, rubber rafts, racing shells, rowing sculls, kayaks, and other paddle craft when paddled, poled, oared, or
windblown. The Abilene Zoo shall have authority to operate wind craft and surf craft on Nelson Park Lake.
(g) A prohibited area is hereby designated within a one hundred (100) foot radius of the outlet control tower located near the east end
of the dam at Lake Kirby.
(Code 1965, § 20-28; Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94; Ord. No. 1-2001, pt. 2(Exh. A), 1-11-01; Ord. No. 29-2012, pt. 1, 6-28-12; Ord.
No. 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-1-16; Ord. No. 16-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A-1), 6-8-17)
Sec. 15-74. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 15-74 pertaining to fishing regulations and deriving from the 1965 Code, § 20-26 and Ordinance 29-2012, pt. 1, adopted 6-28-12; was
deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 12-1-16.
Sec. 15-75. Lake Abilene hours of operation.
Lake Abilene shall be closed to all recreational uses including but not limited to swimming, boating, or camping, between sunset of one
day and sunrise of the following day except by special permission from the director of water utilities.
(Code 1965, § 20-27; Ord. No. 23-1994, pt. 1, 5-26-94; Ord. No. 29-2012, pt. 1, 6-28-12; Ord. No. 62-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-1-16)
Sec. 15-76. Swimming at Lake Abilene
Swimming shall be permitted in certain areas of Lake Abilene only as authorized by the director of the water utilities or designated entity.
(Ord. No. 29-2012, pt. 1, 6-28-12)
Editor's note: Prior to the adoption of Ordinance 29-2012, § 15-76 was repealed in its entirety by part 1 of Ordinance 23-1994, adopted May 26, 1994. Formerly, §
15-76 pertained to destruction of property and derived from § 20-30 of the 1965 Code.
Chapter 16
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Massage: Any process containing of kneading, rubbing or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body of a human being, either with the
hand or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus, but shall not include massage by duly licensed
physicians, nor massage of the face practiced by duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops.
Massage establishment: Any building, room, place or establishment other than regularly licensed hospitals where manipulated massage or
manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, whether with or without use of
mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses or any other establishment being operated as a business.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/648
This term shall not include, however, beauty parlors or barbershops duly licensed under the penal code of the state or registered physical
therapists who treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and who operate only under such physician's direction.
(Code 1965, § 8-46)
Sec. 16-2. Right of inspection; interference with inspectors.
The officers of the police and health departments of the city are hereby authorized and empowered to enter, for the purpose of inspection,
and to inspect at any time massage establishments in the city, for the preservation of law and order and decency and further empowered
to, at any time, make such examinations through the licensed physicians of the department of health of the city as are necessary to
determine whether or not such employees are infected with any infectious disease.
It shall be grounds for the revocation of licenses issued under this chapter to interfere with the inspection of such premises.
(Code 1965, § 8-57)
Sec. 16-3. Hours of operation.
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Code 1965, § 8-56)
Sec. 16-4. Living, sleeping quarters prohibited.
No massage establishment shall be operated or conducted in connection with any place used for living or sleeping quarters.
(Code 1965, § 8-56)
Sec. 16-5. List of employees.
The manager or person in charge of massage establishments shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees, both on duty
and off duty, and such list shall be shown to all proper authorities of the police and health departments upon request.
(Code 1965, § 8-60)
Sec. 16-6. Sanitary requirements.
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary
condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic and bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body
shall be sanitized by a modern and approved method of sanitization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts
thereof after having been used upon one patron shall be sanitized before being used on another. All towels and linens furnished for use of
one patron shall not be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered.
(Code 1965, § 8-62)
Secs. 16-7–16-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LICENSE
Sec. 16-18. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained a license therefor from the city
secretary, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1965, § 8-47)
Sec. 16-19. Investigation of applicant.
After an application has been made for an original license or a renewal of an existing license to operate a massage establishment, the chief
of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's character and whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any
crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or whether the applicant is a person of unfit character, or whether
the holder of a license for such an establishment, or any employee of such establishment committed any lewd, indecent or other act
contrary to common decency during the last licensing period, or such an establishment employs any person convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or whether such an establishment employs a woman who has been
convicted of vagrancy or prostitution, or who is a known prostitute.
(Code 1965, § 8-49)
Sec. 16-20. Names of, medical certificates for employees.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/648
At the time of making application for the license required by this article, the applicant shall furnish to the health department of the city the
names and addresses of all employees of massage establishments and all such employees of massage establishments shall be required to
secure from the health department a medical certificate certifying that such employee has been examined and that such examination
discloses the fact that such person employed, or to be employed by such establishment, is free from any infectious or communicable
disease. Such medical certificate shall be renewed annually by the health officer.
(Code 1965, § 8-50)
Sec. 16-21. Fee.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 8-51; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
Sec. 16-22. Issuance restricted.
A massage establishment license shall only be issued upon the approval of the health officer and the chief of police, in writing, and a
certificate of occupancy from the building inspector.
(Code 1965, § 8-47)
Sec. 16-23. Refusal–Authorized.
The chief of police shall refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of any license required by this article to any applicant who has been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or where the applicant is a person of unfit
character, or where the holder of a license for such an establishment or any employee of such an establishment committed any lewd,
indecent or other act contrary to common decency during the last licensing period; or where any such establishment employs any person
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or which employs a woman who has been
convicted of vagrancy or prostitution, or who is a known prostitute.
(Code 1965, § 8-52)
Sec. 16-24. Same–Appeal.
In the event the chief of police shall refuse to approve the issuance of an original license or the renewal of a license to any applicant in
this article, the action of the chief of police shall be final unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal to approve the
issuance of or the renewal of a license, file a written appeal with the city secretary, addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing by
the city upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted.
In the event such appeal is filed, the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with
reference to the application in question, including the written application, together with the action of the chief of police and the reasons
for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the
chief of police, at which hearing the city council may make such investigation as it may see fit, whether all the pertinent facts appear in
the application or not, and the city council shall determine whether or not such license shall be granted or refused, and such action as the
city council shall take thereon shall be final and conclusive.
(Code 1965, § 8-53)
Sec. 16-25. Display.
The license required by this article shall be exhibited at all times in the licensed establishments.
(Code 1965, § 8-48)
Sec. 16-26. Revocation–Authorized.
Any license issued by the city secretary, after approval in writing by the director of public health and the chief of police, pursuant to this
article, may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police when it shall appear that the business of the person to whom such permit was
issued has been conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or in violation of any statute of the state, any applicable provision of this
Code or other ordinance of the city, or that the person conducting such business is of unfit character to conduct same, or that the purpose
for which such license has been issued is being abused, to the detriment of the public, or that the license is being used for a purpose
different from that for which it was issued to the license holder or that the establishment is not kept in a sanitary condition as determined
by the health officer. Such notice of revocation shall be given by the chief of police in writing and shall be addressed to the license
holder's last known business address.
(Code 1965, § 8-54)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/648
Sec. 16-27. Same–Appeal.
In the event the chief of police revokes the license issued to any license holder under this article, the action of the chief of police shall be
final unless the license holder shall, within ten (10) days after the receipt of written notice of such revocation, file a written appeal with
the city secretary addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing by the council upon the question as to whether or not such license
should have been revoked.
In the event such appeal is filed, the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all the proceedings theretofore had with
reference to the revocation of the license in question, together with the action of the chief of police and the reasons for such action. The
city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police, at which
hearing the city council may make such investigation as it may see fit, and the city council shall determine whether or not the action of
the chief of police should be ratified and confirmed, or should be set aside, and such decision of the city council, after such hearing, shall
be final and conclusive as to all parties.
(Code 1965, § 8-55)
Chapter 17
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 17-1–17-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PAWN SHOPS*
Sec. 17-51. Hold period for personal property purchased by pawn shops.
(a) Each item of personal property purchased from the general public by any local pawn shop under the regulation of the Texas Pawn
Shop Act and the Consumer Credit Commissioner must be held at the licensed pawn shop location for a period from the purchase date
before being modified, changed, sold, or disposed of in any manner for at least eleven (11) days.
(b) The city police department shall have the authority to extend the hold period on any particular personal property if the interest of
justice so requires, from eleven (11) days, to a period not exceeding twenty (20) days, by providing written notice to the local pawn shop,
(under the regulation of the Consumer Credit Commissioner,) in possession of the personal property on or before the 11th day of the hold
period.
(Ord. No. 16-2001, pts. 1, 2, 7-26-01; Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Secs. 17-52–17-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. METAL RECYCLING ENTITIES AND PRECIOUS METAL BUYERS
Sec. 17-61. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section:
Business days. Every official working day of the week, including Monday through Friday. This shall exclude any day in which the city
administration offices are closed due to holidays, inclement weather days, etc.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the City of Abilene, Texas, or designated representative.
City secretary. The city secretary of the City of Abilene, Texas, or designated representative.
Consignment store. A retail store that sells secondhand items on behalf of others and receives a percentage of the sales price.
Fixed location. A location that is owned or leased solely as a storefront location to sell or purchase precious metals or regulated metals.
Metal recycling entity. Anyone who operates or maintains a scrap metal yard or other place in which used or previously purchased metal
items or scrap metal is collected or kept for shipment, sale, or transfer or engages in the business of utilizing machinery or equipment for
the processing of or manufacturing of iron, steel, or nonferrous metallic scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron, scrap steel or
nonferrous metallic scrap for re-melting purposes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/648
Precious metal. Metals as defined by the Texas Occupations Code section 1956.051, as amended.
Precious metal buyer. Any person engaged in the business of buying gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium,
ruthenium, or an alloy of those metals as defined in Texas Occupations Code section 1956.051, as amended.
Regulated metal. Metals as defined by the Texas Occupations Code section 1956.001, as amended.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-62. Exceptions.
This article shall not be applicable to:
(a) The sale of aluminum cans.
(b) Trade or purchase of firearms.
(c) Entities licensed as a pawn shop with the state.
(d) The sale or purchase of coins.
(e) Consignment stores with the exception of transactions of precious metals.
(f) Secondhand personal property businesses with the exception of transactions of precious metals.
(g) Items purchased at auctions or estate sales.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-63. Permit required.
All persons transacting business as a metal recycling entity or a precious metal buyer shall have a current metal and precious metal permit
to operate issued by the city.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-64. Permit application.
Applicants for permits under this article must file with the city secretary an application in writing on a form obtained from the city
secretary and provide the following:
(a) A valid Texas Driver's License or state-issued photo identification.
(b) A valid email address.
(c) The number of the limited sales tax permit issued to the business by the state comptroller's office, if applicable.
(d) A brief description of the activity or business to be conducted.
(e) The appropriate fee.
Any application made pursuant to the provisions of this article may be presented to the Better Business Bureau of Abilene or the city
police department for investigation.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-65. Required fee.
The fees and charges for permits furnished by the city shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary. No application for a permit will be processed until the required fees are tendered to the city secretary. Permit fees are
nonrefundable and shall not be prorated.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-66. Issuance.
Upon completion and presentation of the application, the city secretary shall issue a permit to the applicant within 5 business days unless
grounds for denial exist under section 17-70 of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/648
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-67. Contents.
(a) Each permit issued under this article shall show the name of the permitted individual, business address, the date of issuance, and the
expiration date of such permit.
(b) The permit shall be numbered and printed in black; except, that the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: “The
issuance of this license is not an endorsement by the City of Abilene, or any of its officers or employees, and expires _____________.”
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-68. Permit expiration.
The permit will be valid through December 31 of the year the permit is issued. The permit will only be valid for the address for which it
is issued and will become void if the location of the business is changed.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-69. Transfer.
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred or assigned to any person or business entity.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-70. Denial.
An application for permit may be denied to a person under this article for the following reasons:
(a) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application.
(b) Permit for same business has been revoked within the past 6 months.
(c) The applicant has been convicted within the previous five years of felony offense under chapters 30 through 32 of the
Texas Penal Code as amended and is not clear of community supervision or parole for the last five years.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-71. Revocation.
(a) Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes by any official of the city:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Applicant is convicted of a felony offense under chapters 30 through 32 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
(b) Notice of revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, and specify the grounds of the revocation.
(c) When notice is received that a permit has been revoked, the person shall immediately surrender their permit to the revoking official
and the business operations governed by the permit shall cease to operate.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-72. Appeals.
(a) An appeal from any act of denial or revocation of any permit shall be filed with the city manager or his designee within five (5)
business days from the date of denial or revocation.
(b) Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager or his designee a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal.
(c) The city manager or his designee shall issue a decision on the denial or revocation in writing within 5 business days of receipt of the
appeal.
(d) The revocation or denial is not stayed pending the city manager's or his designee's decision.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/648
(e) The decision and order of the city manager or his designee on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-73. Exhibition of permit required.
All persons transacting business as a metal recycling entity or precious metal buyer shall conspicuously display the current permit to
operate issued by the city.
“Conspicuously displayed” shall mean displayed so that it is visible to any customer conducting business with the metal recycling entity
or precious metal buyer.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-74. Recordkeeping requirements.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, every person licensed or transacting any business as a metal recycling entity or precious metal
buyer within the city shall use the entity designated by the chief of police to maintain an electronic inventory-tracking system and
transmit all information required by this article via computer to the entity designated by the chief of police.
(b) The information required to be transmitted by this section must include:
(1) The date and time of each transaction in which precious metal or regulated metal is purchased, pledged, or received
monetary value for said item(s).
(2) An accurate and detailed description of any and all precious metal or regulated metal purchased or acquired during the
regular course of business for any monetary value, including any and all trademarks, identification numbers, serial numbers,
model numbers, brand names, and other identifying marks.
(3) The full name, address, date of birth, driver's license number or state-issued identification card, and physical description
of the person with whom each such purchase or transaction is consummated. The person must present their driver's license or
state-issued identification card to vendor at the time of each transaction.
(4) A digital photograph is required of any precious metal or regulated metal purchased by a precious metal buyer or metal
recycling entity acquired during the course of business. This digital photograph shall be uploaded to the entity designated by
the chief of police which will be associated with the transaction. Photographs shall clearly depict the item(s). No more than
(10) ten pieces of precious metal may be photographed together. They must be photographed in a manner in which they can
easily be identified
(c) The information required to be transmitted by subsection (b) of this section shall be transmitted within 24 hours of the transaction.
(d) Failure to obtain such information or to falsify such information may result in a citation issued to the individual completing the
transaction or the on-site manager or supervisor.
(e) Exception to photograph requirements. Metal recycling entities with a fixed location shall not be required to photograph and upload
their purchases if they have a digital video recorder that captures day-to-day activities and transaction within the business that will be
made available within three business days upon request of the chief of police. If the entities do not have a DVR system they will be
required to photograph and upload each regulated metal transaction. Video evidence will be retained 90 days; photographs will be
retained 180 days.
(f) Exception to reporting requirements. The exceptions found in section 1956.002 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended, shall
apply to this section provided any payment made for the regulated materials excepted under this section is paid to the utility or business
and not to an individual seller. The excepted transactions include:
(1) A purchase of regulated material from a public utility or a manufacturing, industrial, commercial, retail, or other seller
that sells regulated material in the ordinary course of the seller's business;
(2) A purchase of regulated material by a manufacturer whose primary business is the manufacture of iron and steel
products made from melting scrap iron and scrap steel; or
(3) The transport or hauling of recyclable materials to or from the metal recycling entity.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-75. Police hold binder required.
(a) All metal recycling entities or precious metal buyers within the city shall maintain a police hold binder to log all property believed
to be stolen or that is under investigation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/648
(b) This binder shall consist of a three ring notebook containing a current copy of this article, a property log on a form approved by the
city police department, and signed statements from each employee acknowledging they have been provided a copy of this article and they
understand the provisions.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-76. Stolen property or property under investigation.
(a) Any item deemed as stolen property or under law enforcement investigation shall be placed away from public view, shall be moved
separate from other purchased items and identified as “police hold” item(s) and shall be noted in the police hold binder provided by the
city police department. Pursuant to the Texas Occupations Code section 1956.037, property subject to “police hold” shall be held a
minimum of 60 days unless directed otherwise by a peace officer.
(b) Any law enforcement agency other than the city police department that requests items to be placed on hold due to an ongoing
investigation shall be directed to the city police department's criminal investigations division upon placing said item on police hold.
(c) Property subject to “police hold” shall be held a minimum of 60 days. Property may be released before the expiration of 60 days if
directed by a peace officer.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-77. Acceptance of government or utility property by a metal recycling entity.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a metal recycling entity within the city to purchase or
receive any item of property on which words or markings appear indicating ownership of such item by any government entity or any
public utility company, except where the person offering such item for sale or transfer provides:
(1) Written authorization from the governmental entity, or utility to convey the item on behalf of the entity or utility; or
(2) A valid receipt from the governmental entity or utility evidencing such entity or utility has conveyed or relinquished
ownership of the item.
(b) It shall not be a defense to prosecution that an item of property contains no words or markings indicating ownership if the person
who purchased or received the item knows or should reasonably be expected to know such item is owned by any government entity or
any public utility company.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-78. Acceptance of property sealed or unopened in its original packaging by a metal recycling entity.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a metal recycling entity within the city to purchase or receive
an item of property sealed or unopened in its original packaging unless the person conveying such item presents a receipt or proof of
purchase for the item. Evidence of ownership must be retained with the item.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-79. Acceptance of property inscribed with a company name by a metal recycling entity.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a metal recycling entity within the city limits to purchase
or receive an item of property identified as the property of a business entity unless the person conveying such item provides at the time of
conveyance a valid receipt indicating lawful ownership, a signed statement attesting to lawful ownership, or written authorization from
the owner to convey the item on such owner's behalf.
(b) Evidence of ownership or written authorization to convey the item must be retained with the item, unless otherwise authorized by
the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-80. Hold period for personal property.
Each item of precious metal purchased from the general public by any precious metal buyer must be held at the dealer's location for a
period from the purchase date before being modified, changed, sold, or disposed of in any manner for at least seven (7) days. Exceptions
can be granted by the chief of police for unique circumstances.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-81. Hold period for personal property for metal recycling entities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/648
Section 17-80 of this article does not apply to metal recycling entities. Those entities shall hold all personal property for the time period
required by state law.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-82. Extension of hold period.
The chief of police shall have the authority to extend the hold period on any particular personal property if the interest of justice so
requires by providing written notice to the precious metal buyer or metal recycling entity in possession of the personal property on or
before the expiration of the hold period.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-83. Additional requirements for precious metal buyers without a fixed location.
In addition to the other requirements of this article any precious metal buyer without a fixed location operating in the city shall make all
purchases available for inspection at request of the chief of police within three (3) business days. This request can be either by phone,
email or fax.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-84. Enforcement; inspections; access to records.
The chief of police shall have the authority, in accordance with applicable law, to do the following to enforce the provisions of this article:
(a) Issue any orders, directives, or warnings required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular
provisions.
(b) Enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of
this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state.
(c) Request and receive any records necessary to establish the premises are covered by a valid permit.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Sec. 17-85. Penalty.
(a) A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each transaction and each day shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation of this article, including seizure of goods.
(Ord. No. 58-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-12)
Chapter 18
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Alley: Any street as herein defined having no legal or official name other than alley.
Curb: The edge of the roadway marked or understood.
Double parking: The parking of a vehicle on the roadway or a portion thereof alongside any vehicle which is parallel parked, or behind
any vehicle which is parked head in.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/648
Legal holiday: Only the following days: January 1 (New Year's Day); Fourth Monday in May (Memorial Day); July 4 (Independence
Day); First Monday in September (Labor Day); Fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day); and December 25 (Christmas Day).
Loading zones: Spaces adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of freight or passengers.
Parkway: That portion of a street or highway between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines not
intended for use of pedestrians; also, the intervening space between the roadways of a divided street or highway, or any island or area,
whether or not clearly defined by curbs or markings which divides any portion of any street, highway or intersection into separate lanes
for vehicular traffic.
School day: Any day officially designated by appropriate public school district trustees as a day on which school will be in session.
In addition to the foregoing definitions, this chapter hereby adopts all of the definitions of the state law as set out in Article 6701d,
Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, as presently enacted or subsequently amended, provided, that in the event of any conflict, the
foregoing definitions shall control. All other words used in this chapter shall have their ordinary and commonly accepted meanings.
(Code 1965, § 17-1; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85)
Sec. 18-2. State law adopted.
There is adopted as a part of this chapter all of the provisions of Article 6701d of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes insofar as applicable.
(Code 1965, § 17-7)
Sec. 18-3. Use of roadway by persons on roller skates, etc.
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway designated
as a “through street” except while crossing such street on a crosswalk and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply to persons using or riding a scooter or
bicycle as authorized by chapter 23, scooter and bicycle sharing.
(Code 1965, § 17-10; Ord. No. 20-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-11-19)
Sec. 18-4. When driver unable to report accidents.
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant, shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not given by the driver.
(Code 1965, § 17-18)
Sec. 18-5. Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
(Code 1965, § 17-69)
Sec. 18-6. Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
(Code 1965, § 17-70)
Sec. 18-7. Railroad trains not to block streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a
manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this
provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
(Code 1965, § 17-71)
Sec. 18-8. Mufflers required.
(a) No person shall operate a motorcycle, motorscooter, mini-bike or motor driven bicycle on private or public property, unless such
vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying
smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/648
(b) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate this
section.
(Code 1965, § 19-23)
State law references: Mufflers, Vernon's Civ. Sts., art. 6701d, § 134.
Sec. 18-9. Operation of noisy vehicles.
(a) The running of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary noise is hereby
declared to be unlawful and is hereby prohibited.
(b) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate this
section.
(Code 1965, § 19-23)
Sec. 18-10. Roller skates, bicycles and similar devices prohibited within certain district; exception.
(a) No person shall use or operate roller skates, rollerblades, or skateboards, or ride in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar
device, upon any public roadway, sidewalk, walkway or other public areas within the district designated and described under subsection
(c), unless specifically permitted and posted for such purposes.
(b) No person shall use or operate a bicycle, tricycle, unicycle or other similar device upon any sidewalk, walkway or other public
areas other than the public roadway within the district designated and described under subsection (c), unless specifically permitted and
posted for such purposes.
(c) The activities set forth in subsections (a) and (b) are prohibited within the area encompassed by the boundaries of the Abilene
Reinvestment Zone #1, commonly known as the tax increment financing district (TIF district).
The outside boundary streets are as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of Orange Street and N. 8th Street as the northwest corner then east along N. 8th Street to Plum
Street, then north to N. 10th Street, then east to N. Treadaway Boulevard, then south on N. Treadaway Boulevard to N. 3rd
Street, then east to Almond Street, then south and southwesterly to a point just north of the east-west Texas & Pacific Railroad
tracks on the northern projection of Rose Street, then south on Rose Street to S. 2nd Street, then west to Locust Street, then
south on Locust Street to S. 5th Street, then west on S. 5th Street to Pecan Street, then south on Pecan Street to S. 7th Street,
then west to Butternut Street for the southwest corner, then north on Butternut Street to S. 1st Street, then northeasterly along
the connecting roadway to N. 1st Street at Hickory Street, then north on Hickory Street to N. 7th Street, then west to Orange
Street, then north to the beginning point, the intersection of Orange Street and N. 8th Street.
The district to include all property within the above described streets and the full right-of-way of the boundary streets. This
prohibition includes, but is not limited to the following specific properties within the district: Everman Park, Minter Park,
T&P Freight Warehouse, the R.E.A. Building, T&P Depot, City Hall, Civic Center, and the Taylor County Courthouse.
(d) Said boundary as herein described shall continue in effect for the purpose of this section without regard to the expiration of the TIF
district or any changes to its stated boundary for tax collection purposes.
(e) Exceptions.
(1) Wheelchairs and other such devices to assist handicapped or physically impaired persons are excluded from the
provisions of this section.
(2) Registered participants in an approved parade, festival, celebration or similar event are excluded from the provisions of
this section to the extent of their approved participation.
(3) Uniformed public safety representatives are excluded from the provisions of this section while in the course of their
regular duties.
(4) Persons using, riding or operating a scooter or bicycle as authorized by chapter 23, scooter and bicycle sharing.
(Ord. No. 24-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-8-00; Ord. No. 20-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-11-19)
Sec. 18-11. Use of golf carts on public streets.
(a) Annually, from November 1 until December 31, parcel delivery services, including but not limited to United Parcel Service of
America, Inc. and FedEx Corp., may operate a golf cart on a portion of a public street within the City of Abilene that is:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/648
(1) Within two miles of a golf course;
(2) Has a speed limit of not more than 35 miles per hour;
(3) Provides for no more than two lanes of vehicular traffic per direction; and
(4) Is not designated as part of the state or federal highway system.
(b) A golf cart operated pursuant to this ordinance must have headlamps, tail lamps, reflectors, a parking brake, and mirrors. Any
employee of a parcel delivery service that operates a golf cart pursuant to this section must possess a valid state license to operate a motor
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 50-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-25-12)
Secs. 18-12–18-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ENFORCEMENT, OBEDIENCE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-21. Duty of police officers.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street
traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
(Code 1965, § 17-2)
Sec. 18-22. Authority of police to direct traffic.
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws.
(Code 1965, § 17-3)
Sec. 18-23. Authority of fire department to direct traffic.
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(Code 1965, § 17-4)
Sec. 18-24. Temporary; experimental regulations.
The chief of police by and with the approval of the director of traffic and transportation is empowered to invoke regulations necessary to
make effective provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. The director of traffic and transportation, by and with the approval of the city manager, is empowered to make
experimental regulations. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect more than ninety (90) days.
(Code 1965, § 17-5)
Secs. 18-25–18-31. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU*
Sec. 18-32. Created.
There shall be a traffic violations bureau, the head of which shall be the municipal court clerk. The judge who hears traffic cases shall
designate the specified offenses under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and the state traffic laws in respect to which
payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the
amount of such fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinances,
and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the judge.
(Code 1965, § 17-122)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/648
Sec. 18-33. Payment of fine.
The payment of a fine to the bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon
accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-123)
Sec. 18-34. Duties.
The following duties are imposed upon the traffic violations bureau:
(a) It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead
guilty, waive court appearance, and give power of attorney.
(b) It shall receive and issue receipts for cash escrow deposits from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter
the time of their appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present.
(c) It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding
twelve (12) months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau.
(Code 1965, § 17-124)
Sec. 18-35. Records.
The traffic violations bureau shall keep record and submit summarized monthly reports to the city judge of all notices issued and arrests
made for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the city and of all the fines collected by the traffic violations bureau or court, and
of the final disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of such laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so
maintained as to show all types of violations and total of each. Such records shall be public records.
(Code 1965, § 17-125)
Sec. 18-36. Additional duties of traffic violations bureau.
The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by this chapter and the traffic ordinances or as may be
required by any laws of this state.
(Code 1965, § 17-126)
Sec. 18-37. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 2 of Ordinance 5-1994, adopted Feb. 24, 1994, repealed § 18-37 in its entirety. Formerly, § 18-37 pertained to minimum fines for parking
violations and doubling of fines upon becoming delinquent and derived from subsection (1) of Pt. 1 of Ordinance 133-1983, adopted Dec. 1, 1983.
Secs. 18-38–18-43. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PENALTIES, PROCEDURES UPON ARREST
Sec. 18-44. Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests.
The municipal court clerk shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear and answer to
charges of violating traffic laws and ordinances in the corporation court of the city. Such books shall include serially numbered sets of
citations in quadruplicate in the form prescribed and approved jointly by the judge of the municipal court and the municipal court clerk.
The municipal court clerk shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The
municipal court clerk shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set
of citations contained therein.
(Code 1965, § 17-127; Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 3, 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-45. Procedure of police officers.
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before a magistrate for the violation of any traffic laws,
a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning and does not take such person
into custody under arrest, shall take the name, address and the operator's license number of such person, the registered number of the
motor vehicle involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him in writing on a form as provided
for in section 18-44, a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him in the municipal court at a time at least ten
(10) days after such alleged violation to be specified in such citation. The officer, upon receiving a written promise of the alleged violator
to answer as specified in the citation, shall release such person from custody.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/648
(Code 1965, § 17-128)
Sec. 18-46. Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrant and complaints.
Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or of any
traffic ordinance shall deposit the original and both duplicate copies of the citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause
them to be delivered to the municipal court. Upon the filing of such original citation in the municipal court such citation may be disposed
of only by trial in such court or by other official action by a judge of such court, including forfeiture of bail, cash escrow deposit, or by
payment of a fine to the traffic violations bureau. The judge of the municipal court shall require the return to him of each traffic citation
and all copies thereof, which has been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and has not been issued to an alleged violator. The
chief of police shall establish a procedure not in conflict with this article for the voiding of traffic citations that are spoiled or improperly
or erroneously drawn. It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the police department or other officer or public
employee to dispose of, alter or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic
citation, complaint or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this section.
(Code 1965, § 17-129)
Sec. 18-47. Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this
chapter.
(Code 1965, § 17-130)
Sec. 18-48. Audit of records and reports.
Every record of traffic citations, complaints thereon, and warrants issued therefor required in this article shall be audited at least quarterly
by the director of finance who shall submit a report of such audit together with a summary thereof to the mayor and city council. Such
reports shall be public records. For the purpose of this section, the director of finance or his duly authorized representatives shall have
access at all times to all necessary records, files and papers of the municipal court, the traffic violations bureau, and the police
department.
(Code 1965, § 17-131)
Sec. 18-49. When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint.
In the event the form of citation provided under section 18-44 includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of
this state in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense alleged in the citation to have been committed, then such citation
when filed with a court having jurisdiction shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter.
(Code 1965, § 17-132)
Sec. 18-50. Citation on illegally parked vehicle.
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or
ordinance or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed
on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation requiring the driver to answer to
the charge against him at a time specified in the citation to be not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than ten (10) days from the
date of issuance of such citation.
(Code 1965, § 17-134)
Secs. 18-51, 18-52. Reserved.
Editor's note: Part 2 of Ordinance 5-1994, adopted Feb. 24, 1994, repealed §§ 18-51 and 18-52. Formerly, § 18-51 pertained to presumption in reference to illegal
parking and derived from § 17-135 of the 1965 Code; § 18-52 pertained to failure to comply with parking citation, warrants of arrest and impounding of vehicles and
derived from § 17-136 of the 1965 Code and subsection (2) of Pt. 1 of Ordinance 133-1983, adopted Dec. 1, 1983.
Sec. 18-53. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail or cash escrow deposit of any person charged with a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund.
(Code 1965, § 17-137)
Sec. 18-54. Official misconduct.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/648
Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or
forfeiture, either before or after a deposit in the general fund, to comply with the foregoing provisions of this article shall constitute
misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom.
(Code 1965, § 17-138)
DIVISION 4. PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Sec. 18-55. Created.
There is hereby created a parking violations bureau in and for the City of Abilene which shall have original jurisdiction over cases
involving violations of city ordinances relating to the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles as contained in Chapter 18 of the Code of
the City of Abilene.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-56. Hearing officers.
(a) The parking violations bureau shall be composed of one or more hearing officers who shall be appointed by the municipal court
clerk.
(b) Hearing officers shall have the authority to administer oaths and to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents.
(c) An order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-57. Parking citations.
(a) Violations of city ordinances relating to parking, stopping, or standing are declared to be civil offenses. The administrative
adjudication process for parking, stopping, or standing violations shall be initiated by the issuance of a parking citation which may be
issued by a peace officer or other authorized parking enforcement agent. Authorized parking enforcement agents shall include any police
officer, parking control officer, city marshal, or other employee of the city designated by the chief of police, city marshal, or the city
manager to enforce the provisions of this code in regard to the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles.
(b) If the owner or operator of the vehicle is not present at the time of issuance of the citation, the citation may be issued by affixing the
citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
(c) The citation shall provide that the person charged with a parking, stopping, or standing offense shall have the right of hearing to
determine the issue of liability for the charged offense. Such right to a hearing shall be exercised by mail or by appearing in person before
a hearing officer within ten (10) days from the date of the citation.
(d) The original or any copy of the citation or summons is a record kept in the ordinary course of business in the city and is rebuttable
proof of the facts it contains.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-58. Presumption of ownership.
(a) In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant
named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, such violation occurred.
In the event such vehicle was, at the time of such parking, registered in the name of, or owned by, a corporation, partnership, association,
governmental body or any entity other than an individual, proof that the particular vehicle in question was parked in violation of any such
law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint did, at the time of such parking, have custody or control
of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person having custody or control of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
(b) A state department of transportation computer-generated record of the registered vehicle is prima facie evidence of its contents in an
administrative adjudication hearing under this article.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-59. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/648
Sec. 18-59.1. Hearings.
(a) At the hearing before the hearing officer, the defendant may either admit, admit with explanation, or deny the alleged infraction.
(b) The issuing peace officer or other authorized parking enforcement agent shall not be required to attend the hearing.
(c) It is not required that the city's prosecuting attorney attend the hearing. Provided, however, that if the defendant is represented by
legal counsel at the hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the prosecuting attorney who shall have a right to appear on behalf of the city
at said hearing.
(d) No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer shall examine the contents of the citation and the evidence
related to ownership of the vehicle in question, and shall hear and review the testimony and evidence presented by the defendant. If the
hearing officer determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the defendant, he shall find the
defendant liable therefor.
(e) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether or not the person charged is liable for
violation of the parking, stopping, or standing ordinance and the amount of any civil fines, costs, or fees assessed against him. The order
shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court. All such orders shall be kept in a separate index or file by the municipal court clerk
using appropriate data processing techniques.
(f) Failure of a person charged with the offense to appear at a hearing within the aforesaid ten-day period shall be considered an
admission of liability for the charged offense.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-59.2. Appeal.
(a) A person determined by the hearing officer to be in violation of a parking, stopping, or standing ordinance may appeal this
determination to the municipal court clerk or a deputy so designated.
(b) The appeal must be instituted by filing, not later than the thirtieth day after the filing of the hearing officer's order, a petition with
the clerk of the municipal court along with payment of a nonrefundable administrative appeal filing fee in the amount of five dollars
($5.00), as well as payment of any other costs required by law for municipal courts.
(c) After filing a petition for appeal, the municipal clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and place of the
hearing.
(d) The appeal hearing shall be a de novo review. The municipal court clerk shall examine the evidence presented at the appellate
hearing and if the court clerk determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the defendant, the
court clerk shall find the defendant liable therefor.
(e) Service of notice of appeal under this section does not stay the enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person who
files the appeal posts a cash bond before filing notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. Said cash bond shall be in the
amount of all fines, costs, and fees assessed by the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-59.3. Enforcement.
(a) An order filed by a hearing officer under this article, or a final judgment of the municipal court clerk or a deputy so designated after
appeal, may be enforced by:
(1) Impounding the vehicle;
(2) Immobilizing by the placing of a device (“boot”) that prohibits the movement of a motor vehicle on the vehicle that is
the subject of the order filed;
(3) An additional fine if not paid within the specified time;
(4) Denial of parking permits; or
(5) Provisions of section 18-61(e)(2).
(b) Provided, however, that no vehicle shall be impounded or immobilized under this article unless:
(1) The offender has three (3) or more delinquent unpaid citations in a calendar year; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/648
(2) Written notice is mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle at least ten (10) days before the vehicle is impounded or
immobilized, said notice to inform the registered owner of the vehicle's eligibility of immobilization or impoundment. Said
notice shall also inform the owner of his right to submit information to the hearing officer regarding the propriety of the
immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94; Ord. No. 5-1997 Pts. 1–3(Exh. A), 2-13-97)
Sec. 18-60. Procedures for immobilization and/or impoundment.
(a) When a vehicle is found parked, whether legally or illegally, at any time upon a public street or public property in the city, and such
vehicle has met the criteria for immobilization or impoundment as provided in section 18-59.3, any authorized parking enforcement agent
of the city may immobilize the vehicle by the installation on or attachment to the vehicle of a device, or boot, designed to prohibit the
movement of the vehicle. In the alternative, such vehicle may be towed and impounded, provided that the towing and impoundment is
authorized at the direction of a peace officer.
(b) At the time of immobilization, the agent shall also conspicuously attach to the vehicle a written notice on a form provided by the
city, said notice to contain the following information:
(1) Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this article, and that attempted movement may cause damage
to the vehicle;
(2) That release of the vehicle may be obtained at a designated place;
(3) That the owner may request a hearing regarding the immobilization; and
(4) That the vehicle may be towed and impounded after a designated period of time.
(c) Any vehicle which remains immobilized at 4:00 p.m. may be towed and impounded.
(d) In the event that a vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner thereof shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees for
towing, impoundment, and storage in addition to the fines, costs, and fees provided for herein. Towed vehicles that are not redeemed
within thirty (30) days shall be subject to disposition in the manner provided by state law.
(e) This section is to be cumulative of existing law, and nothing herein shall be construed to restrict or limit the right to tow and
impound vehicles under other applicable law.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-60.1. Boot removal.
(a) The registered owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle, or other authorized person, may secure the release of the vehicle
upon:
(1) Payment of or posting of a cash bond which may be in the amount of the fine and late fees, if any, for each delinquent
parking citation plus the applicable boot fee; or
(2) Entering into a pay agreement wherein the initial payment shall not be less than the boot fee amount and which must be
paid prior to release of vehicle; or
(3) Establishing that he was not the registered owner at the times in question or that he did not receive notice as required by
law.
If vehicle has been towed, the owner or authorized person shall be responsible to the towing company for all towing and storage fees.
(b) Payment of the fines, late fees, boot fee, and any towing and storage fees shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest such fines
and fees.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Sec. 18-61. Fines and fees.
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this Code related to the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, the amount to be determined by the hearing
officer in his reasonable discretion, subject to review on appeal to the municipal court clerk.
(b) Unless higher amounts are required by state law or a lesser amount is determined by the hearing officer or municipal court clerk or
so designated deputy, the minimum fines for parking violations shall be as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/648
(1) Exceeding posted time limit, first offense within a thirty-day period . . . $ 5.00
(2) Exceeding posted time limit, second offense within a thirty-day period . . . 25.00
(3) Exceeding posted time limit, third offense within a thirty-day period . . . 50.00
(4) Exceeding posted time limit, fourth offense and all subsequent offenses within a thirty-day period . . . 100.00
(5) On an expired meter . . . 5.00
(6) In a designated disabled, or handicap space . . . 250.00
(7) All other parking violations . . . 20.00
Any person to whom a parking citation has been issued shall have ten (10) days from the date of issuance of said citation in which to
answer the charges in a manner specified on the citation. Any citation which remains unanswered after ten (10) days shall be deemed to
be delinquent and the minimum fine amount shall become twice the amount specified above.
(c) The payment of a fine to the bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau,
upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof.
(d) The boot fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In addition to the boot fee, charges for towing and/or storage of impounded
vehicles shall be as provided by the law applicable to abandoned vehicles.
(e) If three (3) or more parking citations have not been answered within ten (10) days after date of issuance of the citations, the parking
violations bureau shall send to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the citations had been affixed a letter informing the owner that
the citations are delinquent and that either or both of the following actions may be taken if the citations have not been answered within
ten (10) days of the date of the letter:
(1) The vehicle may be impounded in place by means of an immobilization device or, at the option of the city, towed away
to a secure area of impoundment. If the vehicle is towed to a secure impoundment, the owner shall be responsible for towing
and storage charges.
(2) The registered owner of the vehicle on the dates which such parking violations occurred may be summoned to appear in
the Municipal Court by an order of a hearing officer. Failure to response to such order may result in further charges including
but not limited to failure to appear or a violation of city ordinance. Such charges shall be considered a Class C misdemeanor
charge. Each day such violation shall continue or be permitted to continue, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(f) All fines, costs, and fees shall be deposited in the proper account of the general fund of the city, unless otherwise directed by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94; Ord. No. 5-1997, pt. 4(Exh. A), 2-13-97; Ord. No. 18-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-25-00)
Sec. 18-62. Certain conduct unlawful.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties under
this article, to remove or attempt to remove or to tamper in any manner with an immobilization device (boot) installed on any vehicle
pursuant to this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the direction of a peace officer, to tow or move or to cause to be towed or moved
any vehicle on which a boot is then installed pursuant to this article from the place where it was booted.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties or the
owner or operator of a booted vehicle, to remove or relocate any notice placed upon a booted vehicle pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 5-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-24-94)
Secs. 18-63–18-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Sec. 18-66. Authority to install.
The director of traffic and transportation shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under
this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city or
under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
(Code 1965, § 17-19)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/648
Sec. 18-67. Manual and specifications.
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway and public
transportation commission or resolution adopted by the city council. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this chapter or city ordinance shall be official traffic-control devices.
(Code 1965, § 17-20)
Sec. 18-68. Presumption of legality.
Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority unless the contrary shall be
established by competent evidence.
(Code 1965, § 17-23)
Sec. 18-69. Tests.
The director of traffic and transportation may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
(Code 1965, § 17-6)
Sec. 18-70. Crosswalks, safety zones.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized:
(a) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at
intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he
may deem necessary;
(b) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
(Code 1965, § 17-25)
Sec. 18-71. Traffic lanes.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular
alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or
refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making
a lawful turning movement.
(Code 1965, § 17-26)
Secs. 18-72–18-82. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 18-83. State speed laws applicable.
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except as this chapter, as
authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to
drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter or city ordinance when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-27)
Sec. 18-84. Increasing state speed limits in certain zones.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon those streets
or portions thereof described in section 18-285 is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles, thereon by reason of the
designation and sign posting of such streets as through highways, or by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared
that the prima facie speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof described in section 18-285 shall be as therein stated, which speeds
so declared shall be effective at the time specified therein when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-28)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/648
Sec. 18-85. Decreasing state speed limits in certain zones.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon those streets
or portions thereof described in section 18-286 is greater than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets
and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof described in section 18-286 shall be as
therein stated, which speeds so declared shall be effective at the time specified therein when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-29)
Sec. 18-86. Regulation by traffic signals.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to regulate the time of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an
orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall
erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-30)
Sec. 18-87. Prima facie limit.
(a) Unless otherwise provided within this chapter, the prima facie speed limit on all public streets within the city shall be thirty (30)
miles per hour.
(b) It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum, reasonable and prudent safe
speed for the operation of vehicles upon the alleys of the city is fifteen (15) miles per hour, and any speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(Code 1965, § 17-31)
Secs. 18-88–18-98. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sec. 18-99. Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled so as indicated may conform to or be other
than as prescribed by law or ordinance. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
(Code 1965, § 17-33)
Sec. 18-100. Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right,
left or “U” turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of
any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such
turns are permitted.
(Code 1965, § 17-34)
Secs. 18-101–18-113. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ONE-WAY STREETS, ALLEYS
Sec. 18-114. Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys.
Whenever any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the director of traffic and
transportation shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(Code 1965, § 17-40)
Sec. 18-115. One-way streets and alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in sections 18-289 and 18-290, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/648
(Code 1965, § 17-41)
Sec. 18-116. Authority to restrict direction of movement during certain periods.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon
which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and
shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The director of traffic and
transportation may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center
line of the roadway.
(Code 1965, § 17-42)
Secs. 18-117–18-127. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Sec. 18-128. Through streets designated.
Those streets and parts of streets described in section 18-291 are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this chapter.
(Code 1965, § 17-43)
Sec. 18-129. Authority to erect stop and yield signs.
Whenever any provision of this Code or ordinance designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the director of traffic
and transportation to place and maintain a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or
intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by trafficcontrol
signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a
heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the
director of traffic and transportation upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
(Code 1965, § 17-44)
Sec. 18-130. Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding
any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
(Code 1965, § 17-49)
Sec. 18-131. Driving through closed, etc., railroad gate.
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(Code 1965, § 17-55)
Secs. 18-132–18-144. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Sec. 18-145. Driving through funeral or other procession.
No driver of a vehicle or motorman of a street car shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply
to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Code 1965, § 17-58)
Sec. 18-146. Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand side or edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow
the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(Code 1965, § 17-59)
Sec. 18-147. Funeral processions to be identified.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/648
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or
other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police.
(Code 1965, § 17-60)
Sec. 18-148. Funeral director to notify police department.
It shall be the duty of the funeral director to notify the police department of the time of each funeral procession which shall be under his
direction not later than two (2) hours before such funeral procession is to be formed.
(Code 1965, § 17-61)
Sec. 18-149. When permits required for parades and processions.
No procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United
States Army, Air Force or Navy, the military forces of the state, and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or
proceed along any street without first obtaining permission of the chief of police.
(Code 1965, § 17-62)
Sec. 18-150. Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
The driver of such vehicle shall not back into an intersection or over a crosswalk.
(Code 1965, § 17-64)
Sec. 18-151. Passing vehicles proceeding in the same direction within a school zone prohibited.
No person driving or operating a vehicle shall overtake or pass another vehicle moving in the same direction upon a street within an area
designated as a school zone in section 18-286.
(Code 1965, § 17-75)
Sec. 18-152. Driving of vehicles on public property, etc.
(a) No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle or otherwise move said vehicle into or on a stream bed, creek bed or river bed.
(b) No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle or otherwise move said vehicle on the publicly owned property except to areas
maintained and designated as roads, streets, highways or parking areas for vehicular travel.
(c) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate this
section.
(Code 1965, § 17-76)
Sec. 18-153. Disturbance by motor vehicle.
No person, in a public place or public way, shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor
vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle, drive in any manner calculated to draw immediate attention to a motor vehicle or cause to be
made any loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbances, whereby the quiet, safety or good order of a public place, premises or
neighborhood area is disturbed.
(Ord. No. 45-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-25-03)
Secs. 18-154–18-164. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 18-165. Prohibited crossing.
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway
intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally pedestrians shall
cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
(Code 1965, § 17-78)
Sec. 18-166. Obedience to bridge, railroad signals.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/648
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing is closed or is being opened or closed.
(Code 1965, § 17-79)
Sec. 18-167. Stopping, standing, sitting or remaining at certain intersections within the city.
(a) No pedestrian or other person, who is within a roadway, may stop, stand, sit or remain in any intersection or crosswalk for a period
longer than is necessary to traverse said intersection or crosswalk.
(b) No pedestrian or other person may stop, stand, sit or remain within the immediate vicinity of any vehicle stopped on a roadway.
(c) It is specifically provided, however, that a pedestrian or other person may stop, stand, sit or remain on the surrounding sidewalks,
but not in or on the roadway itself.
(d) No pedestrian or other person shall stop, stand, sit or remain on or under any portion of a median, bridge, overpass, or viaduct for
longer than is necessary to safely traverse said median, bridge, overpass or viaduct.
(e) The above provisions apply at the following locations:
(1) All intersections, access roads, and ramps adjacent to Winters Freeway from S. 1st Street to Buffalo Gap Road.
(2) All intersections adjacent to:
Buffalo Gap Road from S. 27th to Antilley Road.
Southwest Drive from Winters Freeway to Catclaw Drive.
Business I-20 from US-83 (Winters Freeway) to N. Judge Ely Blvd.
S. 14th Street from Willis Street to Butternut Street.
Judge Ely Blvd. from ES 11th Street to EN 10th Street.
Ambler Ave./SH 351 from Grape Street to East Lake Road.
Treadaway Blvd. from E. Hwy 80 to S. 11th Street.
Treadaway Blvd. from S. 27th Street to Industrial Blvd.
(f) Definitions:
Median. Area or portion of a divided street, road or highway within the city separating lanes of traffic of said street, road or highway and
shall be held to include the curb, if any, at the outer edge of said area.
Roadway. Portion of the public street which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including the curb, berm or
shoulder, whether or not improved.
Sidewalk. Improved surface which is between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, and is
improved and designed for or is ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
(Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 3(Exh. B), 2-28-19)
Secs. 18-168–18-177. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-178. Angle parking permitted in certain locations.
Upon those streets and parts of streets described in section 18-292, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the
curb when signs or markings are in place indicating that angle parking is required.
All vehicles parked at an angle shall be parked entirely within the marked stall for such parking and shall have one of the front tires at rest
against the curb or within six (6) inches thereof. No vehicle with an overall length greater than twenty (20) feet shall be angle parked at
the locations provided in this section at any time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/648
(Code 1965, § 17-82; Ord. No. 133-1983, pt. 1(3), 12-1-83)
Sec. 18-179. Angle parking in existing recessed parking.
Angle parking will be permitted to continue as existing until such time as new curbs, sidewalks, or street improvements are made; at
which time section 18-180 shall apply.
(Code 1965, § 17-83)
Sec. 18-180. Angle parking in newly constructed recessed parking areas.
Angle parking shall be permitted only if the following conditions exist:
(a) Curb-to-curb roadway width is greater than forty (40) feet or on streets forty (40) feet in roadway width the angle of
parking is not greater than thirty (30) degrees; or,
(b) The street is not a “through street” as set forth in section 18-291 upon which expenditure of general tax funds is made
for widening or similar improvements for the purpose of moving through traffic.
(c) Providing:
(1) The vehicles when at rest will be all within the public right-of-way.
(2) No portion of any vehicle shall protrude beyond the normal curbline.
(3) The angle of parking shall not be greater than forty-five (45) degrees.
(4) The recessed parking area shall be defined by curbs built to specifications approved by the city engineer.
(5) A sidewalk of minimum width of six (6) feet shall be provided; located either within the public way, or partly or
completely on private property with such location on private property to be conditional upon:
a. Erection of traffic-control devices as needed, and
b. Maintenance of the sidewalk in an unobstructed manner. The sidewalk shall be at least eight (8) feet wide if
both edges of the sidewalk are used as tire stops for parking vehicles.
(Code 1965, § 17-84)
Sec. 18-181. Authority to place angle parking signs and markings.
Whenever any ordinance designates any street or portion thereof for angle parking, the director of traffic and transportation shall place
and maintain signs or pavement markings giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-85)
Sec. 18-182. Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
When angle parking signs or pavement markings have been installed as herein authorized, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such sign or markings.
(Code 1965, § 17-86)
Sec. 18-183. Tow-away zones.
(a) Any location where parking is prohibited by City Code or state law or any location where time limits for continuous parking are
established by the City Code may be designated as a tow-away zone by the director of traffic and transportation by posting signs giving
notice thereof.
(b) Any vehicle parked in a parking prohibited area designated as a two-away zone or any vehicle parked in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours in a time-limited parking area designated as a tow-away zone may, upon direction of a police officer, be removed from such place,
taken to such place as is designated by the police department, and impounded. Fees for towing, impoundment, and daily storage, as set by
the city council, shall be assessed against such vehicles and the owner or driver thereof. All assessed fees shall be paid before such
vehicle is released. The payment of the towing, impoundment, and storage fees shall not constitute a defense to any charge against the
driver or owner of such vehicle for violating this chapter or other traffic laws or ordinances prohibiting or limiting such parking.
(Ord. No. 52-1988, pt. 1, 11-10-88)
Secs. 18-184–18-192. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/648
DIVISION 2. PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
Sec. 18-193. No signs required.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices on a street in any of the following places:
(a) Nearer than four (4) feet to the adjacent property line where there is no curb, or where there is a curb, at any place
between the curb and adjacent property line.
(b) Beside any curb or portion thereof painted red or yellow in color; provided, however, that parking or standing of
vehicles for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, freight or merchandise from any marked loading zone is not
prohibited.
(c) Closer than six (6) feet to the nearest rail of the track of any railroad company, whether the right-of-way is owned by the
railroad company or the tracks have been installed by the railroad under a franchise from the city; provided however, that
parking or standing of vehicles for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, freight or merchandise from any railroad
car or building is not prohibited.
(Code 1965, § 17-90)
Sec. 18-194. Inoperable motor vehicles on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or allow an inoperable motor vehicle to remain on any public street, alley, sidewalk,
highway or public property within the city for a period of more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours, and the presence of such
inoperable motor vehicle upon any such public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or property after the expiration of such forty-eight (48)
hour period is hereby declared illegal and to be a public nuisance. The term “inoperable motor vehicle” as used in this section means a
motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act that does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired
license plate or plates; or a motor vehicle that cannot be started, driven, operated, steered and stopped, under its own power and without
causing damage to the vehicle, because of mechanical failure, breakdown or disrepair or because it has been wrecked, dismantled or
partially dismantled.
(Code 1965, § 17-90.1)
Sec. 18-195. Trailers; mobile recreation equipment on public property or streets; “mobile recreation equipment” defined.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or allow any type of trailer or semitrailer (as defined in Texas law) or any item of mobile
recreation equipment to remain on any public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or public property within the city for a period of more than
forty-eight (48) continuous hours, and the presence of such mobile recreation equipment upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, highway
or property after the expiration of such forty-eight-hour period is hereby declared illegal and to be a public nuisance. The term “mobile
recreation equipment” as used in this section shall mean any boat; any trailer designed or intended by its manufacturer primarily for the
transportation of a boat; and any trailer, semitrailer or self-propelled motor vehicle which is designed, constructed and equipped for
human habitation as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place either permanently or temporarily.
(Code 1965, § 17-90.2; Ord. No. 112-1981, pt. 1, 10-8-81)
State law references: Definitions, Vernon's Civ. Sts., Art. 6701d, § 5.
Sec. 18-196. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten (10) feet upon each side of the marked centerline on any two-way street upon which traffic lines have been marked and ten (10) feet
upon any other street or alley for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Code 1965, § 17-91; Ord. No. 31-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-21-04)
Sec. 18-197. Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle, or place any obstruction, within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle, or place any obstruction, within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. Provided,
however, vehicles actually engaged in the act of extending public utility service or making repairs thereto, either with the alley or on
private property immediately adjacent to such alley, may park, if necessary, in an alley so as to leave less than the required roadway
width, for a time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, or, in the event of an emergency, such vehicles may park for the time necessary to
make such emergency repairs. No person shall park a vehicle which is not a commercial vehicle within an alley situated in a business
district.
(Code 1965, § 17-92)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/648
Sec. 18-198. Parking prohibited in certain alleys.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon one side of any alley where parking is so
frequent as to prevent movement of vehicles through the alley with parking permitted on both sides of the alley. The director of traffic and
transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon both sides of any alley in locations where necessary to permit
vehicular access to abutting property. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon alleys as authorized herein, no person shall
park a vehicle upon any such alley in violation of any such sign.
(Code 1965, § 17-93)
Sec. 18-199. Parking of commercial vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or any owner, to leave, park or stand any vehicle having a rated capacity greater than one ton upon
any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public place; provided, this section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and
repair equipment, trucks, rollers and implements, and trucks, equipment, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility companies
engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities and to motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at customary bus
stops, and all other vehicles designated herein when actually loading or unloading at a designated loading zone in those areas of limited
parking where loading zones are designated or when actually loading or unloading in any other area, provided, further, that this section
shall not apply to any vehicle defined or designated herein developing mechanical defect after such vehicle has commenced to run en
route, making it unsafe to proceed further, and in this event, it shall be lawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to
make emergency repairs; provided further, however, that this section shall not apply to public streets, alleys, parkways, boulevards, or
public places located in an HC, LI or HI zoning district, as designated by the official zoning map of the city, unless such public street,
alley, parkway, boulevard or public place is designated a major thoroughfare (primary or secondary) in the current thoroughfare and
collector plan.
(Code 1965, § 17-93; Ord. No. 88-1981, pt. 1, 8-27-81)
Sec. 18-200. Parking adjacent to schools.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent
to any school property when such parking would in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. When official signs
are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place.
(Code 1965, § 17-96)
Sec. 18-201. Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed
thirty (30) feet. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
(Code 1965, § 17-97)
Sec. 18-202. Standing or parking on one-way roadway.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no
person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or
parking. The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand
side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 17-98)
Sec. 18-203. No stopping, standing or parking near certain intersections.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places near major intersections not
exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length in which the prohibition of stopping, standing or parking would permit the use of an
additional lane for moving vehicular traffic when, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, it is determined that the
additional lane is necessary or desirable for the safe and expeditious movement of vehicular traffic. When official signs are erected at
hazardous or congested places as authorized herein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Code 1965, § 17-99)
Sec. 18-204. Parking on private property; signed.
It shall be illegal to park on private property where signs have been posted indicating the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/648
NO PARKING FROM THE HOUR INDICATED TO THE HOUR INDICATED. (The specific hours shall be set out. For
example; 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) DO NOT PARK OR REMAIN ON THIS PROPERTY BETWEEN THESE HOURS.
PARKING VIOLATORS WILL BE FILED ON, $25.00–$200.00, CARS CAN BE IMPOUNDED.
Vehicles in violation of this provision can also be impounded.
(Ord. No. 83-1982, pt. 1, 6-24-82)
Sec. 18-205. Parking on public property, signed.
It shall be illegal to park on a public parking lot without the owner's permission where signs have been posted indicating the following:
NO PARKING FROM THE HOUR INDICATED TO THE HOUR INDICATED. (The specific hours shall be set out. For
example; 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) DO NOT PARK OR REMAIN ON THIS PROPERTY BETWEEN THESE HOURS.
VIOLATORS WILL BE FILED ON, $25.00–$200.00 FINE, CARS CAN BE IMPOUNDED.
Vehicles in violation of this provision can also be impounded.
(Ord. No. 118-1982, pt. 1, 10-14-82)
Sec. 18-206. Off-street handicapped parking.
(a) Upon the request of the owner or operator of any off-street parking facility, the traffic and transportation department of the city is
authorized to approve stalls or spaces in an off-street parking facility for the exclusive use of vehicles which display distinguishing
license places, specially designated symbols, tags, or other devices issued pursuant to Article 6675a-5e.1, Texas Revised Civil Statutes, to
disabled persons. To be approved, handicapped parking spaces shall be of such size and marked according to prevailing state and federal
standards for handicapped parking. Such stalls or spaces shall be designed by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall
or space a handicapped parking sign that conforms to the requirements of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Marking and signing of parking spaces for the handicapped in off-street parking facilities shall be at the owner's or operator's expense.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate, symbol, tag, or other device issued
to disabled persons pursuant to Article 6675a5e.1, Texas Revised Civil Statutes, to stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any
parking space properly designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to the foregoing subsection (a). Such
unlawful action shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.
(c) Any vehicles not displaying the proper license plates, tags, or devices, may be towed from a handicapped parking space designated
by the foregoing subsection (a) at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and may be impounded until all towing and storage charges
are paid.
(Ord. No. 45-1987, pt. 1, 7-23-87)
Secs. 18-207–18-214. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. LOADING OR UNLOADING
Sec. 18-215. Designation, establishment and abolishment.
The director of traffic and transportation is authorized and instructed to designate and establish curb loading zones which he deems to be
in the public interest and to abolish same when no longer needed or illegally used. The establishment of such zones shall become
effective when such zones are appropriately marked by official signs erected by the director of traffic and transportation.
(Code 1965, § 17-100)
Sec. 18-216. Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone
are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
(Code 1965, § 17-101)
Sec. 18-217. Standing in freight curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
picking up and loading of material in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to
such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. The driver of a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/648
passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials
which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(Code 1965, § 17-102)
Sec. 18-218. Public carrier stops and stands.
The director of traffic and transportation shall establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
(Code 1965, § 17-103)
Sec. 18-219. Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in such a manner that the bus or taxicab when stopped to load or
unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from
the curb and the bus or taxicab approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(Code 1965, § 17-104)
Sec. 18-220. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or
taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(Code 1965, § 17-105)
Secs. 18-221–18-227. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Sec. 18-228. Application.
The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or
as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
(Code 1965, § 17-106)
Sec. 18-229. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions, prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Code 1965, § 17-107)
Sec. 18-230. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in section 18-
293.
(Code 1965, § 17-108)
Sec. 18-231. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in section 18-294,
of any day except Sundays and legal holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described in section 18-294.
(Code 1965, § 17-109; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85)
Sec. 18-231.1. Regulations prohibiting parking during certain hours on city streets.
(a) When signs have been erected at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., of any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays upon any public street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/648
within the city limits of the City of Abilene.
(b) Any vehicle found in violation of this no parking provision shall either be moved by a commercial wrecker service or by the city.
The owner of any vehicle so moved by a commercial wrecker service shall be responsible for the payment of the wrecker service charge.
(Ord. No. 56-1983, pt. 1, 5-26-83; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1; 3-28-85)
Editor's note: Ordinance 56-1983, adopted May 26, 1983, amended the Code with the addition of a new § 18-231A which provisions have been included as § 18-
231.1, at the discretion of the editor, in order to maintain Code format.
Sec. 18-232. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified in
section 18-297 of any day except Sundays and legal holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described in section 18-297.
(Code 1965, § 17-110; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85)
Sec. 18-233. Parking permits for convention guests.
(a) The Abilene convention and visitors bureau shall be authorized to issue special parking permits to out of town convention
participants. Upon a display of said parking permit on the upper surface of the front bumper of a motor vehicle operated by convention
participants, said vehicle shall be permitted to park in excess of the time limit in the locations enumerated in paragraph (e) of section 18-
299.
(b) The special permit to be issued shall be approved as to form by the director of traffic and transportation and a copy of any such
special permit shall be filed with the office of the director of traffic and transportation before issuance to out of town convention
participants is made. These special permits shall contain a space for the opening and closing dates of the convention and such additional
information as the director of traffic and transportation may require. The dates of the opening and closing of the convention shall be
legibly inserted in these spaces provided by either typing or writing with an indelible substance to prevent alteration. No special parking
permit shall exempt a vehicle from the time limit before or after the opening and closing dates of the convention.
(c) The Abilene convention and visitors bureau shall notify the office of the director of traffic and transportation at least three (3) days
in advance of the issuing of any special parking permits and give the number of such permits to be issued, the name of the convention and
the dates it will be held.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, group or association to knowingly issue, permit or cause to be issued any special parking permit
for any vehicle not belonging to an out of town convention participant. It shall be unlawful for any person not an out of town convention
participant to display a special parking permit for purposes of parking longer than permitted.
(Code 1965, § 17-110.1)
Sec. 18-234. Parking permits for vehicles being used in construction activity.
(a) The director of traffic and transportation is hereby authorized to issue special parking permits for motor vehicles being used in
connection with construction activity. Upon display of such a permit in the lower right-hand corner of its front windshield, the authorized
vehicle described in the permit shall be permitted to park in excess of any time limits which may be in effect for the on-street parking
spaces or loading zones immediately adjacent to or within fifty (50) feet of the work site listed on said permit.
(b) The director of traffic and transportation may issue such a permit only if each of the following conditions is met:
(1) The vehicle must be parked at or near to the work site because of tools or equipment carried thereon.
(2) No off-street parking is available on or within fifty (50) feet of the work site.
(3) All on-street parking adjacent to the work site and within fifty (50) feet thereof is time limited by section 18-299 of this
Code.
(c) No more than two (2) such parking permits shall be issued or in effect at the same time because of work being performed at the
same location. Each permit may be issued for a maximum period of thirty (30) calendar days but may be renewed upon application to the
director of traffic and transportation provided the conditions set forth in subsection (b) above are met. No fee shall be charged for
Saturday and Sunday. The fee for each permit issued shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the city secretary's office.
(Code 1965, § 17-110.2; Ord. No. 26-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-23-04)
Sec. 18-235. Customer parking program.
(a) The Customer Parking Program is hereby created to provide a mechanism for addressing first offense exceeding the posted time
limit parking violations by customers transacting business in the Tax Increment Financing (TIF) district at the time the citation is issued.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/648
(b) The director of finance is authorized to sell program stamps to the owners/managers or their authorized representatives of
businesses located in the TIF district. The fee for each program stamp shall be established by the director of finance.
(c) The business owners/managers are authorized to issue program stamps only to customers transacting business in the TIF district for
parking violation citations for first offense exceeding the posted time limit. The business owner/manager shall record on the stamp sheet
the parking violation citation number and other required citation information for each program stamp issued. The empty stamp sheet shall
be returned to the city prior to the issuance of a new stamp sheet.
(d) When a first offense exceeding the posted time parking violation citation is returned to the Abilene municipal court with a program
stamp affixed, the program stamp may be considered as appropriate evidence for dismissal of the citation.
(e) The business owner/manager may forfeit the privilege to purchase additional program stamps if program stamps are used in any
manner that is contrary to the purpose of the program.
(Ord. No. 5-1997, pt. 6(Exh. A), 2-13-97; Ord. No. 27-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-7-00)
Sec. 18-236. Parking signs required.
Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall
be the duty of the director of traffic and transportation to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be
effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
(Code 1965, § 17-111; Ord. No. 5-1997, pt. 5(Exh. A), 2-13-97)
Secs. 18-237–18-242. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. PARKING METERS
Sec. 18-243. Parking meter zones.
Parking meter zones are hereby established within the district or upon those parking lots, streets or parts of streets described in section 18-
300, in which zones the parking of vehicles upon parking lots or streets shall be regulated by parking meters between the hours specified
in section 18-300 of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. The director of traffic and transportation is authorized, subject
to the approval of the city council by amendment of section 18-300, to establish parking meter zones at other locations upon those
parking lots or streets or parts of streets where it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the
installation of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles.
(Code 1965, § 17-112; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 18-244. Installation of parking meters.
The director of traffic and transportation shall install parking meters in the parking meter zones established as provided in this chapter
upon the curb immediately adjacent to each designated parking space or at a single location in a parking lot. Such meters shall be capable
of being operated automatically upon the deposit therein of coins of United States currency or other payment method as specified
in section 18-300 for the full period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in any such parking meter zone. Parking lot meters
may be capable of being operated automatically by the use of a debit or credit card for the full period of time for which parking is
lawfully permitted in any such parking meter zone. Except for parking lot meters, each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed,
installed and set up that upon the expiration of the time period registered, by the deposit of one or more coins, as provided herein, it will
indicate by an appropriate signal that the lawful parking meter has expired, and during such period of time and prior to the expiration
thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of such period. Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the
days and hours when the requirement to deposit coins or other payment method therein shall apply, the value of the coins or other
payment method to be deposited, and the limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in
which such meter is located.
(Code 1965, § 17-113; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 18-245. Parking meter spaces.
For parking meter spaces on the street, the director of traffic and transportation shall designate the parking space adjacent to each parking
meter for which such meter is to be used by appropriate markings upon the curb or the pavement of the street. Parking meter spaces so
designated shall be of appropriate length and width so as to be accessible from the traffic lanes of such street. For parking meter spaces in
a parking lot, the director of traffic and transportation shall designate the parking spaces for which such meter is to be used by appropriate
markings upon the curb or the pavement of the lot or by signage.
(Code 1965, § 17-114; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 18-246. Deposit of coins and time limits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/648
No person shall park a vehicle in any metered parking lot or parking space upon a street alongside of which a parking meter has been
installed during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is located unless a coin or
coins of United States currency of the appropriate denomination or other payment method as provided in this chapter shall have been
deposited therein, or shall have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time, and the meter has been placed in
operation.
No person shall park a vehicle in any such metered parking lot or parking space for a consecutive period of time longer than the limited
period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which such meter is located, irrespective of the
number of amounts of coins or other payment method deposited in such meter.
The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this chapter
and the state vehicle code prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Code 1965, § 17-115; Ord. No. 133-1983, pt. 1(4), 12-1-83; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 18-247. Use of slugs prohibited.
No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any slug, button or any other device or substance as substitutes for
coins of United States currency.
(Code 1965, § 17-116)
Sec. 18-248. Tampering with meter.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
(Code 1965, § 17-117)
Sec. 18-249. Advertising on parking meters.
There shall be no advertising for private purposes placed upon the parking meters, and only such advertising media for municipal
purposes shall be placed thereon as designated by the city council.
(Code 1965, § 17-119)
Sec. 18-250. Parking meter rates.
Parking meter rates shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the city secretary's office.
(Ord. No. 120-1984, pt. 1, 12-20-84; Ord. No. 26-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-23-04)
Secs. 18-251–18-256. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. PARKING LOTS*
Sec. 18-257. City of Abilene designated employee parking.
Any parking lot designated by signage as city employee parking shall be limited to use solely by vehicles owned and/or operated by the
city and city employees while they are on duty.
(Ord. No. 64-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 11-21-13)
Secs. 18-258–18-263. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 18-264. Reserved.
Sec. 18-265. Heavy trucks and certain vehicles prohibited from using certain through streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a truck of seven thousand (7,000) pounds empty weight upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in section 18-301. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the
restrictions stated on such signs except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or
merchandise, and then only when the driver of such vehicle shall have in his possession for the inspection of police officers his log book,
delivery slips or other evidence to justify the presence of that vehicle on a particular street.
(Code 1965, § 17-121)
Secs. 18-266–18-270. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/648
ARTICLE XII. RESERVED*
Secs. 18-271–18-284. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. SCHEDULES
Sec. 18-285. Increased speed limits.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima facie speed limits shall be as set
forth in this schedule upon those streets or portions of streets named herein and at all times unless otherwise specifically provided:
Street Extent Speed
(mph)
North 1st St. From Orange to Grape Sts. 35
From Grape to Main Sts. 40
South 1st St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Grape St. 35
From Grape St. to Leggett Dr. 40
From Leggett to Danville Drs. 45
From Danville Dr. to west city limits 55
North 6th St. From Shelton St. to Elm Creek 35
South 7th St. From Pioneer Dr. to Corsicana Ave. 35
From Corsicana Ave. to Arnold Blvd. 40
East North 10th St. From FW&D RR to Kenwood Dr. 40
From Kenwood Dr. to Loop 322 45
North 10th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to FW&D RR 35
From Westmoreland to North Clack Sts. 35
From Clack St. to Wall St. 40
South 11th St. From South Treadaway Blvd. to Abilene Southern RR 35
East South 11th St. From Abilene Southern RR to Lytle Acres Dr. 40
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/648
From Lytle Acres Dr. to Judge Ely Blvd. 45
From Judge Ely Blvd. to Jake Roberts Freeway 55
South 14th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Hollis Dr. 35
From Hollis Dr. to 500 feet west of Pioneer Dr. 40
From 500 feet west of Pioneer Dr. To Danville Dr. 35
South 25th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Maple St. 40
South 27th St. From Brookhollow Dr. to South Treadaway Blvd. 35
From South Treadaway Blvd. to Abilene Southern RR 40
East South 27th St. From Abilene Southern RR to Oldham Ln. 50
Airport Blvd. From State Highway 36 to Lance Dr. 40
Ambler Ave. From Judge Ely Blvd. to I-20 50
From Judge Ely Blvd. to Cottonwood St. 45
From Cottonwood St. to North Danville Dr. 35
Arnold Blvd. From S. 1st St. to Military Dr. 40
From Military Dr. to Hartford St. 45
Antilley Rd. From US 83/84 to 400 feet west of Directors Prkwy 35
From 400 feet west of Directors Prkwy to west City limits 45
Barrow St. From S. 7th St. to S. 27th St. 35
Bentley St. From Lytle Way to Loop 322 40
Buffalo Gap Rd. From Sayles Blvd. to South 27th St. 35
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/648
From South 27th St. to 300 feet south of Stonecrest Dr. 40
From 300 feet south of Stonecrest Dr. to 800 feet south of
Antilley Rd.
45
From 800 feet south of Antilley Rd. to Catclaw Creek 50
From Catclaw Creek to south city limits 55
Butternut St. From South 1st St. to South Treadaway Blvd. 35
Beltway South From west city limits to east city limits 55
Catclaw Drive From S. Clack to Cedar Run Rd. 35
From Cedar Run Rd. to Rebecca Ln. 40
Clack St., North From North 10th to West Stamford Sts. 45
From West Overland Trail to north city limits 45
Clack St., South From South 7th to Hartford Sts. 45
From Hartford to South 14th Sts. 40
From South 14th St. to U.S. 83/84 45
Corsicana Ave. From alley south of Pueblo Dr. to alley north of Benbrook
St.
35
Danville Dr., North From North 10th to West Stamford Sts. 45
From West Overland Trail to north city limits 45
Danville Dr., South From Treadaway Blvd. to Fairmount St. 45
From Fairmount St. to a point 500 feet south of Steffens
St.
40
Dub Wright Blvd. From US 277 to 1,000 feet south of Jennings Dr. 55
From 1,000 feet south of Jennings Dr. to Hartford St. 50
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/648
East Lake Rd. From SH 351 to north city limits 55
SH 351 to Musgrave Blvd 40
Expo Dr. From ES 11th St. to 500 feet south of Lytle Way 35
Expo Dr. From 500 feet south of Lytle Way to Loop 322 40
Five Points Prkwy. From Fulwiler Rd to Arnold Blvd 35
FM 3438 From I-20 to S. 1st St. (US 84) 50
Fulwiler Road From I-20 to S. 1st St. (US 84) 50
Grape St. From North 1st to Pine Sts. 35
Hardison Ln. From Maple St. to Oldham Ln. (FM 1750) 40
Hardwick Rd. From Antilley Rd. to Beltway South (FM 707) 45
Hartford St. From Corsicana Ave. to Dub Wright Blvd. 40
Highland Ave. From South 20th Street to Buffalo Gap Rd. 35
Industrial Blvd. From Danville Dr. to Treadaway Blvd. 40
From Loop 322 to Oldham Lane 45
From Oldham Lane to Georgetown Dr. 40
From Treadaway Blvd. to Loop 322 50
Judge Ely Blvd. From E.N. 10th St. to E.N. 16th St. 40
From Stamford St. to E.N. 16th St. 45
From E.N. 10th St. to E. Hwy. 80 40
From E. Hwy. 80 to East South 11th St. 45
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/648
Leggett Dr. From North 1st St. to Elm Creek 35
Loop 322 (Jake
Roberts F'way)
From east property line of South Treadaway Blvd. to East
Stamford St.
55
Lytle Way From East South 11th St. to Loop 322 40
Maple St. From East South 11th to east South 27th Sts. 40
From East South 27th St. to Loop 322 50
Loop 322 to 500 feet north of Colony Hill Rd 50
500 feet north of Colony Hill Rd to Beltway South 40
Military Dr. From Chapel Hill Rd. to west city limits 45
Mockingbird Blvd. From South 3rd to North 3rd Sts. 35
Mockingbird Lane From South 3rd to South 7th Sts. 35
From North 3rd St. to Vogel Ave. 35
Musgrave Blvd East Lake Road to Scottish Road 35
Old Anson Rd. From Ambler Ave. to I-20 40
From I-20 to Winters Freeway 45
Oldham Ln. From E.S. 11th St. to Berry Lane 45
From Berry Ln. to 200 ft. south of Cornell Dr. 50
From 200 ft. south of Cornell Dr. to the south city limits 55
Overland Trail, East From FW&D RR to east city limits 45
Overland Trail, West From entrance ramp west of Shirley Rd. to North Clack
St.
45
From entrance ramp west of Shirley Rd. to west city
limits
55
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/648
From N. Danville Dr. to Old Anson Rd. 45
Pine St. From North 6th to Lowden Sts. 35
From Lowden St. to Huckleberry Ln. 45
From Huckleberry Ln. to north city limits 55
Pioneer Dr. From North 1st to North 10th Sts. 40
From South 1st to South 14th Sts. 35
Rebecca Ln. From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Catclaw Dr. 40
From Catclaw Dr. to 1,000 feet west of Catclaw Dr. 45
From 1,000 feet west of Catclaw Dr. to U.S. 277 55
Ridgemont Dr. From Clack St. to Rebecca Ln. 35
SH 36 From Jake Roberts Freeway to south city limits 55
SH 351 From I-20 to 0.1 mile east of East Lake Rd. 50
From 0.1 mile of East Lake Rd. to east city limits 55
Sayles Blvd. From South 1st St. to Industrial Blvd. 35
Southwest Dr. From Brookhollow Dr. to S. Clack St. 35
From Clack St. to 1,000 feet northeast of Sharon Rd. 40
From 1,000 feet northeast of Sharon Road to 200 feet
southwest of Elm Creek
45
From 200 feet southwest of Elm Creek to Rebecca Lane 55
Stamford St., East From FW&D RR to east city limits 45
Stamford St., West From exit ramp west of Shirley Rd. to west city limits 55
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/648
From North Clack St. to exit ramp west of Shirley Rd. 45
From Old Anson Rd. to Danville Dr. 45
T & P Lane From E. Hwy. 80 to E.S. 11th St. 35
Texas Ave. From U.S. 277 to Denton St. 35
From Denton St. to Corsicana Ave. 40
From Corsicana Ave. to Dub Wright Blvd. 45
Transformer Trail From Wise St. to T & P R.R. 40
Treadaway Blvd. From North 4th to Pine Sts. 40
From South 3rd to South 11th Sts. 40
From South 11th to South 32nd Sts. 45
From South 32nd St. to 500 feet south of Executive Dr. 50
From 500 feet south of Executive Dr. to south city limits 55
E. Hwy. 80 From Judge Ely Blvd. to 400 feet west of Cockerell St. 40
From Judge Ely Blvd. to Northway Dr. (eastbound) 55
From east city limits to Northway Dr. 55
From Northway Dr. to Judge Ely Blvd. (westbound) 45
U.S. 277 From Danville Dr. to Texas Ave. 40
From Texas Ave. to 200 feet south of Twylight Tr. 45
From 200 feet south of Twylight Tr. to south city limits 55
Vogel Avenue From Old Anson Rd. to Mockingbird Lane 35
Waldrop Drive Hardwick Rd. to Clack St. 40
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/648
West Lake Rd. From Ambler to 1,000 feet north 40
From 1,000 feet north of Ambler Ave. to Anson Ave. 50
From Anson Ave. to Stamford St. 40
From Stamford St. to 500 feet north of Trailway Dr. 50
From 500 feet north of Trailway Dr. to north city limits 55
Willis St. From North 1st to North 12th Sts. 35
Zoo Lane From Judge Ely Blvd. to Loop 322 40
(Code 1965, § 17-139; Ord. No. 1053, 4-13-78; Ord. No. 1117, 9-28-78; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 62-1980, pt. 1, 7-10-80; Ord.
No. 22-1981, pt. 1, 3-12-81; Ord. No. 78-1981, pt. 1, 8-13-81; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 129-1982, pt. 1, 11-4-82; Ord.
No. 134-1982, pt. 1, 12-2-82; Ord. No. 70-1984, pt. 1, 7-12-84; Ord. No. 88-1984, pt. 1, 8-23-84; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord.
No. 60-1986, pt. 1, 8-14-86; Ord. No. 24-1987, pt. 1, 5-28-87; Ord. No. 4-1989, pt. 1, 2-16-89; Ord. No. 26-1990, pt. 1, 6-28-90; Ord. No.
12-1991, pt. 1, 4-11-91; Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord. No. 15-1993, pt. 1, 3-25-93; Ord. No. 34-1995, pt. 1, 8-10-95; Ord. No.
5-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 1-1998; Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-22-98; Ord. No. 24-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-10-99; Ord. No. 36-1999, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 8-12-99; Ord. No. 27-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-7-00; Ord. No. 24-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-01; Ord. No. 45-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-5-
02; Ord. No. 9-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-03; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 49-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06; Ord.
No. 31-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-07; Ord. No. 49-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-07)
Sec. 18-286. Decreased speed limits–School zones.
(a) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
prima facie speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour for hours designated on school days, where school signs are posted or at any
time when electrical control devices are in operation, on the following streets or portions of streets:
School Street Extent
Austin Elementary South 23rd St. 170 feet east of South Elmwood Dr. to
175 west of Greenbriar Dr.
South 25th St. South Elmwood to Greenbriar Drs.
Elmwood Dr., South South 23rd to South 25th Sts.
Greenbriar Dr. South 23rd St. to 245 feet south of South
25th St.
Bonham Elementary
School
South 7th St. 175 feet west of Buccaneer Dr. to 150
feet east of Hawthorne St.
Buccaneer Dr. South 7th St. to Potomac Ave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/648
Potomac Ave. Buccaneer Dr. to 255 feet west of
Hawthorne St.
Bowie Elementary South 20th St. 255 feet west of Vine St. to 310 feet east
of Jeanette St.
South 21st St. Vine to Jeanette Sts.
Jeanette St. South 20th to South 22nd Sts.
Vine St. South 20th to South 22nd Sts.
College Heights
Elementary
North 17th St. Orange to Beech Sts.
North 18th St. 320 feet west of Beech St. to 145 feet east
of Orange St.
Beech St. 160 feet south of North 17th St. to North
18th St.
Orange St. 205 feet south of North 17th St. to North
18th St.
Clack Middle School Corsicana Ave. Alamo Dr. to 300 feet north of Sagehen
Ridge Dr.
Clack Middle School Sagehen Ridge Dr. Corsicana Ave. to Snipe Ln.
Craig Middle School Prof Bynum Way From Judge Ely to 200 east of Sunrise
Ave.
Dyess Elementary Jennings Dr. Delaware Rd. to 1,200 feet west of
Delaware Rd.
Delaware Rd. Jennings Dr. to Hampton Hills St.
Fannin Elementary North 18th St. 220 feet west of Burger St. to 220 feet
east of Shelton St.
North 20th St. Burger to Shelton Sts.
Burger St. North 18th St. to 270 feet north of North
20th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/648
Shelton St. North 18th St. to 270 feet north of North
20th St.
Franklin Middle School North 12th St. 200 feet west of Clinton St. to 260 feet
east of Merchant St.
Clinton St. North 12th to North 14th Sts.
Merchant St. North 12th to North 14th Sts.
Houston Elementary North 6th St. Cottonwood to Bois d' Arc Sts.
Bois d' Arc St. 110 feet north of North 5th St. to 125 feet
south of North 7th St.
Jackson Elementary South 32nd St. 260 feet west of Buffalo Gap Rd. to 210
feet west of Marshall St.
Marshall St. South 32nd St. to 550 feet north of South
32nd St.
Jefferson Campus Vine St. S. 14th St. to S. 17th St.
Jeanette St. S. 14th St. to S. 17th St.
S. 17th St. Jeanette St. to Vine St.
Jefferson Middle
School
South 14th Street 255 feet west of Vine St. to 250 feet east
of Jeanette St.
South 17th St. Vine to Jeanette Sts.
Jeanette St. South 14th to South 17th Sts.
Vine St. South 14th to South 17th Sts.
Johnston Elementary North 12th St. Glendale Dr. to Minter Lane
North 14th St. Glendale Dr. to Minter Lane
Glendale Dr. Laurel Dr. to North 14th Sts.
Minter Lane North 12th St. to North 14th Sts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/648
Kenley Private School Matador St. South 14th St. to South 15th St.
Lee Elementary North 10th St. 250 feet east of Pioneer Dr. to 140 feet
west of North San Jose Dr.
Pioneer Dr. North 10th St. to San Jose Dr.
San Jose Dr. North 10th St. to Pioneer Dr.
Lincoln Middle School South 3rd St. Peach to Vine Sts.
Peach St. South 1st to South 3rd Sts.
Vine St. South 1st to South 3rd Sts.
Locust Elementary South 8th St. Pecan St. to 160 feet east of Cherry St.
Cherry St. South 8th to South 10th Sts.
Locust St. South 8th to South 10th Sts.
Long Elementary Minter Lane Vogel St. to 230 feet south of Sherry Lane
Sherry Lane Yorktown Dr. to Minter Lane
Vogel Ave. 120 feet west of Yorktown Dr. to 220 feet
east of Minter Lane
Yorktown Dr. Vogel St. to 230 feet south of Sherry Lane
Willis St. 300 feet north of Sherry Lane to 300 feet
south of Sherry Lane
Madison Middle School Barrow St. South 32nd St. to Edgemont Dr.
Mann Middle School Mimosa Dr. Vogel Ave. to Iris St.
Vogel Ave. Westview Dr. to Mimosa Dr.
Westview Dr. Vogel Ave. to Iris St.
Ortiz Elementary Vogel Ave. Burger St. to Catclaw Creek
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/648
Reagan Elementary Corsicana St. Hartford to Waldemar Sts.
Hartsford St. 160 feet west of Corsicana Ave. to 380
feet east of Presidio St.
Presidio St. Hartford to Waldemar Sts.
Waldemar St. Corsicana to Presidio Sts.
Taylor Elementary East North 13th St. Judge Ely Blvd. to Avenue F
Avenue F East North 13th to 200 feet south of East
North 16th Sts.
Thomas Elementary Lakeside Dr. 200 feet South of Bynum St. to East
South 11th St.
Valley View Campus N. 8th St. 200 feet east of Merchant St. to Victoria
St.
Merchant St. 150 feet north of State St. to N. 8th St.
State St. Merchant St. to Victoria St.
Ward Elementary Rebecca Ln. Alley between Pamela Dr. and Carrie
Ann Ln. to 430 feet East of Bruce Dr.
Ward Elementary Paint Brush Dr. Pennington Dr. to Bruce Dr.
Woodson Elementary North 9th St. Plum to Ash Sts.
Ash St. North 9th St. to 275 feet south of North
10th St.
Woodson Skill Center Cockerell Dr. 650 feet north of East Highway 80 to 500
feet south of E.N. 7th St.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
prima facie speed limit shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour for hours designated on school days, where school signs are posted or at
any time when electrical control devices are in operation, on the following streets or portions of streets:
School Street Extent
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/648
Abilene High School North 6th St. Mockingbird Lane to Shelton St.
Bonham Elementary Pioneer Dr. 300 feet north of Potomac Ave. to
Monticello St.
Cooper High School Amarillo St. South 36th St. to 500 feet north of South
41st St.
Sayles Blvd. South 36th St. to South 40th St.
Jefferson Campus S. 14th St. Meander St. to 250 feet east of Jeanette
St.
Long Elementary Ambler Ave. Bel Air Dr. to Glendale Dr.
Ortiz Elementary Ambler Ave. From Green St. to Park Ave.
Reagan Elementary South 7th St. 270 feet west of Alameda Rd. to 170 feet
east of Alameda Rd.
Taylor Elementary EN 10 th St. 300 feet east of Avenue F to 300 feet west
of Avenue F
Jackson Elementary S. 27th St. 300 feet east of Marshall St. to 300 feet
west of Marshall St.
(c) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
prima facie speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour for hours designated on school days, where school signs are posted or at any
time when electrical control devices are in operation, on the following streets or portions of streets:
School Street Extent
Abilene Christian
School
Judge Ely Blvd. From 680 feet south of E. Stamford St. to
1,500 feet south of E. Stamford St.
Craig Middle School Judge Ely Blvd. 100 feet north of Luzon St. to 250 feet north
of Clarks Dr.
Taylor Elementary Judge Ely Blvd. From E.N. 12th St. to 450 feet north of E.N.
13th St.
Wylie Elementary Antilley Rd.
(Westbound)
From Buffalo Gap Rd. to 850 feet East of
Buffalo Gap Rd.
Wylie Elementary Antilley Rd.
(Eastbound)
From Buffalo Gap Rd. to 600 feet East of
Buffalo Gap Rd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/648
Wylie Elementary Hardwick Rd. From 300 feet north of Waldrop Dr. to 800
feet south of Waldrop Dr.
Wylie High School Antilley Rd.
Eastbound
400 feet east of Twin Oaks Blvd. to 2,100
feet east of Twin Oaks Blvd.
Antilley Rd.
Westbound
550 feet east of Twin Oaks Blvd. to 2,550
feet east of Twin Oaks Blvd.
(d) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
prima facie speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour for hours designated on school days, where school signs are posted or at
any time when electrical control devices are in operation, on the following streets or portions of streets.
School Street Extent
Wylie Elementary Buffalo Gap Road
Southbound
710 feet north of Antilley Rd. to 100 feet
south of Antilley Rd.
Wylie Elementary Buffalo Gap Road
Northbound
230 feet south of Antilley Rd. to 710 feet
north of Antilley Rd.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the
prima facie speed limit shall be forty (40) miles per hour for hours designated on school days, where school signs are posted or at any
time when electrical control devices are in operation, on the following streets or portions of streets.
School Street Extent
Bassetti Elementary Hwy 277 Southbound 530 feet south of Twylight Tr. to 1,970 feet
south of Twylight Tr.
Bassetti Elementary Hwy 277 Northbound From 1,030 feet south of Twylight Tr. to
2,370 feet south of Twylight Tr.
(Code 1965, § 17-140; Ord. No. 924, 1-13-77; Ord. No. 1053, 4-13-78; Ord. No. 22-1981, pt. 1, 3-12-81; Ord. No. 20-1983, pt. 1(2), 3-
24-83; Ord. No. 90-1983, pt. 1, 8-25-83; Ord. No. 72-1984, pt. 1, 7-26-84; Ord. No. 60-1986, 8-14-86; Ord. No. 4-87, pt. 1, 2-12-87; Ord.
No. 44-1987, pt. 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 49-1988, pt. 1, 10-27-88; Ord. No. 30-1992, pt. 1, 7-23-92; Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord.
No. 50-1992, pt. 1, 12-3-92; Ord. No. 35-1993, pt. 1, 8-12-93; Ord. No. 52-1993, pt. 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 14-1994, pt. 1, 4-14-94; Ord.
No. 31-1994, pt. 1, 7-28-94; Ord. No. 1-1995, pt. 1, 1-12-95; Ord. No. 5-1-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 30-1997, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 7-10-
97; Ord. No. 1-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-22-98; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 24-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-01; Ord. No.
25-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-14-03; Ord. No. 38-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-13-03; Ord. No. 15-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-8-04; Ord. No. 31-2004,
pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-21-04; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 49-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06; Ord. No. 31-2007, pt.
1(Exh. A), 8-9-07; Ord. No. 29-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-28-08; Ord. No. 01-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-11-18)
Sec. 18-287. Same–Other zones.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when traffic-control devices or signs are erected giving notice thereof, the prima
facie speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour on the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Extent
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/648
Airport Blvd. From Short Dr. to Lance Dr.
(Code 1965, § 17-140; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 05-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-19)
Sec. 18-288. Prohibited turns.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall make the turning
movement herein set forth at the intersection indicated at the specified times:
Intersection Vehicles
Entering From
Movement Prohibited Hours Prohibited
South 1st St. and Sayles Blvd. West Left turn At any time
South 2nd St. and Mockingbird Blvd. East Left turn At any time
South 2nd St. and Mockingbird Blvd. West Left turn At any time
South 2nd St. and Mockingbird Blvd. North Right turn At any time
North 2nd St. and Mockingbird Blvd. East Left turn At any time
North 2nd St. and Mockingbird Blvd. South Right turn At any time
South 24th and Butternut Sts. West Left turn At any time
(Code 1965, § 17-141; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 1179, 6-28-79)
Sec. 18-289. One-way streets–At all times.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon
the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Extent Direction
North 2nd St. From Walnut to Grape St. West
South 2nd St. From Oak to Chestnut St. West
North 3rd St. From Grape to Walnut St. East
North 4th St. From Walnut St. to Grape St. West
North 5th St. From the North 6th/5th St. split to
Plum St.
East
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/648
North 6th St. From Hickory St. to North 6th/5th St.
split
West
North 10th St. From Park Ave. to Grape St. East
North 10th St. From Grape St. to North 11th St. West
North 11th St. From Grape St. to Park St. West
Airport Blvd. From Lance Dr. to Lance Dr. Loop
Chestnut St. From South 1st to South 7th St. South
Clack Dr., North
From Old Anson Rd. to West
Overland Trail
South
From Vogel St. to Ambler Ave. South
From Ramp to N. 3rd St. South
From Ambler Ave. off-ramp to the
North 1st St. on-ramp
South
Clack Dr., South From Taos Dr. to FM 707. South
Cypress St. From North 1st to North 6th St. North
Danville Dr., North From the North 1st St. off-ramp to
West Stamford St.
North
Hickory St. From North 1st to North 2nd St. North
Oak St. From South 4th St. to South 1st St. North
Orange St. From North 1st to North 2nd St. South
Overland Trail, West
From the Pine St. off-ramp to North
Danville Drive
West
From Clack St. to west city limits West
Overland Trail, East From North Danville Drive to FM
600 (West Lake Road)
East
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/648
From FM 600 (West Lake Road) to
Loop 322
East
San Jose Dr., North From North 10th St. to Pioneer Dr. North and East
Stamford St., West
From Danville Dr. to FM 600 (West
Lake Rd.)
East
From Vogel St. to Old Hwy 80 West
Stamford St., East From FM 600 (West Lake Rd.) to
Loop 322
East
Loop 322 Access Rd,
South From Lytle Creek Dr. to Maple St. South
Loop 322 Access Rd,
North From Maple St. to Oldham Ln. North
Loop 322 Access Rd,
East
From Hwy 36 to where it Dead Ends
to the South
North
Lindbergh Dr. From Hwy 36 to Navajo Cir South
Lindbergh Dr. From State Highway 36 to Navajo Tr. South
(Code 1965, § 17-142; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 1169, 5-10-79; Ord. No. 46-1980, pt. 1, 5-8-80; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-
82; Ord. No. 107-1982, pt. 1(1), 9-9-82; Ord. No. 133-1982, pt. 1(2), 12-2-82; Ord. No. 11-1985, pt. 1, 2-14-85; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1,
2-28-85; Ord. No. 21-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-28-94; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 67-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-15-16;
Ord. No. 57-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-18; Ord. No. 05-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-19)
Sec. 18-289.1. Same–During certain hours.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon
the following streets or portions of streets during the hours specified:
Street Extent Direction Hours
EN 13th St. From Judge Ely Blvd. to Avenue F West 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
Minter Ln. From Vogel Ave. to Sherry Ln. North 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
Potomac Ave. From Hawthorne Dr. to Buccaneer
Dr.
West 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/648
State St. Victoria St. to Merchant St. East 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
Merchant St. State St. to N. 8th St. South 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
N. 8th St. Merchant St. to Victoria St. West 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
Alley East of
Victoria St.
N. 8th St. to State St. North 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
Peach St. S. 1st St. to S. 3rd St. South 7:40–8:20 a.m. 3:15–4:00 p.m.
(School Days Only)
N. 17th St. From Orange St. to Beech St. West 3:00–3:45 p.m.
(School Days Only)
(Ord. No. 107-1982, pt. 1(2), 9-9-82; Ord. No. 133-1982, pt. 1(1), 12-2-82; Ord. No. 16-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 2-1991, pt. 1, 1-
10-91; Ord. No. 45-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-28-00; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 45-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-5-02;
Ord. No. 38-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-13-03; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 21-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-17; Ord. No.
02-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-11-18)
Editor's note: Ordinance 107-1982, pt. 1(2), enacted Sept. 9, 1982, added a new § 18-289a to the Code. In order to maintain Code format, said provisions have been
redesignated as § 18-289.1.
Sec. 18-290. One-way alleys.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon
the following alleys or portions of alleys:
(a) Northbound:
(1) All north-south alleys within the area bounded by North 1st, North 6th, Mesquite, and Orange Streets shall be one-way,
northbound only, except the following which shall be two-way:
a. Alley between North 2nd, North 3rd, Hickory and Cedar Streets.
b. Alley between North 3rd, North 4th, Cypress, and Cedar Streets.
c. Alley between North 3rd, North 4th, Cedar, and Hickory Streets.
(2) North-south alley between North 1st, North 2nd, Grape, and Merchant Streets from 60 feet south of North 2nd Street to
North 2nd Street–9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(3) North-south alley between North Mockingbird Lane and Woodlawn Drive from North 6th Street to State Street.
(b) Southbound:
(1) All north-south alleys within the area bounded by South 1st, South 5th, Pecan and Butternut Streets shall be one-way,
southbound only.
(2) Alley between North 1st, North 2nd, Cedar and Hickory Sts.
(3) North-south alley between North 1st, North 2nd, Grape and Merchant Sts. from 60 feet south of North 2nd St. to 120
feet south of North 2nd St.–9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(c) Westbound:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/648
(1) All east-west alleys within the area bounded by North 1st, North 6th, Mesquite and Orange Streets shall be westbound
only, except for the following which shall be two-way:
a. Alley between North 1st and North 2nd Streets from Hickory Street to Cypress Street.
(2) All east-west alleys in the area bounded by South 1st, South 5th, Pecan and Butternut Sts. shall be one-way, westbound
only.
(3) The east-west alley south of East North 15th St. between Avenue E and Cedar St. shall be westbound only.
(Code 1965 § 17-142; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 45-1983, pt. 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 97-1983, pt. 1, 9-8-83; Ord. No. 58-1984, pt. 1,
6-28-84; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 21-1991, pt. 1, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 2-1992, pt. 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 29-2008, pt.
1(Exh. A), 6-28-08)
Sec. 18-290.1. One-way alleys–During certain hours.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon
the following alleys or portions of alleys during the hours specified:
Alley Direction Extent Hours
(Ord. No. 45-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-5-02; Ord. No. 25-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-14-03)
Sec. 18-291. Through streets; stop, yield intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every
intersection where stop signs are erected, and shall yield the right-of-way at every intersection where yield right-of-way signs are erected,
before entering any of the following streets or portions of streets, except as modified by other sections hereof:
Street Intersection or extent
North 1st St. From Walnut St. to west dead end.
South 1st St. From west city limits to Treadaway Blvd.
North 2nd St. From Grape St. to Treadaway Blvd.
From North Jefferson to Danville Drs.
South 2nd St. From Chestnut St. to Butternut St.
At Carl St.
At Santos St.
North 3rd St. From Bois d' Arc. St. to Willis St.
From Clack to Wall Sts.
South 3rd St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Riverside Blvd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/648
At San Jose Dr.
North 4th St. From Grape St. to Treadaway Blvd.
South 4th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Butternut St.
East South 5th St. From T & P Lane to Carver St.
North 5th St. From Victoria to Bois d' Arc Sts.
South 5th St. At Jeanette St.
From Treadaway Blvd. to Oak St.
From Sayles Blvd. to Ross St.
From Mockingbird Lane to Willis St.
From Sycamore St. to Butternut St.
North 6th St. From Bois d' Arc St. to Leggett Dr.
South 6th St. At Amarillo St.
At Meander St.
From Treadaway Blvd. to Butternut St.
North 7th St. At Mulberry St.
From Cockerell Dr. to Walnut St.
From Pioneer to Danville Drs.
South 7th St. From Carver St. to Arnold Blvd.
North 8th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Park St.
South 8th St. At Davis St.
From Treadaway Blvd. to Sayles Blvd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/648
North 9th St. At Graham St.
At Plaza St.
At Victoria St.
At Lillius St.
South 9th St. At Meander St.
At Palm St.
At Poplar St.
At Jeanette St.
North 10th St. From railroad to Loop 322
From railroad to Marigold St.
South 10th St. At Albany St.
At Highland Ave.
At Portland St.
At Santos St.
North 11th St. At Mesquite St.
At Mulberry St.
From Grape to Park Sts.
South 11th St. From east city limits to Elmwood Dr.
North 12th St. From Pine St. to Glendale Dr.
South 12th St. At Albany St. At Amarillo St. At Blair St. At Highland Ave.
At Marshall St. At Sylvan Dr. From Butternut to Meander
Sts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/648
East North 13th St. At Avenue F
North 13th St. From College Dr. to Grape St.
South 13th St. At Cherry St. At China St. At Marshall St. At Santos St. At
Sunset St. From Butternut to Meander Sts.
North 14th St. At Mulberry St. From Grape to Lillius Sts. From Park Ave.
to Richland Dr.
South 14th St. From Maple St. to west city limits
North 15th St. From Park Avenue to Westview Dr. From Westview to
Roanoak Drs.
South 15th St. At Ballinger St. From Barrow St. to Ross Ave.
East North 16th St. From College Dr. to Griffin Rd.
North 16th St. At Cedar St. At Mulberry St. At Orange St. At Plum St. At
Swenson St.
South 16th St. At Poplar St. At Portland St. At Woodard St. From Barrow
St. to Ross Ave.
North 17th St. At Simmons St.
South 17th St. At Amarillo St. At Jeanette St. At Palm St. At Peach St. At
Poplar St. At Vine St.
North 18th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to North Danville Dr.
South 18th St. At Amarillo Dr.
North 19th St. At Beech St. At Cedar St.
South 19th St. At Amarillo St. At Grand St. At Highland Ave. At Portland
St. At Santos St. At Sewell St. At Woodard St. From Barrow
St. to Ross Ave.
North 20th St. At Beech St. At Green St. From Grape to Park Sts.
South 20th St. From Treadaway Blvd. to Brook Hollow Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/648
North 21st St. At Beech St. At Cedar St.
South 21st St. At Meander St. At Palm St.
South 22nd St. At Columbia Dr.
South 23rd St. At Vine St. From Buffalo Gap to Post Oak Rds.
South 25th St. At Woodridge Dr.
South 27th St. From Southwest Dr. to Oldham Lane
South 32nd St. From east dead end to Santa Monica Dr.
South 35th St. At Highland Ave.
South 36th St. From Treadaway to Sayles Blvds.
South 38th St. At Erie St.
South 39th St. At Erie St.
South 40th St. At Erie St.
South 41st St. At Erie St.
Alameda Rd. From Steffens St. to Springbrook Dr.
Alamo Dr. From Corsicana Ave. to Clack St.
Amarillo St. At South 9th St. At South 13th St. At South 29th St. At
College St. At Chimney Wood Ct. At David's Ct. At
Idlewild St.
Ambler Ave. From I-20 to Winters Freeway
Andy St. From Corsicana to Hartford Sts.
Anson Ave. From Old Anson Rd. to West Lake Rd.
Arlington Ave. At Oaklawn Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/648
Arnold Blvd. From I-20 to Hartford St.
Arrowhead Dr. From Buffalo Gap Road to South Clack Dr.
Avenue D From East North 16th St. to Ambler Ave.
Avenue E From East North 10th to East North 16th Sts.
Avenue F From Piedmont Dr. to East North 16th Sts.
Ballinger St. From South 14th to South 20th Sts.
Barrow St. From Mockingbird Lane to South 32nd St.
Beech St. At North 7th St. At North 14th St. At North 17th St. At
Parramore St. At State St. At Sandifer St.
Belmont Blvd. From Butternut to South 21st Sts.
Berry Lane From Maple St. to Oldham Lane
Blue Quail Dr. From Quail Run to Corsicana Ave.
Bois d' Arc St. At North 5th St. At North 6th St.
Booker T. Washington St. From East South 7th St. to north dead end
Brentwood Dr. From South Danville Dr. to South 23rd St.
Brook Hollow Dr. From South 20th to South 27th Sts.
Bruce Dr. From Rebecca Lane to Chimney Rock
From Rolling Green Dr. To Rebecca Lane
Buccaneer St. At Monticello St. At Potomac Ave.
Buffalo Gap Rd. From Highland St. to south city limits
Burger St. At North 19th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/648
Butternut St. From South 1st St. to Treadaway Blvd.
Buttonwillow Dr. From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Robertson Dr.
Buttonwillow Parkway From Chimney Rock to Robertson Dr.
Byrd Dr. At Scott Place
Campus Courts From East North 16th St. to north dead end
Capital Ave. At Plaza St.
Carver Dr. At East North 8th St.
Carver St. From East South 5th to East South 7th Sts.
Castle Dr. At Rexie Circle
Catclaw Dr. From Southwest Dr. to Rebecca Ln. From Rebecca Ln. to
Chimney Rock Rd.
Cedar St. At North 7th St. At Wilson St.
Cedar Crest Dr. From East North 10th St. to Ambler Ave.
Chaucer Dr. South 11th to Friar's Sts.
Cherry St. At Dimmitt St.
Chestnut St. From South 1st St. to Treadaway Blvd.
Chimney Rock From Buffalo Gap Rd. to east dead end
China St. From Treadaway Blvd. to South 7th St.
Chriswood Dr. From Musken Rd. to Kenwood Dr.
Clack St., North From North 1st to West Stamford Sts. From West Overland
Trail to North City Limits
Clack St., South From Steffens St. to Antilley Rd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/648
Clark's Dr. From Judge Ely Blvd. to Pardoner's Rd.
Clinton St. At North 9th St. At North 15th St. At North 16th St. At
North 19th St. At North 20th St. At North 21st St. At
Anderson St. At Sandifer St. At University Blvd. At Wagner
St.
From Anson Ave. to Stamford St.
Clyde St. At Russell St.
Cockerell Dr. E. Hwy. 80 to East North 10th St.
College Dr. East North 13th St. to Campus Courts
Corsicana Ave. From Health Center Dr. to Lamesa Ave.
Countryside Dr. At Mourning Dove Lane
Cypress St. At North 8th St. At Wilson St.
Danville Dr., North From North 1st to West Stamford Sts. From West Overland
Trail to north city limits
Danville Dr., South From South 1st St. to Treadaway Blvd.
Davis Dr. At Ward Dr.
Delaware Rd. At Jennings Dr.
Denton St. At Burbank Dr.
Don Juan St. From Whittier St. to Danville Dr.
Edgemont Dr. From Nonesuch Rd. to Clack St. From Waverly Ave. to
Santa Monica Dr.
Elm St. At South 9th St. At South 12th St. At South 13th St.
Elmwood Dr. From South 7th St. to River Oaks Rd.
South Elmwood Dr. From Elmwood Dr. to Brook Hollow Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/648
Estates Dr. From Lytle Way to East South 11th St.
Fairmont St. From Danville Dr. to Lexington Ave.
Fairway Oaks Blvd. From Antilley Rd. to Woodlake Dr.
Fannin St. At North 19th St.
Friar's St. From Judge Ely Blvd. to Chaucer Dr.
Garfield Ave. At Bacon Dr. At Hillcrest Dr.
Gill Dr. From Green Valley Dr. to South dead end
Glen Abbey Ct. From Antilley Road north to dead end
Glendale Dr. From North 10th St. to North 14th St.
Grand Ave. At South 18th St. From South 7th to South 14th Sts. From
Sayles Blvd. to Edgemont Dr.
Graham St. At North 2nd St. At North 5th St.
Grape St. From South 1st to North Pine Sts.
Green St. At North 20th St.
Green Valley Dr. From East North 10th St. south to dead end
Grove St. At South 8th St. At South 9th St.
Hardy St. At Sandifer St.
Hartford St. From South Clack St. to FM 3438
From Buccaneer to Danville Drs.
Henderson St. From East South 7th St. north to dead end
Heritage Lane From Bruce Dr. east to dead end
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/648
Hickory St. From North 1st St. to Ambler Ave.
Highland St. At South 13th St. At South 18th St. At South 29th St. At
College St.
High Meadows Dr. From Shepherd St. to Brentwood Dr.
Huckleberry Lane At Clinton St.
Hunt St. At Portland St. At Sewell St. From Barrow St. to Ross Ave.
Hollis Dr. At South 12th St.
Hoylake Dr. From Antilley Rd. to Innisbrook Dr.
Idlewild St. At Highland St.
Industrial Blvd. From Jake Roberts Freeway to Danville Dr.
Jake Roberts Freeway From north city limits to south city limits
Jameson St. At Victoria St.
Jeanette St. At South 6th St. At South 10th St. From South 14th St. to
Treadaway Blvd.
Jennings Dr. At Delaware Rd.
Judge Ely Blvd. From East South 11th to Stamford Sts.
Kenwood Dr. From East North 10th St. to Musken Rd.
Kirkwood St. At North 5th St. At North 7th St. At Kansas St. At
Parramore St.
Laguna Ave. At Corsicana Ave.
Lake Fort Phantom Rd.,
West
From Ambler Ave. to North city limits
Leggett Dr. From North 6th to South 14th Sts.
Lexington Ave. From Stratford St. to Russell Ave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/648
Ligustrum Dr. At South Elmwood Dr.
Lillius St. At North 7th St. At North 14th St. At North 15th St. At
Parramore St.
Lincoln Dr. From College Dr. to Ambler Ave.
Locust St. At South 2nd St. From South 11th St. to South 14th St.
Lowden St. From Grape to Pine Sts.
Lynbrook Drive From Chimney Rock Rd. to Memorial Drive
Lytle Shores Dr. At Willow Wren
Lytle Trail From Lytle Way to Edgewater Rd. From Oldham Lane to
Shoreline Dr.
Lytle Way From East South 11th St. to Expo Dr.
Madison St. At Bacon Dr. At Hillcrest Dr.
Main St. Crossover (on Loop 355) at Steffens St.
Maple St. At South 27th St. From South 11th St. to south city limits
Marshall St. From South 14th to South 32nd Sts. At Hunt St.
Matador St. At South 12th St. At South 13th St. At South 19th St. From
South 14th to South 20th Sts.
Meander St. At South 8th St. From South 11th St. to South 14th St. At
Ildewild St. At Over St.
Merchant St. At North 9th St. At North 19th St. At North 21st St. At
Sandifer St.
Merion St. At Augusta Dr.
Mesquite St. At North 9th St. At North 14th St.
Miller St. At South 2nd St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/648
Mimosa Dr. From Ambler Ave. to Vogel
Minda St. From T & P Lane to Judge Ely Blvd.
Minter Lane At North 14th St.
Mockingbird Lane From Barrow St. to Vogel Ave.
Northway Dr. At Pasadena Dr.
Nottingham Rd. From Lytle Way to Lancelot Rd.
Oak St. From South 1st St. to Treadaway Blvd.
Old Anson Rd. From Ambler Ave. to north city limits
Oldham Lane From East South 11th St. to south city limits
Orange St. At North 7th St. At North 9th St. At North 14th St. At North
17th St. From North 1st to Butternut Sts. At State St.
Over St. At Meander St.
Overland Trail, East From east city limits to Pine St.
Overland Trail, West From Pine St. to North Danville Dr. From North Clack St. to
west city limits
Palm St. From South 1st to South 8th Sts. From South 22nd to South
24th Sts.
Park Ave. At South 20th St.
Peach St. At South 9th St. At South 10th St. From South 1st to South
7th Sts. From South 14th to South 20th Sts.
Pecan St. From South 11th to South 14th Sts.
Peppermill Lane From Innisbrook Drive to Willow Wood Drive
Pickard St. From East South 7th St. north to dead end
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/648
Piedmont Dr. From Gill St. to Kenwood Dr.
Pioneer Dr. From North Danville Dr. to South 14th St.
Pine St. From N. 1 st St. to US 83/277
Plaza St. From North 1st to North 10th Sts.
Poplar St. From South 1st to South 7th Sts. At South 21st St. At South
22nd St.
Portland St. At South 5th St. At South 12th St. At South 13th St. At
South 15th St. At South 25th St. At Russell Ave.
Post Oak Rd. From South 20th St. to Bob-O-Link Dr.
Potomac Ave. From Danville Dr. to Lexington Ave.
Presidio Dr. From Lamesa Ave. to South 7th St. From Waldemer St. to
Shenandoah Dr.
Primose Dr. From Bruce Dr. east to dead end
Pueblo Dr. At Presidio St.
Quail Run From Texas Ave. north and west to dead end
Rebecca Lane From Buffalo Gap Rd. west to U.S. Hwy. 277
Redwood Dr. From Westwood Dr. to North 10th St.
Richland Dr. From North 10th to North 11th Sts.
Richmond St. From Lexington Ave. to Danville Dr.
Rio Mesa Dr. Buffalo Gap Rd. to west end
Riverside Dr. At South 5th St. At South 6th St.
Robertson Dr. From Buffalo Gap Rd. east and south to dead end
Rolling Green Dr. From Ridgemont Dr. to Catclaw Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/648
Ross Ave. South 1st St. to Edgemont Dr.
Ruidosa St. From South 7th to Steffens Sts.
Russell Ave. At Carl St. At Miller St.
Ruswood Dr. From Judge Ely Blvd. to Kenwood Dr.
Sammons St. At South 2nd St. At Russell St. At South 5th St.
Sandifer St. At Walnut St.
San Jose Dr. From South 3rd St. to Richmond St.
San Jose Dr. At Waldemar St.
Santa Monica Dr. At Edgemont Dr. From Willis St. (at San Miguel Dr.) to
Kensington Dr.
Santos St. At South 6th St. At South 18th St. At College St. At Over St.
At Russell St.
Sayles Blvd. From North 1st St. to South Danville Dr.
Scott Place At Radford Dr.
At Russell Ave.
Sewell St. At South 15th St. At South 16th St. At South 22nd St. At
College St.
Shelton St. At North 19th St. At North 20th St. At University Blvd.
Shepherd St. At High Meadows Dr.
Sherry Ln. Willis St. to Yorktown Dr.
Shoreline Dr. From Lytle Trail to Lytle Way
Simmons Ave. At North 21st St. At Vogel Ave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/648
Southmoor Dr. From Corsicana Ave. to Bishop Rd.
Southwest Dr. From South 27th to Clack Sts.
From Clack St. to Rebecca Ln.
Stafford Ave. From East South 7th St. north to dead end
Stamford St., East From east city limits to Pine St.
Stamford St., West From Pine St. to North Danville Dr. From North Clark St. to
west city limits
State St. At Westmoreland St. From Grape St. to North Danville Dr.
Steffens St. From Clack St. to Vapor Trail From Pioneer to Danville Dr.
Stratford St. From Pioneer to Leggett Dr.
Sunset Dr. At South 4th St. At South 5th St. At South 13th St. At
College St.
Swenson St. At North 17th St. At North 19th St. At North 20th St. At
North 21st St. At Sandifer St.
Sycamore At South 9th St.
Sylvan Dr. At Edgewood Dr. At Green Meadows Rd. At Woodridge Rd.
T & P Lane From E. Hwy 80 to East South 11th St.
Tanglewood Dr. At Inwood Dr.
Taos Dr. At Corsicana Ave.
Texas Ave. From US 277 to Dub Wright Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd. From US 83/84 and Loop 322 interchange to Pine St.
University Blvd. At Hardy St. At Merchant St. At Swenson St. At Walnut St.
U.S. 80 East From east city limits to Treadaway Blvd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/648
Victoria St. From North 14th St. to Ambler Ave. At Kansas St.
Vine St. At South 10th St. At South 17th St. At South 19th St. At
South 21st St. At South 22nd St. At Fulton St. At Idlewild
St.
Vogel Ave. From Danville Dr. to Treadaway Blvd.
Waldemar St. From Danville Dr. to Lexington Ave.
Walnut St. From North 1st St. to Ambler Ave.
Washington Blvd. From E. Hwy. 80 to East North 16th St.
Westchester Dr. From Buffalo Gap Rd. west to dead end
Westmoreland St. At North 5th St. At North 20th St. At University Blvd. At
Sandifer St.
Westridge Dr. At Monticello Dr.
Westview Dr. At North 15th St.
Westway Dr. From Oak to Butternut Sts.
Westwood Dr. From Redwood Dr. to Vogel Ave.
Willis St. From West Stamford to South Danville Dr.
Winters Freeway From north city limits to south city limits
Woodard St. At South 15th St.
At South 25th St.
At Hunt St.
Woodlake Dr. From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Meadow Lake
Woodland Trail At Inwood Lane
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/648
Woodridge Dr. At Green Meadows Dr.
Yale Dr. From Willis St. to Westwood Dr.
Yorktown Dr. At North 15th St.
At Sherry Lane
Unnamed connector street From western continuation of North 3rd St. at Grape St. to
North 3rd St. at Mulberry St.
Unnamed connector street From North 4th St. at Mulberry St. to western continuation
of North 3rd St. at Grape St.
Unnamed connector street From North 6th St. at Lillius St. to North 5th St. at the
northern continuation of Victoria Street.
(Code 1965, § 17-143; Ord. No. 1053, 4-13-78; Ord. No. 1136, 11-30-78; Ord. No. 20-1983, pt. 1(1), 3-24-83; Ord. No. 28-1986, pt. 1, 4-
24-86; Ord. No. 23-1988, pt. 1, 5-26-88; Ord. No. 14-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-14-94; Ord. No. 53-1996, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-21-96; Ord. No.
11-1997, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-27-97; Ord. No. 56-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-98; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 15-2004,
pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-8-04; Ord. No. 46-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-12)
Sec. 18-292. Angle parking.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected or pavement markings are in place giving notice thereof, no
person shall at any time park or stand a vehicle other than at the designated angle to the curb on the following streets or portions of streets
on the indicated side:
Street Side Extent
North 2nd Street Both From Walnut St. to Hickory St.
South 2nd Street North From Oak St. to Chestnut St.
North 3rd Street North From Hickory St. to Walnut St.
South From alley east of Hickory St. to Walnut St.
South 3rd Street North From Pecan St. to alley west of Pecan St.
South From Pecan St. to Oak St.
North 4th Street North From Walnut St. to Hickory St.
South From Walnut St. to Cypress St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/648
South From Cedar St. to Hickory St.
North 5th Street North From Hickory St. to Walnut St.
South From Hickory St. to Mesquite St.
South 5th Street North From alley east of Oak St. to Oak St.
North 6th Street North From Plum St. to alley west of Mesquite St.
North From alley east of Pine St. to Hickory St.
South From Hickory St. to Cedar St.
South From alley west of Pine St. to Walnut St.
Cedar St. East From North 1st St. to 200 feet north of North 3rd St.
East From 150 feet north of North 5th St. to North 6th St.
West From 80 feet north of North 5th St. to North 1st St.
Chestnut Street East From 200 feet south of South 1st St. to South 2nd St.
West From South 1st St. to South 6th St.
Cypress Street Both From North 1st St. to North 4th St.
East From 150 feet north of North 4th St. to North 5th St.
West From 150 feet north of North 4th St. to North 6th St.
Hickory Street Both From North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
West From North 1st St. to North 2nd St.
Oak Street East From South 2nd St. to South 1st St.
West From South 5th St. to South 2nd St.
Pine Street East From North 1st St. to North 5th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/648
West From North 1st St. to 200 feet north of North 4th St.
Walnut Street East From 150 feet north of North 1st St. to 250 feet north of
North 1st St.
East From North 2nd St. to North 6th St.
West From North 6th St. to 100 feet south of North 5th St.
West From North 5th St. to 70 feet south of North 2nd St.
(Code 1965, § 17-145; Ord. No. 30-1982, pt. 1, 3-25-82; Ord. No. 133-1983, pt. 1(6), 12-1-83; Ord. No. 58-1984, pt. 1, 6-28-84; Ord. No.
15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85)
Sec. 18-293. Parking prohibited–At all times.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a
vehicle upon the indicated side of any of the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Side Extent
North 1st St. Both From 400 feet west of Clack St. to Mulberry St.
South From Mulberry St. to 170 feet east of Pine St.
South From 20 feet west of Walnut St. to 20 feet east of
Walnut St.
South From 200 feet east of Walnut St. east a distance of 100
feet
North From 100 feet east of Beech St. to 170 feet east of Pine
St.
North From 20 feet west of Walnut St. to 40 feet east of
Walnut St.
South 1st St. Both From Treadaway Blvd. to Clack St.
North 2nd St. Both From Ash St. to Treadaway Blvd.
Both From 120 feet east of Mesquite St. to 120 feet west of
Mesquite St.
North 2nd St. North From Grape St. to 30 feet west of the alley west of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/648
Grape St.
South 2nd St. South From Sycamore St. west a distance of 200 feet
North 3rd St. North From Wall Street east a distance of 60 feet.
South From Wall Street east a distance of 420 feet.
South From Mesquite St. to 120 feet east of Mesquite St.
North From 120 feet east of Mesquite to 45 feet west of
Mesquite St.
South 3rd St. North From Elm St. to the alley east of Elm St.
North 4th St. North From Hickory St. west to the N-S alley between
Hickory and Orange Sts.
North From alley east of Cypress, east a distance of 50 feet
North 4th St. South From Walnut St. east a distance of 50 feet
Both From 120 feet east of Mesquite St. to 120 feet west of
Mesquite St.
South 4th St. South From 80 feet west of Pecan St. to 140 feet east of Oak
St.
South From Oak St. west a distance of 70 feet
South From 110 feet west of Chestnut St. to 200 feet west of
Chestnut St.
South From Sycamore St. to the alley west of Sycamore St.
North 5th St. North From Walnut St. to alley west of Plum St.
North From Walnut St. east a distance of 35 feet
North From alley west of Plum St. west a distance of 30 feet
South From Mesquite St. west a distance of 30 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/648
South From 130 feet east of Cypress St. to 80 feet west of
Pine Street
South 5th St. North From alley west of Meander St. west a distance of 100
feet
South 5th St. North From Pecan St. to alley east of Pecan St.
South 5th St. North From 80 feet west of Pecan St. to 140 feet east of Oak
St.
South 5th St. South From Pecan St. to alley west of Pecan St.
Both From Sycamore St. to the alley west of Sycamore St.
North 6th St. Both From Fannin St. to Leggett Dr.
North From 45 feet east of Mesquite St. to 45 feet west of
Mesquite St.
North From 40 feet west of the alley of Mesquite St. to 20 feet
east of the same alley
South From Shelton St. west a distance of 70 feet
South From Walnut St. east a distance of 400 feet
South From a point 75 feet west of Plum St. west a distance of
140 feet
Both From North Mockingbird Lane to Elm Creek
South 6th St. North From Pecan St. to alley west of Pecan St.
North From 210 feet east of Sycamore St. to the alley west of
Sycamore St.
South From Oak St. to alley east of Oak St.
North 7th St. North From east side of Ash Street west 190 feet
North From alley west of Pine St. to Cedar Street
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/648
South 7th St. North From Riverside Dr. to Elm Creek
North From a point 400 feet west of Leggett Dr. west a
distance of 120 feet
North From a point 150 feet west of Pioneer Dr. to a point 200
feet east of Pioneer Dr.
North From a point 200 feet east of Willis St. to a point 200
feet west of Willis St.
South From a point 150 feet west of Pioneer Dr. to Sayles
Blvd.
South 9th St. South From Sycamore St. to Sayles Blvd.
North 10th St. North From Park to Grape Sts.
South From Grape St. to the alley east of Grape St.
Both From Clack St. to 200 feet west of Wall St.
Both From Danville Dr. to Elm Creek
Both From Minter Lane to Kirkwood St.
Both From Treadaway Blvd. to FW&D RR
East North 10th St. Both From 300 feet west of Judge Ely Blvd. to 300 feet east
of Bruce Way
North From 200 feet east of Washington Blvd. to 200 feet
west of Washington Blvd.
East North 10th St. North 95 feet west of Cedar Crest Dr. to 290 feet west of
Cedar Crest Dr.
North 11th St. North From a point 300 feet west of Grape St. to North 10th
St.
South 11th St. Both From Ross Ave. to Oak St.
South From Elmwood Dr. to Ross Ave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/648
East South 11th St. Both From south Treadaway to Judge Ely Blvds.
North 12th St. North From Merchant St. east a distance of 200 feet
South From Catclaw Creek to Merchant St.
South 13th St. South From Butternut St. west to alley west of Butternut St.
South Both From Treadaway Blvd. to a point 500 feet west of Texas
Ave.
North 15th St. North From Pine St. west a distance of 150 feet
South From alley east of Barrow St. to a point 70 feet east of
the alley
North From Pine St. to alley west of Pine St.
East North 16th St. Both From Campus Ct. to Judge Ely Blvd.
Both From Judge Ely Blvd. to 350 feet west of Judge Ely
Blvd.
North From Pemelton Dr. west a distance of 350 feet
South From Newcastle Dr. east a distance of 150 feet
South 17th Street North From Butternut St. east 60 feet
North From Sayles Blvd. to 120 feet west of Vine St.
South From Sayles Blvd. east a distance of 200 feet
South From 350 feet of Sayles Blvd. to Vine St.
East North 18th St. South From Campus Court west a distance of 50 feet
North Campus Ct. to 150 feet west of Campus Ct.
South Campus Ct. to 210 feet west of Campus Ct.
North 18th St. South From Pine St. to Mockingbird Lane
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/648
Both From Pine St. to alley east of Pine St.
South 18th St. South From Treadaway Blvd. to Abilene Southern Railroad
East North 19th St. North From Campus Ct. to 200 feet west of Campus Ct.
South From Campus Ct. to Ave. D
North 19th St. Both From Treadaway Blvd. to Cottonwood St.
South 19th St. South 95 feet east of Santos St. to 115 feet east of Santos St.
N. 20th St. North From 50 feet west of Park Ave. to 50 feet east of Park
Ave.
South From 50 feet west of Park Ave. to alley east of Park
Ave.
South 20th St. North From Barrow Street east 150 feet
North 21st St. North From Hickory to Simmons Sts.
South From Hickory St. west a distance of 150 feet
South From 290 feet west of Hickory St. west a distance of 50
feet
South 23rd South From 460 feet east of Willis St. to a point 550 feet east
of Willis St.
South 27th St. North From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Barrow St.
Both From Barrow St. to a point 450 feet west of Shepherd
St.
North From a point 450 feet west of Shepherd St. to Catclaw
Creek
Both From Catclaw Creek to Hollis Dr.
South From Hollis Dr. to Brookhollow Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/648
South 32nd St. North From 150 feet east to 100 feet west of Barrow St.
South From 150 feet west to 100 feet east of the Redbud Park
entrance road
North From 75 feet east of Sheppard St. to 50 feet west of
Sheppard St.
North From 75 feet east of San Miguel Dr. to 50 feet west of
San Miguel Dr.
North From 75 feet east of Salinas Dr. to 50 feet west of
Salinas Dr.
South 41st St. South From 525 feet west of Amarillo St. to 675 feet west of
Amarillo St.
Airport Blvd. Both From upper/lower split to upper/lower split
Alameda Rd. East From South 7th St. to Pueblo Dr.
West From South 7th St. south a distance of 150 feet
Both From South 7th St. north a distance of 150 feet
Amarillo St. West From South 1st to South 3rd Sts.
Both From South 17th St. north a distance of 100 feet
West From 1085 feet south of South 36th St. to a point 1195
feet south of South 36th St.
East From a point 220 feet north of Industrial Blvd. to a
point 250 feet north of South 41st St.
West From a point 100 feet north of South 41st St. to a point
60 feet south of South 41st St.
East From 630 feet south of South 36th St. to 1,090 feet
south of South 36th St.
West From 180 feet south of South 36th St. to 410 feet south
of South 36th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/648
West From 720 feet south of South 36th St. to 950 feet south
of South 36th St.
East From 620 feet north of South 41st St. to 720 feet north
of South 41st St.
Ambler Ave. Both From Treadaway Blvd. to Lincoln Dr.
Both From Grape St. to Bridge Avenue
South From Bridge Avenue to Mimosa Dr.
Both From Mimosa Dr. to Yorktown Dr.
South From Yorktown Dr. to 60 feet east of Westwood Dr.
Both From 60 feet east of Westwood Dr. to North Danville
Dr.
North From Lincoln Dr. to Ave. D
Both From Ave. D to Judge Ely Blvd.
North From Beech St. to a point 95 feet east of Pine St.
South From 300 feet west of Pine St. to a point 50 feet east of
Pine St.
Antilley Rd. Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Elm Creek
Arnold Blvd. Both From South 1st St. to Hartford St.
Arrow Point West A 60-foot section adjacent to the Lake Patrol boat
storage building located 0.4 mile north of Dixon Rd.
Avenue E West From east North 16th St. south 35 feet
East From EN 16th St. to alley north of EN 14th St.
Avenue F West From EN 13th St. north a distance of 100 feet
West From EN 14th St. south a distance of 50 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/648
West From EN 16th St. south a distance of 100 feet
Barrow St. Both From South 7th St. to 240 feet south of South 11th St.
Both From 200 feet north of Bickley St. to 320 feet south of
South 14th St.
Both From Fulton St. to a point 40 feet north of Over St.
Both From South 27th St. to a point 230 feet north of South
23rd St.
East From South 27th St. south a distance of 150 feet
West From South 27th St. south a distance of 100 feet
Bel Air Dr. East From Vogel Ave. north a distance of 240 feet
West From 130 feet north of Vogel Ave. north a distance of
270 feet
Beltway South Both From 300 feet west of White Blvd. to 750 feet west of
White Blvd.
North From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Hearne Dr.
Ben Richey Dr. South From 1,400 feet west of Boys Ranch Rd. west a
distance of 200 feet
Bickley St. South From Albany to South Willis Sts.
Bishop Rd. Both From Texas Ave. south a distance of 200 feet
Bowie Dr. Both From South 14th St. north a distance of 200 ft.
Bruce Way West From Amanda Lane to Bruce Way
East From Ruswood Dr. north a distance of 50 feet
Buccaneer Dr. West From South 7th St. to Potomac Ave.
West From South 7th St. to Potomac Ave.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/648
Buffalo Gap Rd. Both From Sayles Blvd. to 500 feet south of FM 707
Butternut St. Both From South 1st to South 2nd Sts.
Butternut St. East From 75 feet south of South 17th St. to 50 feet north of
South 17th St.
West From South 13th St. north a distance of 70 feet
Buttonwillow Ave. Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. east a distance of 50 feet
Campus Court East From East North 16th St. north a distance of 50 feet
East From 325 feet north of East North 16th St. to 570 feet
north of East North 16th St.
East From 640 feet north of East North 16th St. to 790 feet
north of East North 16th St.
East From 200 feet south of Ambler Ave. to Ambler Ave.
East From East North 20th St. 50 feet north of East North
21st St.
West From 60 feet south of College Dr. to 100 feet North of
EN 20th St.
East From 70 feet south of East North 18th St. to 100 feet
North of EN 19th St.
East From East North 20th St. to 50 feet north of East North
21st St.
Carver St. Both From EN 10th St. to EN 8th St.
Catclaw Drive Both From 150 feet south of Rebecca Ln. to 150 feet north of
Bob-O-Link Dr.
Cedar St. Both From 6th St. north 200 feet
East From N. 16th St. to N. 17th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/648
West From Vogel Ave. north a distance of 100 feet
Cedar Crest Dr. South-west From College Dr. to a point 1300 feet north of East
North 10th St.
Cedar Run Rd. Both From Catclaw Dr. east a distance of 200 feet
North From John Knox Dr. west a distance of 200 feet
South From John Knox Dr. west a distance of 600 feet
Chestnut St. East From South 2nd to South 6th Sts.
West From 150 feet south of South 4th St. to 250 feet south
of South 4th St.
West From 480 feet south of South 4th St. to 580 feet south
of South 4th St.
West From South 6th St. north a distance of 80 feet
Clack Street West From Fairmount Street to South 14th Street
Cockerell Dr. East EN 8th St. to EN 10th St.
West From alley south of EN 8th St. to EN 10th St.
Both From EN 10th St. to EN 8th St.
College Dr. South From 140 feet east of Avenue D east a distance of 60
feet
Colonial Drive Both From Clack Street west 100 feet
Compere Blvd. Both From Hickory St. west a distance of 40 feet
Both From Simmons Ave. east a distance of 40 feet
Cottonwood St. East From 330 feet north of North 10th St. a distance of 300
feet
Corsicana Ave. Both From Texas Ave. north a distance of 200 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/648
Both From Texas Ave. south a distance of 100 feet
Both From Sagehen Ridge Dr. south a distance of 106 feet
Crossroads Dr. East From Curry Lane south a distance of 200 feet
Curry Lane Both From Catclaw Dr. east a distance of 200 feet
Cypress St. East From North 2nd St. north a distance of 100 feet
East From North 1st St. north a distance of 130 feet
West From North 1st St. north a distance of 80 feet
Danville Drive East From South 14th Street to 710 feet south of Hartford
Street
Davis Dr. Both From South 7th St. south a distance of 50 feet
Denton St. East From Texas Ave. north 45 feet.
Director's Parkway Both From Antilley Rd. south 150 feet
Dub Wright Blvd. Both From Hartford St. to U.S. 277
East Highway 80 South From Bandera Park Dr. east 800 feet
East Lake Rd. Both SH 351 to Musgrave Blvd.
Elm St. East From South 2nd St. south a distance of 240 feet
Enterprise Drive Both SH 351 to Overland Tr.
Eplen Court Both From South 1st St. south a distance of 200 feet
Expo Dr. Both From ES 11th St. to Loop 322
Fairway Oaks Blvd. Both From 400 feet north of Antilley Rd. to 900 feet south of
Antilley Rd.
Forrest Ave. East From State St. to North 10th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/648
Forrest Hill Rd. North From Phoenix Dr. to Buffalo Gap Rd.
Forrest Hill Rd. South From Phoenix Dr. to 450 feet east of Buffalo Gap Rd.
Frenchman's Creek Road South- west From 50 feet northeast to 100 feet southwest of Rue
Maison
Friars Street Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east 300 feet
Gann Street Both From 100 feet north of the alley between U.S. 80 East
and Sandy St. to 100 feet south of the alley
Grand Ave. West From 50 feet north of Cooke St. to 50 feet south of
Cooke St.
West From Moore St. north 180 feet
Grape St. Both From South 1st to North 1st Sts.
West From North 1st to North 14th Sts.
Hampton Hills St. Both From Dub Wright Blvd. west 270 feet
Hartford St. North From Presidio St. west a distance of 250 feet
Both From LaSalle Dr. to the alley west of LaSalle Dr.
Hickory St. Both From North 18th St. to Ambler Ave.
Both From Vogel Ave north a distance of 280 feet
Highland Ave. West From Hunt St. to S. 18th St.
Hunt St. North From Sayles Blvd. to Ross Ave.
South From Sayles Blvd. to 150 feet west of Grand Ave.
Industrial Blvd. Both From Maple St. to Loop 322
Both From Treadaway Blvd. to Buffalo Gap Rd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/648
Both From 250 feet east of Oldham Lane to Loop 322
Both From 7,200 feet east of Georgetown Dr. to Elmdale Rd.,
south
Jake Roberts Freeway Both 1,000 feet on either side of the Lytle Creek bridge
Jeanette St. East From South 8th to South 9th Sts.
West From South 8th St. to the alley south of South 8th St.
West From South 22nd St. north 150 feet
Jeffries St. South From Grape St. west a distance of 215 feet
Jennings Dr. South From Delaware Rd. west to a point 150 feet west of the
western driveway to Dyes Elementary School
John Knox Dr. West From Cedar Run Rd. south a distance of 150 feet
Both From Ridgemont Dr. west a distance of 200 feet
Judge Ely Blvd. Both From Stamford to East South 11th Sts.
Kirkwood St. West From Little League Rd. to Sandefer St.
East From Little League Rd. to Ambler Ave.
Lance Dr. North & East From Airport Blvd. to Dead End South
Larkin St. West From South 6th St. north a distance of 50 feet
Leggett Dr. West From Don Juan to South 14th Sts.
Both From Elm Creek to North 1st St.
Little League Rd. Both From Kirkwood St. to Ambrocio Flores Jr. Rd.
Lynwood Ln. North From 380 feet west of Leggett Dr., west a distance of 50
ft.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/648
Marshall Ave. East From 430 feet south of Edgemont Dr. to 550 feet south
of Edgemont Dr.
East From South 32nd St. north a distance of 50 feet
West From 430 feet south of Edgemont Dr. to 510 feet south
of Edgemont Dr.
West From 750 feet south of Edgemont Dr. to 810 feet south
of Edgemont Dr.
Mesquite St. East From North 3rd St. south a distance of 140 feet
East From 100 feet north of North 3rd St. to 155 feet south
of North 4th St.
West From 50 feet north of North 4th Street north a distance
of 120 feet
Military Dr. Both From the north gate to a point 200 feet east of the gate
Both From 300 feet east of to 300 feet west of the road to the
Dyess Air Force Base north gate.
Mockingbird Blvd. Both From South 7th St. north a distance of 280 feet
Mockingbird Lane Both From North 14th to South 10th Sts.
Morris St. East From 300 feet south of South 1st St. to Russell St.
Mulberry St. West From South 3rd St. south a distance of 230 feet
Musgrave Blvd. Both East Lake Rd. to Overland Tr.
Musken Rd. South From a point 400 feet east of Judge Ely Blvd. to a point
650 feet east of Judge Ely Blvd.
Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east a distance of 250 feet
Nelson Dr. Both From EN 10th St. to EN 8th St.
Oak St. East From South 4th St. south 80 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/648
East From South 5th St. north 50 feet
West From South 4th to South 2nd Sts.
West From South 4th St. south a distance of 80 feet
Old Anson Rd. Both From Ambler Ave. to 500 feet north of Impact Dr.
West From Ambler Ave. south a distance of 150 feet
Park Ave. Both From 50 feet north of North 20th St. to 50 feet south of
North 20th St.
Peach St. Both From South 2nd St. south a distance of 80 feet
Pecan St. West From South 4th St. to South 5th St.
Pecan St. East From 80 feet south of South 4th St. to 60 feet north of
South 5th St.
Pine St. Both From 300 feet south of Ambler Ave. north to a point
250 feet north of Ambler Ave.
East From Lane Avenue south a distance of 75 feet
West From North 18th St. to a point 250 feet north of Ambler
Ave.
West From North 3rd St. south a distance of 110 feet
West From North 4th St. south a distance of 180 feet
West From 80 feet south of North 5th St. to 140 feet south of
North 5th St.
Pioneer Dr., South Both From South 1st St. to Don Juan St.
Both From 250 feet north of S 7th to 200 feet south of
Potomac Ave.
Pioneer Dr., North Both From North 1st St. to 100 feet south of North 7th St.
Poplar St. West From South 14th St. to a point 200 feet south
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/648
Portland Ave. West From South 14th St. south 25 feet
East From South 14th St. south 80 feet.
Portland St. East From north property line of North 7th St. to a point 200
feet north
Potomac Ave. North From Pioneer Dr. to Buccaneer Dr.
Prof Bynum Way Both From Judge Ely Blvd. west 300 feet
Quail Run Both From Texas Ave. north a distance of 120 feet
Rebecca Lane Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. to U.S. 277
Redbud Cir. Both From 80 feet west of Leggett Dr., west a distance of 40
feet
North From 350 feet west of Leggett Dr., west a distance of 80
feet
South From 350 feet west of Leggett Dr., west a distance of
100 feet
East From Lynwood Ln. south a distance of 80 feet
West From 270 feet south of Don Juan St. south a distance of
40 feet
Redwood Dr. Both From North 10th St. south a distance of 75 feet
Richland Dr. Both From North 10th St. north a distance of 75 feet
Ridgemont Dr. Both From Clack St. to Rebecca Lane
Ridgway St. West From Ridgmar St. north a distance of 140 feet
Rolling Green Dr. Both From Ridgemont Dr. to Catclaw Dr.
Ross Ave. East From 200 feet south of South 14th St. south a distance
of 250 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/648
East From South 14th St. south a distance of 150 feet
Russwood Dr. Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east a distance of 250 feet
North From 50 feet west of Bruce Way to 50 feet east of
Bruce Way
Sammons St. East From South 10th to South 11th Sts.
East From North 5th St. to 50 feet south of South 6th St.
San Jacinto Dr. Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east a distance of 250 feet
San Jose Dr., North Both From Pioneer Dr. west a distance of 100 feet
Both From North 10th St. north a distance of 50 feet
North From 250 feet west of Pioneer Dr. west a distance of
170 feet
East From a point 75 feet south of the main gate to the Lee
Complex north a distance of 125 feet
Sandefer St. South From Kirkwood to Graham Sts.
Sandy St. North From Gann St. to Judge Ely Blvd.
Santos St. East From 340 feet south of South 19th St. to 370 feet south
of South 19th St.
East From Hunt St. to S. 18th St.
Sayles Blvd. East From South 1st to South 3rd Sts.
West From South 14th St. south a distance of 400 feet
Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. west a distance of 1,750 feet
West From 580 feet south of South 14th St. to 250 feet north
of Hunt St.
West From Hunt St. north a distance of 100 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/648
East From South 17th St. south a distance of 100 feet
West From 100 feet north of South 40th St. to 50 feet south
of South 40th St.
East From a point 65 feet north of the projected north
curbline of Moore St. northeast a distance of 230 feet
East From the projected southwest curbline of Highland Ave.
northeast a distance of 310 feet
West From South 20th St. to 200 feet south of South 24th St.
West From 50 feet north of Moore St. to 50 feet north of
Moore St.
West From 100 feet north of South 38th St. to 50 feet south
of South 38th St.
East From 70 feet north of South 38th St. to 300 feet north of
South 38th St.
East From 10 feet north of the projected north curbline of
South 39th St. to a point 15 feet south of the projected
south curbline of South 38th St.
West From 100 feet north of South 39th St. to 50 feet south
of South 39th St.
West From 100 feet north of South 41st St. to 50 feet south of
South 41st St.
East From 75 feet south of South 41st St. to 50 feet north of
South 41st St.
North- west From Highland Ave. northeast a distance of 50 feet
North- west From Grand Ave. northeast a distance of 50 feet
Both From 250 feet north of Industrial Blvd. to 200 feet
south of Industrial Blvd.
Shelton St. West From North 6th St. north 100 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/648
Sierra Sunset Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. east 300 feet
Simmons Ave. West From Ambler Ave. north a distance of 900 feet
West From North 18th St. to alley north of North 18th St.
West North 19th St. to alley north of North 19th St.
East From North 18th St. to alley north of North 19th St.
Simmons St. East From Ambler Ave. to Vogel St.
Southwest Drive Both From Brookhollow Dr. to Curry Lane
State St. South From Hickory to Orange Sts.
State St. Both From Mockingbird Lane east a distance of 200 feet
From Mockingbird Lane west a distance of 200 feet
State St. North From 150 feet east of Forrest Ave. to 100 feet west of
Forrest Ave.
South From 100 feet east of Forrest Ave. to 150 feet west of
Forrest Ave.
Sugarberry Ave. Both From Maple St. east 300 feet
Sycamore St. East From 130 feet south of South 4th St. to 240 feet north
of South 6th St.
West From South 2nd St. south a distance of 170 feet
Texas Ave. South From US 277 to Dub Wright Blvd.
North From US 277 to Denton St.
North From 500 feet east of Corsicana Ave. to Dub Wright
Blvd.
Tracy Lynn Dr. Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east a distance of 250 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/648
Treadaway Blvd. Both From North 13th to South 11th Sts.
E. Hwy. 80 Both From Treadaway Blvd. to east end of Cedar Creek
Bridge
Vapor Tr. Both From Hartford St. to Benbrook St.
Victoria St. East From North 1st to North 3rd Sts.
West From North 1st St. north a distance of 300 feet
Vogel Ave. North From Cedar to Hickory Sts.
South From Hickory to Simmons Sts.
South From 100 feet west of Mimosa Drive to 100 feet east of
Willis Street
North From Mimosa Dr. west 140 feet
Wall St. East From 280 feet south of North 3rd St. to 250 feet north
of North 3rd St.
West From 280 feet south of North 3rd St. to 200 feet north
of General Dynamics Way
Washington Blvd. East From E. Hwy. 80 to 370 feet north of E. Hwy. 80
East From 480 feet north of E. Hwy. 80 to 750 feet north of
E. Hwy. 80
East From 50 feet north of East North 15th St. to 100 feet
south of East North 15th St.
West From 100 feet north of East North 15th St. to 60 feet
south of East North 15th St.
Westchester Dr. Both From Buffalo Gap Rd. west a distance of 150 feet
W. Stamford St. South Shirley Rd. to FM 3438
Westmoreland St. West From Ambler Ave. north a distance of 300 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/648
Willis St. Both From a point 140 feet north of South 7th to South 13th
Sts.
Both From South 2nd St. to a point 70 feet north of Yale St.
East From South 13th St. north a distance of 150 feet
East From South 13th St. south a distance of 150 feet
West From North 12th St. north a distance of 172 feet
West From South 13th St. to a point 125 feet south of South
15th St.
Both From South 14th St. to a point 125 feet south of South
15th St.
Both From a point 152 feet south of State St. to North 12th
St.
Wyndham Ct. North From Lynbrook Dr. east a distance of 150 feet
South From Lynbrook Dr. east a distance of 210 feet
Yeoman's Rd. Both From Judge Ely Blvd. east a distance of 250 feet
Unnamed Connector road
from South 1st St. to the
unnamed connector road
from Oak St. to Pine St.
Both From South 1st St. to the unnamed connector road from
Oak St. to Pine St.
EN 8th St. Both Cockerell Dr. to Carver St.
E-S alley between US 80E
and Sandy St.
South From 300 feet east of Gann St. to Judge Ely Blvd.
E-W alley between North 3rd
and North 6th St.
Both From Burger to Fannin Sts.
Both From Fannin St. to Mockingbird Lane
Both From Green to Burger Sts.
E-W alley between North 1st South From North Jefferson St. to San Jose Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/648
and North 2nd St.
Both From Cypress St. west to N/S alley between Cypress St.
and Cedar St.
E-W alley between North
18th St. and North 19th St.
Both From Hickory to Cedar Sts.
E-W alley south South From Santos St. East 150 feet of S. 19th St.
E-W alley between US 80E
and Sandy St.
South From Gann St. east a distance of 300 feet
E-W alley between US 80E
and Sandy St.
North From Gann St. to Judge Ely Blvd.
E-W alley north of Texas
Ave.
North From Quail Run to 450 feet west of Quail Run
N-S alley between Campus
Courts and Avenue D
Both From East North 16th St. to the alley north of East
North 16th St.
N-S alley east of Hickory St. Both From North 21st St. to Amber Ave.
N-S alley between Fannin St.
and Mockingbird Lane
East From North 3rd St. north to the E-W alley
N-S alley between Hickory
and Cedar Sts.
Both From North 19th St. to the E-W alley south of North
19th St.
N-S alley between N.
Jefferson Dr. and N. LaSalle
Dr.
West From N. 2nd St. north a distance of 600 feet
N-S alley between
Mockingbird Ln. and
Woodlawn Dr.
East From N. 6th St. south a distance of 400 feet
N-S alley between Pine and
Cypress Sts.
East From North 4th St. north a distance of 50 feet
N-S alley between Pine and
Cypress Sts.
West From North 4th Street to North 5th Street
N-S alley between Pine St.
and Cyprus St.
Both From North 2nd St. to North 3rd St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/648
N-S alley between Pine and
Cypress Streets
Both From North 3rd St. to North 4th St.
N-S alley between Pine and
Walnut Sts.
West From North 4th to North 5th Sts.
N-S alley west of Plum St. East From a point 155 feet south of North 6th St. to a point
235 feet south of North 6th St.
N-S alley west of Plum St. East From North 5th St. north a distance of 30 feet
N-S alley between Walnut St.
and Mesquite St.
West From North 3rd St. north a distance of 60 feet
N-S alley west of Washington
Blvd.
West From East North 16th St. to College Dr.
N-S alley between Elm St.
and Sycamore St.
East From South 2nd to the E-W alley between South 1st St.
and South 2nd St.
(Code 1965, § 17-146; Ord. No. 1053, 4-13-78; Ord. No. 1141, 12-21-78; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 1179, 6-28-79; Ord. No. 50-
1979, 8-9-79; Ord. No. 61-1979, pt. 1, 9-13-79; Ord. No. 75-1979, pt. 1, 10-25-79; Ord. No. 77-1979, pt. 1, 11-1-79; Ord. No. 14-1980,
pt. 1, 2-28-80; Ord. No. 46-1980, pt. 2, 5-8-80; Ord. No. 56-1980, pt. 1, 6-12-80; Ord. No. 62-1980, pt. 2, 7-10-80; Ord. No. 87-1980, pt.
1, 8-28-80; Ord. No. 113-1980, pt. 1, 11-20-80; Ord. No. 16-1981, pt. 1, 2-26-81; Ord. No. 22-1981, pt. 1, 3-12-81; Ord. No. 78-1981, pt.
1, 8-13-81; Ord. No. 87-1981, pt. 1, 9-10-81; Ord. No. 111-1981, pt. 1, 10-8-81; Ord. No. 117-1981, pt. 1, 10-22-81; Ord. No. 30-1982,
pt. 1, 3-25-82; Ord. No. 48-1982, pt. 1, 5-6-82; Ord. No. 63-1982, pt. 1, 5-27-82; Ord. No. 68-1982, pt. 1, 6-10-82; Ord. No. 71-1982, pt.
1, 6-24-82; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 95-1982, pt. 1, 8-12-82; Ord. No. 101-1982, pt. 1, 8-26-82; Ord. No. 107-1982, pt.
1(3), 9-9-82; Ord. No. 120-1982, pt. 1, 10-28-82; Ord. No. 128-1982, pt. 1, 11-4-82; Ord. No. 10-1983, pt. 1(1), 2-10-83; Ord. No. 29-
1983, pt. 1, 3-24-83; Ord. No. 47-1983, pt. 1, 5-26-83; Ord. No. 57-1983, pt. 1, 6-9-83; Ord. No. 57-1984, pt. 1, 6-14-84; Ord. No. 58-
1984, pt. 1, 6-28-84; Ord. No. 70-1984, pt. 1, 7-12-84; Ord. No. 108-1984, pt. 1, 10-25-84; Ord. No. 119-1984, pt. 1, 12-6-84; Ord. No. 1-
1985, pt. 1, 1-10-85; Ord. No. 3-1985, pt. 1, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 12-195, pt. 1, 2-14-85; Ord. No. 11-1985, pt. 1, 2-14-85; Ord. No. 34-
1985, pt. 1, 4-25-85; Ord. No. 67-1985, pt. 1, 8-22-85; Ord. No. 28-1986, pt. 1, 4-24-86; Ord. No. 32-1986, pt. 1, 5-22-86; Ord. No. 43-
1986, pt. 1, 6-12-86; Ord. No. 60-1986, pt. 1, 8-14-86; Ord. No. 87-1986, pt. 1, 10-23-86; Ord. No. 12-1987, pt. 1, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 14-
1987, pt. 1, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 24-1987, pt. 1, 5-28-87; Ord. No. 70-1987, pt. 1, 11-5-87; Ord. No. 23-1988, pt. 1, 5-26-88; Ord. No. 38-
1988, pt. 1, 8-11-88; Ord. No. 39-1988, pt. 1, 8-25-88; Ord. No. 49-1988, pt. 1, 10-27-88; Ord. No. 54-1988, pt. 1, 12-1-88; Ord. No. 1-
1989, pt. 1, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 4-1989, pt. 1, 2-16-89; Ord. No. 8-1989, pt. 1, 4-27-89; Ord. No. 30-1989, pt. 1, 8-10-89; Ord. No. 12-
1990, pt. 1, 4-12-90; Ord. No. 19-1990, pt. 1, 5-10-90; Ord. No. 26-1990, pt. 1, 6-28-90; Ord. No. 41-1990, pt. 1, 10-11-90; Ord. No. 2-
1991, pt. 1, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 9-1991, pt. 1, 3-28-91; Ord. No. 12-1991, pt. 1, 4-11-91; Ord. No. 21-1991, pt. 1, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 11-
1992, pt. 1, 4-9-92; Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord. No. 27-1992, pt. 1, 6-25-92; Ord. No. 15-1993, pt. 1, 3-25-93; Ord. No. 35-
1993, pt. 1, 8-12-93; Ord. No. 52-1993, pt. 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 14-1994, pt. 1, 4-14-94; Ord. No. 27-1994, pt. 1, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 46-
1994, pt. 1, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 35-1995, pt. 1, 8-10-95; Ord. No. 1-1996, pt. 1, 1-11-96; Ord. No. 5-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 14-
1996, pt. 1, 4-11-96; Ord. No. 53-1996, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-21-96; Ord. No. 11-1997, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-27-97; Ord. No. 18-1997, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 5-8-97; Ord. No. 30-97, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-10-97; Ord. No. 35-1997, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-97; Ord. No. 1-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-22-98;
Ord. No. 56-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-98; Ord. No. 24-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-10-99; Ord. No. 36-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-12-99; Ord. No.
27-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-7-00; Ord. No. 48-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-9-00; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 24-2001,
pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-01; Ord. No. 37-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-13-01; Ord. No. 21-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-02; Ord. No. 25-2003, pt.
1(Exh. A), 8-14-03; Ord. No. 15-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-8-04; Ord. No. 31-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-21-04; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 13-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-07; Ord. No. 16-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-10-07; Ord. No. 31-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-
07; Ord. No. 49-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-07; Ord. No. 29-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-28-08; Ord. No. 58-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-27-16; Ord.
No. 06-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-23-17; Ord. No. 34-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-18; Ord. No. 47-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-18; Ord. No. 74-
2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-20-18; Ord. No. 05-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-19; Ord. No. 15-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-14-19)
Sec. 18-294. Same–During certain hours.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle during
the times specified in this schedule on the indicated sides of the following streets or portions of streets:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/648
(a) 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.; 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.; and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Sundays and legal holidays:
Street Side Extent
Simmons Avenue East From North 21st Street to Compere Boulevard
Simmons Avenue West From North 21st Street to the alley south of North 20th
Street
(b) 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., on Tuesday and Friday:
Street Side Extent
East North 10th Street South From Green Valley Drive west a distance of 400 feet
(c) 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days only:
Street Side Extent
North 17th Street South From Beech Street to Simmons Street
South 20th Street South From Vine Street east a distance of 150 feet
Beech Street West From North 17th Street to North 18th Street
Potomac Avenue South From Buccaneer Street to 500 feet east of Westridge
Drive
(d) 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days only:
Street Side Extent
E-W alley between
Moore and South 38th
Street
Both From Sayles Boulevard west a distance of 100 feet
N. 6th St. South From 70 feet west of Shelton St. west a distance of 120
feet
South From Green St. to Burger St.
S. 39th Street South From Sayles Blvd. west 250 feet
Shelton Street East From N. 6th St. north a distance of 280 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/648
(e) 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.:
Street Side Extent
Compere Boulevard North From Hickory Street to Simmons Avenue
Compere Boulevard South From Hickory Street west a distance of 380 feet
Simmons Ave. East From Compere Blvd. south a distance of 150 feet
(f) 6:30 p.m. to 5:30 a.m.:
Street Side Extent
North 1st Street Both From Plaza Street west to the dead end
(g) Reserved.
(h) 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.:
Street Side Extent
Capitol Ave. Both River Bend to Pioneer Dr.
State St. Both River Bend to Pioneer Dr.
N. 7th St. Both River Bend to Pioneer Dr.
River Bend Both Capitol Ave. to N. 7th St.
Stafford St. Both From Ash St. to Treadaway Blvd.
N. 15th St. North From alley west of Pine St. to Cypress St.
N. 15th St. South From Pine St. to Cypress St.
(Ord. No. 113-1980, pt. 1, 11-20-80; Ord. No. 37-1982, pt. 1, 3-25-82; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85; Ord. No. 11-1986, pt. 1, 3-13-86;
Ord. No. 43-1986, pt. 1, 6-12-86; Ord. No. 56-1987, pt. 1, 9-10-87; Ord. No. 19-1990, pt. 1, 5-10-90; Ord. No. 2-1992, pt. 1, 1-23-92;
Ord. No. 13-1992, pt. 1, 4-23-92; Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord. No. 35-1995, pt. 1, 8-10-95; Ord. No. 56-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A),
11-19-98; Ord. No. 36-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-12-99; Ord. No. 27-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-7-00; Ord. No. 48-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-9-00;
Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 45-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-5-02; Ord. No. 25-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-14-03; Ord. No.
15-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-8-04; Ord. No. 02-2018, pt. 2(Exh. A), 1-11-18; Ord. No. 47-2018, pt. 2(Exh. A), 8-23-18)
Sec. 18-294.1. Parking and standing prohibited at all times.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/648
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park or
stand a vehicle upon the indicated portion of the following streets or segments of streets:
Street Side Extent
North Frontage of S. 1st
Street
Both From 1,000 feet west of Old Hwy 80 to west
end
South 1st Street North Parkway From Leggett Drive to Winters Freeway
(Ord. No. 32-1986, pt. 1, 5-22-86; Ord. No. 27-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-7-00)
Sec. 18-295. Shopping areas or medical center complex-designation–Prohibited parking.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, and when signs are erected as approved by the director of traffic and transportation, no
person shall at any time park a vehicle within any area or areas indicated as no parking areas on the following described shopping center
or retail sales areas, [medical center complex] more particularly shown on site plan or plans on file in the office of the director of traffic
and transportation:
Mall of Abilene
Hendrick Medical Center complex
Westgate Mall [as established by Ordinance 126-1983]
(Code 1965, § 17-146A; Ord. No. 1124, 10-26-78; Ord. No. 1153, 2-22-79; Ord. No. 33-1981, pt. 1, 4-9-81; Ord. No. 126-1983, pt. 1, 11-
3-83)
Sec. 18-296. Same–Erection of signs.
The expense of obtaining, preparing, erecting and installing signs, curb painting, or other related material and procedure as necessitated
by section 18-295 above shall be borne in its entirety by the owner or owners, as their interests may appear, of the shopping center or
retail sales area [or medical center complex] designated as a prohibited parking zone according to said section 18-295. The method and
arrangements for obtaining, preparing, erecting or installing signs, curb painting, or other related material shall be as approved by the city
director of traffic and transportation provided that the city shall be compensated for any expense it incurs hereby within thirty (30) days of
the completion of any such obtaining, preparing, erecting or installing signs, curb painting, or other related materials or said erected and
installed signs may be removed by the city. Further, if the city is not compensated within thirty (30) days, as set out above, for any
expenses incurred herein, the city council may repeal the prohibited parking designation from that shopping center or retail sales area [/or
medical center complex] for which the above said failure to pay expenses has occurred.
(Code 1965, § 17-146B; Ord. No. 1124, 10-26-78)
Sec. 18-297. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stand, stop or park a
vehicle during the times specified in this schedule on the indicated sides of the following streets or portions of streets:
(a) At all times (Sundays and legal holidays included):
Street Side Extent
N. 2nd St. South From Hickory St. west a distance of 220 feet
East 27th St. Both From Shoreline Dr. west 920 feet
N-S alley west of Grape St. Both From North 1st St. to North 2nd St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/648
State Street Both From Forrest Ave. east 110 feet
W. Stamford St. North From Victoria St. west a distance of 800 feet
W. Stamford St. South From 130 feet west of Victoria St. west a distance of 110
feet
(b) 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days:
Street Side Extent
Presidio Dr. Both From 50 feet north of Hartford St. to 350 feet north of
Hartford St.
North 12th St. North From 25 feet east of Bel Air Dr. to 75 feet west of Bel Air
Dr.
North 12th St. South From Bel Air Dr. west 100 feet
South 20th St. North From Jeannette St. west to Vine St.
(Ord. No. 87-1982, pt. 1, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 23-1985, pt. 1, 3-28-85; Ord. No. 87-1986, pt. 1, 10-23-86; Ord. No. 54-1988, pt. 1, 12-1-88;
Ord. No. 52-1993, pt. 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 3-1994, pt. 1, 1-27-94; Ord. No. 46-1994, pt. 1, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 1-1995, pt. 1, 1-12-95;
Ord. No. 1-1996, pt. 1, 1-11-96; Ord. No. 11-1997, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-27-97; Ord. No. 1-1998, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-22-98; Ord. No. 21-2017, pt.
2(Exh. A), 7-13-17)
Sec. 18-298. Reserved.
Sec. 18-299. Parking time limited.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stand, stop or park a
vehicle in excess of the indicated period of time specified in this schedule on the indicated days on the indicated sides of the following
streets or portions of streets. Each consecutive increment of the time limit during which a vehicle remains continuously parked shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
(a) Two hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday:
Street Side Extent
North 1st St. North From Pine to Cypress Sts.
North 2nd St. South From Pine St. to Cypress St.
South From Cedar St. to Hickory St.
South From alley east of Walnut St. to the alley west of Walnut St.
North From Walnut St. to Pine St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/648
South From Walnut St. to Pine St.
North 3rd St. North Cedar St. to Cypress St.
North From Hickory St. to alley east of Hickory St.
South Hickory St. to Cedar St.
From alley east of Walnut St. to Walnut St.
South From Walnut St. to Pine St.
North From Pine St. to alley west of Pine St.
North 4th St. Both From Pine to Hickory Sts.
North From Walnut to Pine Sts.
North 5th St. North From Walnut St. to alley east of Hickory St.
South From alley west of Walnut St. to alley east of Hickory St.
Cedar St. West From North 2nd St. south to the alley
West From North 3rd to North 5th Sts.
East From North 2nd St. to North 1st St.
East From 150 feet north of North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
East From North 1st St. to North 3rd St.
Cypress St. West From alley between North 1st St. and North 2nd St. to North 2nd
St.
West From North 5th St. to North 6th St.
West From North 3rd St. to 104 feet south of North 3rd St.
East From North 5th St. to North 6th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/648
Hickory St. East From North 3rd St. to North 4th St.
Pine St. Both From North 5th to North 6th Sts.
East From North 4th to North 5th Sts.
West From 90 feet north of North 2nd St. to North 3rd St.
Pine St. East North 1st St. to North 2nd St.
East From North 2nd St. to North 3rd St.
Walnut St. East From North 2nd St. to North 3rd St.
East From North 5th St. north a distance of 155 feet
East From North 4th St. north a distance of 195 feet.
West From North 2nd St. to 100 feet south of North 5th St.
(b) One hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday:
Street Side Extent
North 2nd St. North From Cypress St. to Cedar St.
North From Cedar to Hickory Sts.
North From Pine St. to Cypress St.
South From Cypress St. to Cedar St.
North 3rd St. North From Cypress St. to alley west of Pine St.
North From 45 feet west of Mesquite St. to alley west of Mesquite St.
South From Mesquite St. to alley west of Mesquite St.
South From. Pine St. to Cedar St.
North 5th St. South From Walnut St. to alley west of Walnut St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/648
North 6th St. North From Hickory St. to the alley east of Hickory St.
Cedar St. West From North 2nd St. to North 3rd St.
East From North 3rd St. north a distance of 150 feet
Cypress St. West From 80 feet north of North 1st St. to alley between North 1st
St. and North 2nd St.
East From North 1st St. to North 5th St.
West From 104 feet south of North 3rd St. to North 2nd St.
West From North 3rd St. to North 5th St.
Mesquite St. West From 90 feet north of North 3rd St. to 160 feet south of North
4th St.
Pine St. West From North 1st St. to 90 feet north of North 2nd St.
West From North 3rd to North 5th Sts.
Walnut St. East From North 3rd to North 4th Sts.
West From North 5th St. south a distance of 100 feet
(c) One hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., school days only:
Street Side Extent
North 5th Street South From Shelton Street to alley east of Shelton Street
North 6th Street North 150 feet east of Fannin St. to 70 feet east of Burger St.
South 38th St. North From Sayles Blvd. west 260 feet
South From Sayles Blvd. west 240 feet
North 19th St. North Burger St. to alley west of Burger St.
Burger St. West From North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/648
East From 150 feet north of North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
Cooke St. North From Sayles Blvd. west a distance of 360 feet
South From Sayles Blvd. west a distance of 270 feet
Fannin St. West From 70 feet north of North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
East From North 6th St. to alley south of North 6th St.
East From 120 feet south of the alley south of North 6th St. to 190
feet north of North 3rd St.
Grand Ave. East From 300 feet south of South 35th St. to Sayles Blvd.
West From Moore St. to alley north of Cooke St.
Green St. West From 180 feet north of North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
Green St. East From 120 feet north of North 3rd St. to alley south of North 6th
St.
Highland Ave. East From Sayles Blvd. to south 35th St.
Highland Ave. West From Sayles Blvd. north 250 feet
Moore St. Both From Sayles Blvd. to Erie St.
Shelton St. East From North 6th St. north a distance of 280 feet
Both From North 3rd St. to North 6th St.
(d) Forty-five minute limit: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday:
Street Side Extent
Campus Court West From point 150 feet north of East North 16th St. to a point 100
feet south of East North 18th St.
College Dr. Both From Campus Court to an alley west of Campus Court
(e) Thirty-minute limit: At any time: [Reserved]
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/648
(f) Reserved.
(g) Reserved.
(h) Reserved.
(i) Reserved.
(j) Reserved.
(k) One hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Sunday through Saturday:
Street Side Extent
South 4th St. South Oak St. to Pecan St.
South 5th St. North Oak St. to Pecan St.
(l) Two hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Saturday:
Street Side Extent
Walnut St. West From North 3rd St. to North 4th St.
(m) One hour limit: 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Saturday:
Street Side Extent
Walnut St. East From North 3rd St. to North 4th St.
(Code 1965, § 17-149; Ord. No. 1062, 5-11-78; Ord. No. 1072, 6-8-78; Ord. No. 20-1980, pt. 1, 3-13-80; Ord. No. 62-1980, pt. 3, 7-10-
80; Ord. No. 87-1980, pt. 1, 8-28-80; Ord. No. 88-1980, pt. 1, 9-11-80; Ord. No. 113-1980, pt. 1, 11-20-80; Ord. No. 38-1982, pt. 1, 4-22-
82; Ord. No. 48-1982, pt. 1, 5-6-82; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 10-1983, pt. 1(2), 3-10-82; Ord. No. 62-1983, pt. 1(1), 6-
9-83; Ord. No. 133-1983, pt. 1(7), 12-1-83; Ord. No. 38-1984, pt. 1, 4-12-84; Ord. No. 11-1985, pt. 1, 2-14-85; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1,
2-28-85; Ord. No. 87-1986, pt. 1, 10-23-86; Ord. No. 4-1987, pt. 1, 2-12-87; Ord. No. 14-1987, pt. 1, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 24-1987, pt. 1, 5-
28-87; Ord. No. 25-1987, pt. 1, 5-28-87; Ord. No. 40-1987, pt. 1, 7-9-87; Ord. No. 56-1987, pt. 1, 9-10-87; Ord. No. 70-1987, pt. 1, 11-5-
87; Ord. No. 38-1988, pt. 1, 8-11-88; Ord. No. 39-1988, pt. 1, 8-25-88; Ord. No. 1-1989, pt. 1, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 8-1989, pt. 1, 4-27-89;
Ord. No. 30-1989, pt. 1, 8-10-89; Ord. No. 32-1989, pt. 1, 8-24-89; Ord. No. 12-1990, pt. 1, 4-12-90; Ord. No. 26-1990, pt. 1, 6-28-90;
Ord. No. 34-1990, pt. 1, 8-9-90; Ord. No. 41-1990, pt. 1, 10-11-90; Ord. No. 2-1991, pt. 1, 1-10-91; Ord. No. 9-1991, pt. 1, 3-28-91; Ord.
No. 21-1991, pt. 1, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 2-1992, pt. 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 27-1992, pt. 1, 6-25-92; Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord.
No. 50-1992, pt. 1, 12-3-92; Ord. No. 35-1993, pt. 1, 8-12-93; Ord. No. 52-1993, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-2-93; Ord. No. 3-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A),
1-27-94; Ord. No. 35-1995, pt. 1, 8-10-95; Ord. No. 5-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 14-1996, pt. 1, 4-11-96; Ord. No. 11-1997, pt.
1(Exh. A), 3-27-97; Ord. No. 30-1997, pt. 1, 7-10-97; Ord. No. 24-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-10-99; Ord. No. 36-1999, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-12-
99; Ord. No. 48-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-9-00; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01; Ord. No. 37-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-13-01; Ord.
No. 21-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-02; Ord. No. 45-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-5-02; Ord. No. 9-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-03; Ord. No. 25-
2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-14-03; Ord. No. 38-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-13-03; Ord. No. 15-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-8-04; Ord. No. 31-2004, pt.
1(Exh. A), 10-21-04; Ord. No. 34-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-05; Ord. No. 49-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-06; Ord. No. 13-2007, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 4-12-07; Ord. No. 31-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-07; Ord. No. 49-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-07; Ord. No. 05-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-
19)
Sec. 18-300. Parking meter zones.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, parking meter zones are hereby established upon the following parking lots, streets or
portions of streets, in which the parking of vehicles shall be regulated by parking meters between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of
any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except as otherwise specified herein:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/648
(a) 4-hour limit: At Rate A.
Street Side Extent
200 Block Cedar St. East All spaces
(b) 24-minute limit: At Rate B.
Street Side Extent
North 3rd St. North From Pine to Walnut Sts.
North 4th St. South From Walnut to Pine Sts.
Pine St. East From North 3rd to North 4th Sts.
The time limits prescribed by this section shall be the maximum time for continuous parking within any space within the applicable
parking meter zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name, operated by
him or in his custody or control to be parked or remain in any parking space for any period of time in excess of the maximum period of
time prescribed for such space by this section, or be parked or remain in any parking space while the meter controlling such space is
displaying a signal or otherwise indicating that the vehicle occupying such space has been parked therein beyond the period of time
permitted by this section or other provisions of this chapter. The enumeration of the foregoing violations shall not be exclusive, and shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws and
ordinances.
In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the particular vehicle in question was parked or situated in any one
parking space governed hereby at different times on the same day shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such vehicle
was continuously parked or continuously remained in such parking space at all times during the period between such different times.
(Code 1965, § 17-150; Ord. No. 1019, 1-26-78; Ord. No. 90-1982, pt. 1, 7-22-82; Ord. No. 62-1983, pt. 1(2), 6-9-83; Ord. No. 83-1984,
pt. 1, 4-12-84; Ord. No. 120-1984, pt. 1, 12-20-84; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 18-301. Through trucks prohibited.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any truck exceeding seven thousand (7,000) pounds empty weight
at any time upon any of the following streets or portions of streets except for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries:
Street Extent
South 20th St. From Highland St. to Brook Hollow Dr.
South 23rd St. From Buffalo Gap to Post Oak Rds.
Avenue D From East North 16th St. to Ambler Ave.
Edgemont Dr. From Buffalo Gap Rd. to Treadaway Blvd.
Elmwood Dr. From South 7th St. to Brook Hollow Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/648
Leggett Dr. From Russell to South 14th Sts.
Lincoln Dr. From Ambler Ave. to College Dr.
Lytle Way From East South 11th St. to Play St.
Old Andy Rd. Andy Road to Hartford St.
Pioneer Dr. From North 10th St. to Danville Dr.
Post Oak Rd. From Danville Dr. to South 20th St.
Sayles Blvd. From South 1st to South 20th Sts.
Shoreline Dr. From Lytle Way to Lytle Trail
Washington Blvd. From East North 16th St. to E. Hwy. 80
Westwood Dr. From North 6th St. to Ambler Ave.
(Code 1965, § 17-151; Ord. No. 926, § 1-13-77; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 2-1988, pt. 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 50-1992, § 1,
12-3-92)
Sec. 18-302. Signalized intersections.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, signalized intersections are hereby established, and the movement of traffic or pedestrians
through the following intersections shall be controlled by a traffic signal selected by the director of traffic and transportation:
North 1st St. and Cedar St.
Graham St/Sayles Blvd.
Grape St.
Hickory St.
Leggett Dr.
Mockingbird Blvd. (southbound off ramp)
Orange St.
Pine St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/648
Pioneer Dr.
Shelton St.
Westwood Dr.
Willis St.
South 1st St. and Butternut St.
Grape St.
Leggett Dr.
Oak St.
Pioneer Dr.
Sayles Blvd.
Shelton St./Portland Ave.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
Winters Freeway east off-ramp
Winters Freeway west off-ramp
North 2nd St. and Cedar St.
Cypress St.
Hickory St.
Pine St.
Walnut St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/648
North 3rd St. and Cedar St.
Cypress St.
Grape St.
Hickory St.
Mockingbird Lane
Pine St.
Walnut St.
Willis St.
South 3rd St. and Sayles Blvd.
North 4th St. and Cedar St.
Cypress St.
Hickory St.
Pine St.
Walnut St.
North 5th St. and Cedar St.
Cypress St.
Grape St.
Hickory St.
Pine St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/648
Walnut St.
North 6th St. and Cedar St.
Grape St.
Hickory St.
Mockingbird Lane
Pine St.
Walnut St.
Westwood Dr.
Willis St.
North 7th St. and Treadaway Blvd.
South 7th St. and Arnold Blvd.
Butternut St.
Chestnut St.
Clack St.
Danville Dr.
Leggett Dr.
Mockingbird Lane
Oak St.
Pioneer Dr.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/648
Sayles Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
North 8th St. and Grape St.
Hickory St.
Pine St.
East North 10th St. and Judge Ely Blvd.
North 10th St. and Grape St.
Hickory St.
Minter Lane
Mockingbird Lane
Pine St.
Pioneer Dr.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
East South 11th St. and Judge Ely Blvd.
Oldham Lane
South 11th St. and Barrow St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/648
Butternut St.
Chestnut St.
Oak St.
Sayles Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
North 12th St. and Grape St.
Mockingbird Lane
Willis St.
North 13th St. and Hickory St.
Pine St.
Treadaway Blvd.
South 14th St. and Barrow St.
Butternut St.
Clack St.
Danville Dr.
Elmwood Dr.
Leggett Dr.
Oak St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/648
Pioneer Dr.
Ross Ave.
Sayles Blvd.
Texas Ave.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
East North 16th St. and Judge Ely Blvd.
North 18th St. and Grape St.
Hickory St.
Mockingbird Lane
Pine St.
Willis St.
South 20th St. and Barrow St.
Butternut St.
Sayles Blvd.
Willis St.
South 23rd St. and Barrow St.
Willis St.
South 27th St. Barrow St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/648
Buffalo Gap Rd.
Sayles Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
South 32nd St. and Buffalo Gap Rd.
Ambler Ave. and Campers Courts
Grape St.
Hickory St.
Judge Ely Blvd.
Mockingbird Lane
Old Anson Rd.
Overland Trail
Pine St.
Stamford St.
Treadaway Blvd.
Willis St.
Antilley Rd. and Director's Parkway/Regional Plaza
Fairways Oaks Blvd.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/648
Buffalo Gap Rd. and
Chimney Rock Rd.
Clack St.
Danville St.
Rebecca Lane
Robertson Dr.
Antilley Rd.
Industrial Blvd. and Sayles Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd.
Treadaway Blvd. and E. Hwy. 80/North 2nd St.
Rebecca Ln. and Catclaw Dr.
Ridgemont Dr.
Southwest Drive and Catclaw Dr.
Clack St.
Danville Dr.
Texas Ave. and Corsicana Ave.
E. Hwy. and Judge Ely Blvd.
T & P Lane
FM 3438 and Hartford St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/648
(Code 1965, § 17-152; Ord. No. 1053, 4-13-78; Ord. No. 1136, 11-30-78; Ord. No. 1161, 4-12-79; Ord. No. 23-1980, pt. 1, 3-27-80; Ord.
No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 28-1986, pt. 1, 4-24-86; Ord. No. 87-1986, pt. 1, 10-23-86; Ord. No. 30-1992, pt. 1, 7-23-92; Ord.
No. 35-1993, pt. 1, 8-12-93; Ord. No. 23-1995, pt. 1, 5-25-95; Ord. No. 5-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01)
Sec. 18-303. Pedestrian actuated school crossing signals.
In accordance with the terms of this chapter, pedestrian actuated school crossing signals are hereby established at the following locations,
and the movement of traffic or pedestrians at such locations shall be controlled by a traffic signal selected by the director of traffic and
transportation:
EN 10th St at Avenue F
North 10th St. at North San Jose Dr.
South 20th St at Jeanette St.
Ambler Ave. at Yorktown Dr.
Mockingbird Lane at Abilene High School
Pioneer Dr. at Potomac St.
S. Willis St. at Sherry Lane
(Code 1965, § 17-152; Ord. No. 15-1985, pt. 1, 2-28-85; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A.), 8-9-01)
Sec. 18-304. Parking designated for the disabled.
(a) In accordance with the terms of this chapter, and when notice thereof is given by designating the parking spaces and areas in
compliance with state law, parking spaces and areas are hereby established specifically for the disabled within the district or upon those
streets or parts of streets set out in the schedule that follows:
Street Side Location
N. 2nd St. North From Cedar St. to 60 feet west of Cedar St.
North On the north parkway from 125 feet west of Hickory St. to
175 feet west of Hickory St.
South From 170 feet west of Cypress St. to 215 feet west of
Cypress St.
N. 3rd St. North From Pine St. east 55 feet
N. 3rd St. North From Cedar St. east 50 feet
N. 8th St. North From 65 feet east of Cypress St. to 86 feet east of Cypress St.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/648
Cedar St. West From 80 feet north of N. 2nd St. to 115 feet north of N. 2nd
St.
Cypress St. West From North 3rd St. north 60 feet
West From North 4th north a distance of 50 feet
Pine St. East From North 2nd St. north 50 feet
East From North 5th St. south 55 feet
West From 120 feet north of North 1st St. to 150 feet north of
North 1st St.
West From North 2nd St. north a distance of 45 feet
Walnut St. East From 40 feet south of North 5th St. south a distance of 60
feet
East From North 5th St. north a distance of 54 feet
West From North 2nd St. north a distance of 50 feet
(b) Chapter 681 of the Texas Transportation Code is hereby made applicable to any parking space or area for the disabled on private
property that is designated in compliance with the identification requirements of state law.
(Ord. No. 62-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86; Ord. No. 19-1988, pt. 1, 4-28-88; Ord. No. 32-1989, pt. 1, 8-24-89; Ord. No. 41-1990, pt. 1, 10-11-90;
Ord. No. 41-1992, pt. 1, 10-22-92; Ord. No. 50-1992, pt. 1, 12-3-92; Ord. No. 51-1992, pt. 1, 12-17-92; Ord. No. 52-1993, pt. 1(Exh. A),
12-2-93; Ord. No. 14-1994, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-14-94; Ord. No. 21-1995, pt. 1, 5-11-95; Ord. No. 35-1995, pt. 1, 8-10-95; Ord. No. 1-1996,
pt. 1, 1-11-96; Ord. No. 5-1996, pt. 1, 2-22-96; Ord. No. 45-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-28-00; Ord. No. 18-2001, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-01; Ord.
No. 21-2002, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-02; Ord. No. 49-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-07)
Chapter 19
NUISANCES AND ILLEGAL DUMPING*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 19-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Abilene
through the regulation of nuisances and illegal dumping.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-2. Texas junked motor vehicles provisions adopted.
Whereas, it is the desire of the City of Abilene Texas, to prevent the accumulation of abandoned or junked motor vehicles within the City,
to eliminate the health and safety hazards associated with said vehicles and to abate the nuisances attributable to such vehicles, the City of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/648
Abilene hereby adopts Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code regarding Junked Motor Vehicles in its entirety herein, and as
amended, and it shall serve as the city's ordinance for said vehicles. An alternative administrative procedure as outlined in section 19-34
will be used in enforcing this section.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
Administrator. City of Abilene Peace Officers and Firefighters, Code Enforcement Officers, Environmental Enforcement Officers, Public
Health Authority or designee, or City Manager or designee who administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Cultivated. Any real property that is currently being used to grow crops.
Fences in deteriorated condition. A fence that:
(a) Is out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, except for fencing
four (4) feet or less in height, the vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top
of the fence; or
(b) Has broken, loose, damaged, removed or missing parts including but not limited to pickets, slats, posts, wood rails,
bricks, and panels; or
(c) Is braced by guy wires, braces or any other material that may be viewable from any public streets, rights-of-way,
alleyways, or property and easements over which the city or general public has dominion and control.
Improved parking surface. Concrete, asphalt, or any accepted all-weather base material.
Natural land. Any real property that has not been maintained, cleared, or developed.
Nuisance. Any unlawful act, or omission to perform a duty, or any condition or thing permitted to exist, where such act, omission,
condition or thing:
(a) Injures or endangers the comfort, health, safety or welfare of others; or
(b) Offends decency; or
(c) Is offensive to the senses; or
(d) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street,
highway, sidewalk, path, alley, stream, ditch or drainage pathway; or
(e) In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
(f) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to diminish the quality of the property of others.
Vehicle. Shall include but not be limited to cars, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats or other watercraft or
motorcycles.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 37-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-10-08; Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-09)
Secs. 19-4–19-14. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PROHIBITIONS
Sec. 19-15. Prohibited acts or conditions which constitute a nuisance.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the
following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance and are therefore prohibited and unlawful;
provided, however, this list shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
(1) Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation.
(2) Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber, stagnant water or of any
object or matter that may cause injury, death or disease to human beings.
(3) Any condition that provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/648
(4) Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in
such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a heightened
fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located.
(5) All excessive or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises.
(6) All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise
to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches including dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities.
(7) The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours after death.
(8) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial
wastes or other substances.
(9) Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is
conducted, performed or maintained.
(10) All appliances intended for indoor use, working or nonworking, used, stored, abandoned or junked anywhere in the
public view.
(11) Dead, diseased, or insect harboring trees when such trees constitute a hazard to life or property.
(12) Fences in a deteriorated condition or subject to falling down due to lack of maintenance or damage or that are repaired
with materials that are not comparable to the original.
(13) Reserved.
(14) Excessive accumulation of items intended for use outdoors that are not screened from the public view.
(15) Items on a porch, in a yard, under a carport, or within any area visible from the public view that are not intended for
use outdoors or are not made of material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outdoors.
(16) Furniture intended for indoor use that is used, stored, abandoned or junked outside, including on a porch, in a yard, or
under a carport.
(17) Human waste or wastewater that is deposited, stored, discharged, or exposed in such a way as to be a potential
instrument or medium in disease transmission.
(18) Violations of Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code regarding junked vehicles, and as amended.
(19) Grasses, weeds or brush at a height greater than twelve (12) inches on any lot, tract or parcel of land, including the
adjacent parkway and alleys, which is five (5) acres or less, except as provided by section 19-16 of this chapter.
(20) Vehicles in the yard of any residence excluding improved parking surfaces, or areas screened from the public view by
an opaque fence.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 37-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-10-08; Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-
09)
Sec. 19-16. Exceptions.
Any provision in this article related to grasses, weeds or brush shall not apply to the following areas:
(1) Section 19-15(19) shall not apply to the following areas:
a. Certain portions of improved and unimproved creeks; drainage channels; detention and retention ponds; borrow
ditches; any other conveyances subject to water drainage that are maintained by the City of Abilene.
b. Portions containing drought resistant landscaping as provided by section 23-320 of the city zoning ordinance.
c. Any lot, tract or parcel which is cultivated or natural land, regardless of acreage size.
(2) Section 19-15(19) shall apply to the following areas:
a. The portion of any lot, tract or parcel of land greater than five (5) acres, which is within thirty (30) feet from the
curb of any street, the edge of pavement, or any traveled portion of a street or roadway.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/648
b. The portion of the lot, tract or parcel of land greater than five (5) acres, which is within thirty (30) feet from any
abutting lot, tract or parcel of land which is one (1) acre or less and is occupied by a residence.
(3) Cultivated low-water use landscaping.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 37-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-10-08)
Secs. 19-17–19-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. NUISANCE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 19-25. Notice to abate and service of notice.
Except as otherwise provided in sections 19-29, 19-33 and 19-34, whenever a nuisance is found to exist the administrator shall give ten
(10) days written notice by certified mail or hand delivery with signed receipt to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
nuisance exists or to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. If the notice is returned unclaimed by the United States Post Office,
official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-26. Contents of notice.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall contain:
(1) The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary.
(2) A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
(3) An order to abate the nuisance within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances, or to request a
hearing within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. Request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be
addressed to the municipal court judge in which court the procedure to abate the nuisance is pending.
(4) A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time,
the city may abate such nuisance and assess the cost of abatement against such person.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-27. Hearing on nuisance.
Except as provided by section 19-34, a hearing must be held prior to the abatement of the nuisance by the city only if such a hearing is
requested by the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or by the person causing or maintaining the
nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court. The judge of the municipal court shall determine at the
hearing whether or not a nuisance exists. If a nuisance is found to exist, the judge may order the abatement of the nuisance and/or assess a
fine as provided for under chapter 1 (section 1-9) of this Code. Any ruling or order by the judge of the municipal court at this hearing
shall become final unless appealed within ten (10) days to a competent court of law of the State of Texas.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-28. Abatement by city.
Except as provided by section 19-34, upon the failure of the person, firm or corporation upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, or to request a hearing before the judge of the municipal court, the
administrator may proceed to enter upon the property to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the
abatement thereof.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-29. Abatement of an immediate danger to health and safety.
Except as provided by section 19-34, in the event of an immediate danger to the health and safety of the public, the administrator may go
upon the property where the nuisance(s) is found, and abate or cause to be abated such nuisance(s), without notice to the property owner.
No later than the tenth day after the date the city abates or causes to be abated the nuisance(s) upon the property, the city shall send notice
to the property owner in the manner required by section 19-25. The notice shall contain:
(1) A description of the nuisance(s) that was found on the property;
(2) A statement that the nuisance(s) was abated by the city;
(3) An itemized statement of the costs and fees incurred by the city for work done to abate the nuisance(s); and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/648
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request a hearing before the municipal court judge concerning the city's
abatement of such nuisance(s).
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-30. Assessment of city's expenses; billing.
Except as provided by section 19-34, expenses incurred due to the action taken by the city to correct any condition coming under the
nuisance provisions of this chapter, including service charges to cover administrative costs and penalty charges, shall be assessed against
the owners of all outstanding interests in the lot or parcel of land involved. An itemized bill of such costs will be mailed to each such
owner if the address is known.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-31. City's expenses declared lien.
Except as provided by section 19-34, any and all expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as
provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate
thereafter until satisfied.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-32. Penalties in addition to abatement.
(a) Except as provided in sections 19-34, 19-35 and 19-45, violations of provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter or
any parent or legal guardian of a child under seventeen (17) years of age who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal
negligence allows the child to place graffiti upon any structure or property or to otherwise violate this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with chapter 1 (section 1-9) of this Code. In case the owner
or occupant of any lot, lots or premises under the provisions of this chapter shall be a corporation and shall violate any provision of this
chapter, the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation with
actual or apparent authority to manage or control the actions of such corporation related to the alleged violations, shall also be severally
liable for the penalties herein provided.
(b) Each day the violation continues to exist, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(c) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(d) It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time that the existing ordinance was repealed and such ordinance adopted shall be discharged or
affected by such repeal, but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes
presently in process may be prosecuted in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Sec. 19-33. Exceptions to notice and enforcement provisions.
(a) High grasses, weeds or brush. When any violation of high grasses, weeds or brush is found to exist, a notice by letter as allowed
under this article will be addressed to the owner of the property in question. If the address of the property owner is unknown, then notice
may be given by publication one (1) time in a local, daily newspaper of general circulation. The property owner will have ten (10) days
from the date of the notice to correct the violation. Annual notice may be given to the property owner anytime during the calendar year
and no further notices shall be required for a period of one (1) year from the date of the notice.
(b) High grasses, weeds or brush in excess of forty-eight (48) inches. In the event that high grasses, weeds or brush is higher than fortyeight
(48) inches the city may go upon the property found in violation of this article and abate such violation without notice to the
property owner. No later than the tenth day after the city causes the work to be done under this section, the city shall send notice, pursuant
to section 19-29, and a bill to the property owner by certified mail.
(c) Parking in the yard of a residence. In the event that a vehicle is not parked on an improved surface in a residential yard, as required
by section 19-15(20), a single notice may be given to the property owner and no further notices shall be required for a period of six (6)
months from the date of the notice.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 22-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-8-08; Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-09)
Sec. 19-34. Administrative procedure for junked vehicles.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/648
Pursuant to chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code, the following alternative procedure for administrative hearings will be used.
(1) Notice. A person charged with violating section 19-2 of this chapter shall be entitled to request a hearing within ten (10)
days of the date of citation or notice to the person charged. A citation issued as part of a procedure adopted under this section
must:
a. Notify the person charged with violating the ordinance that the person has the right to a hearing; and
b. Provide information as to the time and place of the hearing.
(2) Hearing. If timely requested in accordance with subsection (1), a hearing shall be held within 21 calendar days after
such request, but not earlier than the 11th day after the date of citation or notice to the person charged. The hearing will be
conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the municipal court clerk with authority to administer oaths and issue orders
compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. The original or a copy of the citation shall be kept as
a record in the ordinary course of business of the municipality and is rebuttable proof of the facts it states. The person who
issued the citation is not required to attend a hearing under this section.
The judge of the municipal court may enforce an order of a hearing officer compelling the attendance of a witness or the
production of a document. A person charged with violating section 19-2 of this chapter who fails to appear at a hearing
authorized under this section is considered to admit liability for the violation charged.
The hearing officer shall issue an order stating: (a) whether the person charged with violating section 19-2 of this chapter
is liable for the violation and (b) the amount of a penalty, cost, or fee assessed against the person. A determination by the
hearing officer that section 19-2 of this chapter has been violated may result in the removal of the vehicle by the city and
the assessment of all related penalties, costs, and fees including towing charges. An order issued under this section will
be filed with the municipal court clerk, and the order shall be kept in a separate index and file from other municipal court
citations. After removal, a vehicle is prohibited from being reconstructed or made operable. Notice identifying the
vehicle or part of the vehicle shall be given to the department not later than the fifth day after the date of removal.
Relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the city after a proceeding for the
abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle
constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(3) Appeal. A person who is found by a hearing officer to have violated section 19-2 of this chapter may appeal the
determination by filing a petition in municipal court before the 31st day after the date the hearing officer's determination is
filed. An appeal does not stay enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person, before filing the appeal, posts a
bond in the amount set forth in the hearing officer's order with the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 09-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-23-17)
Sec. 19-35. Penalties, costs and fees for section 19-2 junked vehicles.
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code related to junked vehicles shall be assessed a civil penalty
in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, the amount to be determined by the hearing officer in his
reasonable discretion, subject to review on appeal.
(b) Unless higher amounts are required by state law or a lesser amount is determined by the hearing officer or judge of the municipal
court, the minimum penalties for junked vehicle violations shall be as follows:
(1) 1st offense of failure to abate each junked vehicle in authorized time limit: $50.00.
(2) 2nd offense of failure to abate each junked vehicle within a six (6) month period: $75.00.
(3) 3rd and all subsequent offenses of failure to abate each junked vehicle within a six (6) month period: $100.00.
(c) In addition to the minimum penalty, charges for towing of the vehicle shall be added.
(d) All penalties, costs, and fees shall be deposited in the proper account of the general fund of the city, unless otherwise directed by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06; Ord. No. 09-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-23-17)
Secs. 19-36–19-44. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ILLEGAL DUMPING
Sec. 19-45. Texas Litter Abatement Act–Adopted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/648
Whereas, it is the desire of the City of Abilene, Texas to prevent illegal dumping within the city, and to eliminate and abate the health and
safety hazards associated with and attributable to such illegal dumping, the City of Abilene hereby adopts Chapter 365, the Texas Litter
Abatement Act, of the Texas Health and Safety Code in its entirety herein, and as amended, and it shall serve as the city's ordinance for
illegal dumping.
(Ord. No. 67-2006, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-7-06)
Secs. 19-46–19-60. Reserved.
Chapter 20
OFFENSES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Noise control generally.
(a) Any unreasonable loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary
sensibility in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be unlawful and is hereby prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfort and enjoyment of
private homes by persons of ordinary sensibility is hereby declared to be unlawful and is hereby prohibited.
(c) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate this
section.
(Code 1965, § 19-23)
Sec. 20-2. Use of bells to attract public attention.
No person shall ring a bell in excess of four (4) inches in diameter on any vehicle from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. for the purpose of attracting the attention of the general public.
(Code 1965, § 19-24; Ord. No. 55-1985, pt. 1, 5-23-85)
Sec. 20-3. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 20-3 pertaining to “amplifiers, etc.–use on premises” and deriving from the 1965 Code, § 19-25; was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance 66-2016, pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted 12-15-16.
Sec. 20-4. Allowing minors to trespass.
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate the
criminal trespass laws as provided by section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code.
(Code 1965, § 19-43)
Sec. 20-5. Urinating in public place.
No person shall urinate upon any street, alley or public place, except in rest rooms containing urinals or toilets for such purposes.
(Code 1965, § 19-45)
Sec. 20-6. Fishing, etc., on or under bridges.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from the road surface or deck of any bridge in the city limits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to fish or camp under any bridge or within the right-of-way of any street or road within the city
limits.
(Code 1965, § 19-5.1)
Sec. 20-7. Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/648
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for
the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability
insurance, in an amount as provided by the state torts claim act indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the
operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This section shall apply to
all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provision of this Code.
State law references: State torts claim act, Vernon's Civ. Sts., art. 6252–19.
Sec. 20-8. Registration of goods purchased by secondhand dealers.
Any person purchasing, either for himself or on behalf of any other person, secondhand goods, furniture, clothing, automobile parts or
accessories or any other personal property for the purpose of resale shall keep a permanent register of such purchases, in which the
following information shall be provided:
(a) An accurate description of the article purchased.
(b) From whom the article was received and a description of such person.
(c) The address of the seller.
(d) The final disposition made of such property, and if sold, to whom sold, a description of the buyer, the buyer's address
and the amount for which the article was sold.
Such register shall be open to inspection by any police officer of the city or of the state at any time.
(Code 1965, § 8-3)
Sec. 20-9. Congregating, gathering, lingering in vicinity of secondary schools.
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any persons twenty (20) years of age and under to congregate, gather, linger or otherwise
assemble, whether on foot or in vehicles on private property, without permission of the owner thereof, and in public streets and alleyways,
within one thousand (1,000) feet from the property boundary line of any lot used for secondary school purposes within the city limits on
official school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., official city time. It
shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that such congregation, gathering, or assembly is sponsored and supervised by school
personnel or such persons age twenty (20) years and under are accompanied by their parents, guardians, or other adults responsible for
such persons subject to this curfew.
(b) Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or the maximum amount for that class of offense as
may be set by the state legislature in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 50-1989, Pts. 2, 3, 12-21-89)
Secs. 20-10–20-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
Sec. 20-20. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent of any child or a guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate
the provisions of this article.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-5, 19-6)
Sec. 20-21. Discharge of firearms–Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire off or discharge any firearm within the city limits at any time of the day or night. Gunsmiths
may discharge firearms left in their custody for test purposes only. Shooting galleries may be established, provided that the owner thereof
takes all necessary precautions to make the operation of the gallery safe and in no way or manner of operation a danger to persons on the
street or public places within the city. The definition of firearm as contained in section 46.01(3) of the Texas Penal Code is hereby
adopted and made a part hereof.
(Code 1965, § 19-5)
Cross references: Use of firearms at city lakes, § 15-3.
Sec. 20-22. Same–Exceptions.
The provisions of section 20-21 shall not apply in the following circumstances:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/648
(1) If the firearm or other weapon is a shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow discharged in accordance with
applicable city, state and national laws and regulations:
(a) Within the city on any tract of land of 10 acres or more and more than 150 feet from a residence or occupied
building located on another property; and
(b) In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract.
(2) The individual is a peace officer, animal control officer or zoo employee of the city in the lawful discharge of their
official duties under the direction and control of their supervisor, or as part of the approved wildlife flight hazard depredation
program at Abilene Regional Airport.
(3) For the purpose of calculating the 10-acre minimum under subsection (1)(a), a parcel bisected by the municipal
boundary may include the contiguous portion of the parcel extending into the extraterritorial jurisdiction to meet the 10-acre
minimum.
(Code 1965, § 19-5; Ord. No. 39-2011, pt. 1, 10-27-11)
Sec. 20-23. Pellet guns and rifles–Discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge within the city limits any air gun or air rifle by whatever name known that by
means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or other means is capable of shooting or discharging any pellet, missile or projectile a
distance greater than thirty (30) feet.
(Code 1965, § 19-6)
Sec. 20-24. Same–Exception.
The provisions of section 20-23 shall not apply to:
(a) Any commissioned peace officer discharging an air gun, rifle or other device in the performance of his lawful duties.
(b) A person lawfully defending his person or property or the person or property of another as provided by state law.
(c) The discharge of air guns or rifles as herein defined in a shooting gallery or gunsmith's establishment, when such
shooting gallery or gunsmith's establishment is set up and used in accordance with this Code or any other ordinances of the
city governing the operation of such gallery or establishment; provided, that the pellet or projectile is reasonably aimed at or
intended to strike a target or other object provided for that purpose.
(Code 1965, § 19-6)
Sec. 20-25. Fireworks.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall manufacture, store, possess, keep, sell, offer for sale, give away,
use, ignite or cause to explode any fireworks or pyrotechnics of any kind or description within the city or in an area outside of but
immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city where such area is within one hundred (100) feet of a building, as that term is defined in
article 28.01 of the Texas Penal Code, located within or partially within the city; provided, that such area outside the city shall not include
any area contained within the corporate limits of any other incorporated city or town.
(b) The fire marshal may allow a display of fireworks and/or pyrotechnics at a designated time and place if the display meets minimum
safety criteria. Any individual or corporation having a display of fireworks and/or pyrotechnics shall submit a permit application to the
fire marshal and shall conform to all conditions and requirements set by the fire marshal's office. Any person conducting a display of
fireworks and/or pyrotechnics must be licensed by the state. In the event the fire marshal denies a permit application, the applicant may
appeal the decision to city council by filing a written appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) business days after the denial of the
permit application is mailed to the applicant or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. If no appeal is filed within ten (10) business
days, the decision of the fire marshal becomes final and unappealable. The written appeal should contain all information on which the city
council can make a decision. The city council shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed with the city secretary.
(c) An act in violation of subsection (a) of this section constitutes a danger to the public health and safety and constitutes a nuisance.
(Code 1965, § 19-15; Ord. No. 85-1980, pt. 1, 8-28-80; Ord. No. 54-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-22-15)
State law references: Fireworks generally, Vernon's Civ. Sts., art. 9205.
Secs. 20-26–20-36. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PAINT SPRAY, GLUE SNIFFING
Sec. 20-37. Definition.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/648
As used in this article, the phrase “paint spray or glue containing a solvent having the property of or releasing toxic vapors or fumes”
shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any paint spray or glue containing one (1) or more of the following volatile solvents:
(1) Acetone
(2) Amylacetate
(3) Benzol or Benzene
(4) Butyl Acetate
(5) Butyl Alcohol
(6) Carbon Tetrachloride
(7) Chloroform
(8) Cyclohexanone
(9) Ethanol or Ethyl Alcohol
(10) Ethyl Acetate
(11) Hexan
(12) Isopropanol or Isopropyl Alcohol
(13) Isopropyl Acetate
(14) Methyl “Cellosolve” Acetate
(15) Methyl Ethyl Ketone
(16) Methyl Isobutyl Ketone
(17) Toluol or Toluene
(18) Trichloroethylene
(19) Tricresyl Phosphate
(20) Xylol or Xylene
(Ord. No. 1157, Part 1, 3-8-79)
Sec. 20-38. Prohibition.
No person shall, within the incorporated limits of the city, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes or vapors from a paint spray or glue
containing a solvent having the property of or releasing toxic vapors or fumes, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
inebriation, stupefaction or the dulling of such person's brain or nervous system by so smelling or inhaling.
(Ord. No. 1157, Part 1, 3-8-79)
Sec. 20-39. Exemption.
This article shall not apply to persons inhaling or smelling any anesthesia or other substance pursuant to the advice of qualified medical
personnel for solely therapeutic purposes.
(Ord. No. 1157, Part 1, 3-8-79)
Sec. 20-40. Proof of substance.
Proof that a container was labeled as containing one or more of the volatile solvents listed in section 20-37 shall constitute prima facie
evidence that any substance in said container did include said volatile solvent.
(Ord. No. 1157, Part 1, 3-8-79)
Secs. 20-41–20-51. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/648
ARTICLE IV. DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS*
Sec. 20-52. Defined.
“Drive-in restaurant,” within the meaning of this article, shall be deemed to be any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, cold drinks,
beverages, ice cream or other food or drink is served directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons in or upon automobiles,
motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises.
For the purpose of preserving public peace, health and safety, the entire premises occupied by a drive-in restaurant, together with means
of ingress thereto and egress therefrom, are hereby declared to be a public place.
(Code 1965, § 13-29)
Sec. 20-53. Intent and interpretation of article.
It is declared to be the intention and purpose of this article not to repeal any other ordinance or ordinances now in effect applicable to
premises such as drive-in restaurants; it is expressly declared that the purpose of this article is to make it cumulative with all other such
applicable ordinances; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict in language between this article and any other ordinance or
ordinances applicable to drive-in restaurants, the language of this article shall prevail.
(Code 1965, § 13-34)
Sec. 20-54. Maintenance of order on premises.
The owner, lessee or operator of any drive-in restaurant shall maintain quiet and good order on the premises and shall not permit
disorderly or immoral conduct, nor shall he cause or permit any noise or nuisance on the parking area of the drive-in restaurant whereby
the quiet and good order of the neighborhood are disturbed.
(Code 1965, § 13-30)
Sec. 20-55. Racing motor, blowing horn or causing other disturbance with motor vehicle.
No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any
motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbances
whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or neighborhood are disturbed.
(Code 1965, § 13-31)
Sec. 20-56. Prohibited acts.
The following acts or conduct of any person or persons entering any drive-in restaurant or premises are hereby declared to be unlawful,
and any person found guilty of any such act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
(a) To enter the premises of any drive-in restaurant with any motor vehicle of any description and park such vehicle and
leave the premises (thereby leaving such vehicle unoccupied) without the consent of the owner or operator of such restaurant.
A vehicle so parked may be impounded at the owner's expense.
(b) To enter such premises in a motor vehicle of any kind and use such premises for racing, as a short cut to another street as
a turn around to proceed in either direction on the same street, or in any manner so as to annoy or endanger:
1. Any person either on or off such premises; or
2. Other motor vehicles lawfully on such premises.
(c) For three (3) or more persons to congregate on the premises and linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any
drive-in restaurant other than in the restaurant building or in a legally parked motor vehicle.
(d) For any person or persons to commit any act which would injure, or obstruct, or disrupt or interfere with the operator's
lawful business.
(Code 1965, § 13-32; Ord. No. 80-1984, pt. 1, 8-9-84)
Sec. 20-57. Posting of regulations.
It shall be unlawful for the drive-in restaurant operator to fail to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more signs bearing
the following language:
ON THESE PREMISES, IT IS UNLAWFUL TO:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/648
1. LEAVE A MOTOR VEHICLE UNOCCUPIED WITHOUT THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR'S CONSENT.
2. RACE A MOTOR VEHICLE.
3. USE THE PREMISES AS A SHORTCUT OR TURNAROUND.
4. CONGREGATE OR LOITER OUTSIDE A PARKED MOTOR VEHICLE.
5. DISRUPT OR INTERFERE WITH THIS RESTAURANT'S OPERATION.
(Code 1965, § 13-33; Ord. No. 63-1985, pt. 1, 6-27-85)
Secs. 20-58–20-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 20-70. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Alarm protective service: Any service whereby the person providing such service installs, services, repairs, maintains, sells, replaces, or
responds to an alarm system or which causes any of the activities to take place. For the purposes of this article, alarm protective services
shall not include any persons engaged solely in the sale of alarm systems designed to cause audible and/or visual signal to be emitted only
in or on the premises in which the system is installed.
Alarm system: Any device used to detect or prevent burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage, or other such emergency situation which when
activated, causes notification to be made directly or indirectly to the police department, or any device or system designed primarily for the
purpose of giving an audible or visual signal of an attempted burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage, or other such emergency.
For the purposes of this article, an alarm system shall not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a motor vehicle.
(2) An alarm installed upon the premises occupied by the United States Government, the state, the city, or any county
governments or school districts situated within the corporate limits of the city.
(3) A fire, smoke and/or carbon monoxide alarm system.
Alarm system user: Any person in control of the property on which an alarm system is maintained within the corporate limits of the city.
Automatic dialing service: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
False alarm: An alarm signal eliciting an emergency response when a situation requiring such response does not in fact exist, but does
not include alarm signals caused by violent conditions of nature. Equipment malfunction causing a response when a situation requiring
such response does not in fact exist shall be considered a “false alarm” for all purposes herein.
Permit: A certificate of authorization issued by the city to the person in control of the property which authorizes the operation of an alarm
system.
Permit holder: Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to whom an alarm system permit is issued.
Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
Sec. 20-71. Permit application; issuance.
(a) No person shall operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an alarm system unless a valid permit has been issued by
the city for such system. This requirement shall not be applicable to private businesses or private institutions that employ their own
internal security or police department. Additionally, this requirement shall not be applicable to an alarm protective service, but is
applicable only to the person in control of the property, which the alarm system is designed to protect. An alarm system user shall be in
violation of this article if he permits the operation of such a system without a permit.
(b) An alarm system permit holder, or his agent shall obtain a permit for each alarm system(s) operated at the site of the protected
property. Each permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and shall expire on the last day of the month of issuance. The
annual fee for an alarm system permit for a residential location and for a commercial location will be set by city council resolution. The
city will notify each permit holder that their permit must be renewed and each permit holder shall be responsible for renewing and
updating each system permit and application. Permits may be renewed at designated locations, determined by the city during regular
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/648
business hours anytime during the permit expiration month. Failure to renew and update each system permit and application within thirty
(30) days of notification of expiration may result in cancellation of the alarm system permit.
(c) Application for a permit for the operation of an alarm system shall be made at designated locations, determined by the city, by the
person having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated or by his agent. Application shall be
made in writing on a form designated by the city. On such application form, the applicant shall set forth:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of each person in control of the property to be protected.
(2) The street address of the property on which the alarm is to be installed and operated.
(3) A brief description of the type of property to be protected and the type of alarm system to be installed.
(4) Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated.
(5) Name, address, and telephone number of the alarm protective service who will install and service the alarm system.
(6) Names and addresses of two (2) or more persons who are able to and have agreed to receive notification at any time, to
go to the alarm system site to grant access to the alarm site and deactivate or reset the alarm system.
(7) A signed agreement by the applicant, assuring that for each activation of the alarm system for which he is seeking a
permit, he will go, or cause his agent or representative to go, to the site of the alarm system to allow police personnel access
and deactivate or reset the alarm system.
(8) Any other information required by the city, which is necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(d) The city shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity in control of the property to be protected
upon submission of a completed application and payment of the appropriate fees, unless any statement made on the application is
incomplete or false.
(e) The city, to the extent permitted by applicable law, and except as contractually required with third-party alarm system vendors, shall
treat all information on the application as confidential.
(f) Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be applicable only to the permit holder and is not transferable.
(g) Each permit issued to an alarm system user shall be valid until such time as one of the following occurs:
(1) Control of the property is transferred from the permit holder;
(2) Permit holder voluntarily discontinues services provided by a particular alarm protective service, and/or disconnects the
alarm system;
(3) Revocation of the permit by the city pursuant to section 20-73; or
(4) The city, upon thirty (30) days' notice, terminates the permit for nonrenewal of the annual permit.
(h) After the effective date of this article, fees will be revised, as needed, by city council resolution. The revised fees will then be
placed on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
Sec. 20-72. False alarms; service fees generally.
(a) False burglar or robbery alarm. Except as provided by subsection (d), the following service fees will apply for false activation of the
burglar mode of an alarm system.
(1) The city will assess a service fee set by city council resolution, but not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), to the permit
holder for each response by the city to notification of activation of the burglar mode of an alarm system which is determined to
be a false alarm as defined by section 20-70 if the location has had more than three but fewer than six other false alarms in the
preceding twelve-month period.
(2) The city will assess a service fee set by city council resolution, but not more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), to the
permit holder for each response by the city to notification of activation of the burglar mode of an alarm system which is
determined to be a false alarm as defined by section 20-70 if the location has had more than five but fewer than eight other
false alarms in the preceding twelve-month period.
(3) The city will assess a service fee set by city council resolution, but not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), to the
permit holder for each response by the city to notification of activation of the burglar mode of an alarm system which is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/648
determined to be a false alarm as defined by section 20-70 if the location has had eight or more other false alarms in the
preceding twelve-month period.
(b) The city may revoke the permit pursuant to section 20-73 of this article or assess a service fee of no more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) to the permit holder for each alarm system activation to which he does not go, or cause his agent or representative to go, when
requested by the police, to allow police access and deactivate or reset the alarm system.
(c) After the effective date of this article, fees will be revised, as needed, by city council resolution. The revised fees will then be placed
on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
Sec. 20-73. Revocation of permits.
(a) The city is authorized to revoke or refuse to renew an alarm system permit if the chief of police or his designee determines that:
(1) There is a false statement of material matter on the application for a permit;
(2) The permit holder has violated this article or any of its provisions;
(3) The permit holder has failed to renew an expired permit within thirty (30) days of notice of such expiration;
(4) The permit holder has failed to make timely payment in full of a service fee assessed under section 20-72;
(5) The alarm system has had eight (8) or more false burglar mode alarms in the preceding 12-month period.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Operate an alarm system during the period in which his alarm system permit is revoked or expired; or
(2) Cause or permit another to operate an alarm system, knowing that the alarm system permit is revoked or expired.
(3) Such offense shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense.
(c) At the discretion of the city, emergency response to a permit holder's alarm system site may be terminated if the permit holder fails
to pay the section 20-72 false alarm fees in full within thirty (30) days of notice.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
Sec. 20-74. Standards; prohibiting automatic dialing and review.
(a) The city may set reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm protective service when giving notice to the city
of activation of an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm system
business requesting same.
(b) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing device which, when activated, uses a telephone device or
attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the communication center of the police department and then transmits any
prerecorded message or signal.
(c) If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and
suppresses false alarms, the city may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the individual or association responsible for
maintenance of the alarm system to review circumstances of each false alarm.
(d) Each permit shall be numbered and the holder thereof shall present such number to the city upon request or as set out in standards
promulgated by the city. Alarm protective services, as defined in section 20-70, shall obtain the permit numbers of their customers and
provide such numbers in accordance with the above.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
Sec. 20-75. Change in required information.
Should any change occur in any of the information required in the application for a permit under this article during the term of the permit,
the permittee shall, within ten (10) days of the change of such information, give written notification to the city of such change in order
that the information required and furnished on the permit application will be kept current at all times. Violations of this section may result
in revocation pursuant to section 20-73 of this article.
(Ord. No. 50-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-13-05; Ord. No. 58-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-5-15)
ARTICLE VI. GRAFFITI
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/648
Sec. 20-76. Definitions.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design or other marking of any sort that is etched, written, painted,
drawn, or applied in any other way to any structure, building, tree, vehicle, or property of any sort or to any portion or element thereof,
whether the property is public or private.
Removal. The elimination of the visible evidence of graffiti through the use of chemical extraction, abrasion techniques, or by using
primer, paint and/or stain to obscure the graffiti.
(Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-09)
Sec. 20-77. Removal process.
(a) Notice to owner. Upon receiving a complaint that a structure, building, tree, vehicle, or property is marked with graffiti, the city
shall contact the owner thereof and request the graffiti be removed on or before the fifteenth day following receipt of notice.
(b) The notice required by subsection (a) must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter sent by certified mail, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as contained in the
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If service cannot be obtained under subdivision (1) or (2):
(i) By publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or municipality;
(ii) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the notice relates; or
(iii) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the notice
relates.
(c) Failure of owner to remove. If the property owner fails to remove the graffiti on or before the fifteenth day after the date of receipt
of the notice, the city may remove the graffiti and charge the expenses of removal to the property owner in accordance with the adopted
fee schedule on file with the city secretary.
(d) Expense of removal to become lien. To obtain a lien against the property for expenses incurred under subsection (c), the city shall
file a statement of expenses with the county clerk. The statement of expenses must contain:
(1) The name of the property owner, if known;
(2) The legal description of the property; and
(3) The amount of expenses incurred under subsection (c).
(e) A lien described by subsection (d) attaches to the property on the date on which the statement of expenses is filed in the real
property records of the county in which the property is located and is subordinate to:
(1) Any previously recorded lien; and
(2) The rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquires an interest in the property subject to the lien before the
statement of expenses is filed as described by subsection (d).
(Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-09)
Sec. 20-78. Exceptions and removal by city.
(a) Hazardous location. It is an exception from the requirement that an owner of property remove graffiti from the owner's property if:
(1) The graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; and
(2) The removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal.
(b) City's offer to remove. The city may not give notice to a property owner under section 20-77, subsection (a) unless:
(1) The city has offered to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge; and
(2) The property owner has refused the offer verbally or in writing.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/648
(c) Offer to remove may be included in notice. The city may include the offer to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of
charge within the notice to a property owner under section 20-77, subsection (a) if:
(1) The city allows an additional five (5) days for a response from the owner prior to beginning the fifteen (15) days under
section 20-77; and
(2) The offer to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge is stated in bold type at the beginning of the
notice; and
(3) The offer language includes a statement that failure of the property owner to respond before the end of the fifth day to
the offer from the city to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge shall be considered a refusal of the offer.
(Ord. No. 29-2009, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-27-09)
Secs. 20-79–20-84. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 20-85. Extended hours of consumption, possession and sale.
(a) In an extended hours area, it shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to consume any alcoholic
beverage in any public place or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage for the purpose of consuming the same in such public
place at any time on Sundays between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon, and on all other days at any time between the hours of 2:15
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. An alcoholic beverage served to a customer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays must be provided during
the service of food to the customer.
(b) The extended hours prescribed in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §105.03(c) are adopted in the city, and such extended hours are
effective for the sale and the offer to sell mixed alcoholic beverages by a holder of a mixed beverages late hours permit.
(c) The extended hours prescribed in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code §105.05(c) are adopted in the city, and such extended hours are
effective for the sale, offer to sell and delivery of beer by a holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license or mixed beverages late hours permit
issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code to sell any alcoholic beverage or offer the same for sale:
(1) On Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(2) On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license or a mixed beverages late hours
permit issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code to sell any alcoholic beverage or offer the same for sale:
(1) On Sunday at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(2) On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(f) Private clubs located within the city holding a private club late hours permit issued by the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code may permit persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages on club premises on Sundays between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any day except Sunday between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m.
(g) Violation of the above restrictions is punishable as a violation of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
State law reference–Hours of sale, etc., V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.03, 105.04, 105.05; hours of consumption, V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code §
105.06.
(Ord. No. 13-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-27-17)
Chapter 21
OIL AND GAS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/648
Sec. 21-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and regulations for operations on private and
public property within the City of Abilene related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting, and storing of oil, gas,
and other substances produced in association with oil and gas, in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; to
minimize the potential impact to private property; to protect the quality of the environment; and to encourage the orderly production of
available mineral resources.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms wherever and whenever used or appearing herein shall have the scope and
meaning hereafter defined and set out in connection with each. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not
specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
Building. A structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure or partial enclosure of persons, animals, personal property, or
movable property of any kind including swimming pools.
Building official. The Building Official of the City of Abilene, Texas or designee.
City council. The City of Council of Abilene, Texas.
Commence. The first visible sign of actual drilling operations on the ground done with the intention to continue the work until the drilling
is completed.
Drill site. All of the land area used during the drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells
or any associated operation.
Fire marshal. The Fire Marshall of the City of Abilene, Texas.
Official. City manager or designee.
Oil and gas well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil or natural gas.
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the appropriate City of Abilene application forms for an oil and gas well that is, or will be,
actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit
operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil and gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this
chapter, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises
affected by this chapter, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Owner. The fee simple title owner of the surface estate.
Railroad commission. The Texas Railroad Commission or successor.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes,
including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil and gas well permit is filed with the city.
Right-of-way. Any area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee simple, by easement, by
prescriptive right or other interest and that is expressly or implicitly accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as a public roadway,
street, sidewalk, alley, utility, drainage, or public access easement or used for the provision of governmental services or functions. The
term includes the area on, below, and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public
right-of-way is paved or unpaved.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or successor.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-3. Measurement.
Unless otherwise stated, the measurement of all distances set forth herein shall be calculated from the proposed well bore, in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the object as established by a licensed surveyor.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-4. Enforcement; inspections; access to records.
The official shall have the authority, in accordance with applicable law, to do the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/648
(a) Issue any orders, directives, or warnings required to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular
provisions.
(b) Enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this chapter to determine compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. The official may conduct periodic
inspections of all permitted wells within the city to determine that the wells are operating in accordance with the requirements
as set out in this chapter and with regulations promulgated by the railroad commission.
(c) Request and receive any records necessary to establish compliance with the applicable oil and gas well permit, including
records sent to the railroad commission relating to the status or condition of any permitted oil and gas well.
(d) Contact the local office of the railroad commission to seek their assistance in enforcing applicable oil and gas
regulations.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-5. Violations.
In the event a violation of this chapter is determined by the official, the city may act in any or all of the following ways:
(a) The city, through its designated official, may issue a notice of violation to the operator, its agent, agents, employees or
independent contractors or to any person participating in the drilling of the well.
(b) If after fourteen (14) days the violation has not been corrected, the city reserves the right to draw upon the performance
bond or letter of credit in order to remedy the violation. Serious violations will be reported to the railroad commission.
(c) In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the official may revoke any permit issued.
(1) Such revocation may be appealed to the city council.
(2) An appeal of a permit revocation must be filed with the city secretary prior to the expiration of thirty (30) calendar
days following the date of the written notice of revocation from the city.
(3) On the appeal of the revocation, the city council shall have the option of affirming or reversing the decision to
revoke the permit.
(4) If the city council votes to reverse the decision to revoke, and reinstate the permit, it may do so with any
reasonable conditions, including the provision of additional financial security for the drilling operation.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-6. Operator's agent.
Each operator of any oil and gas well shall designate an agent upon whom all orders and notices provided in this chapter may be served in
person or by registered or certified mail. The agent shall be readily available to the official. Every operator so designating such agent shall
within ten (10) calendar days notify the city in writing of any change of agent or the mailing address of such agent.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Secs. 21-7–21-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERMITS
Sec. 21-16. Permits required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant of any
other person to commence to drill, to drill, reenter or operate any well within the city limits or to work upon or assist in any way the
prosecution or operation of any such well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued by the
authority of city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(b) A separate permit shall be required for each well and each water and/or gas re-pressurizing or injection facility.
(c) An oil and gas well permit must be approved by a resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-17. Application procedure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/648
(a) The procedure for applying for an oil and gas well permit from the shall be initiated with the filing of an application by the operator
with the public works department of the city.
(b) No application shall be accepted for filing until it is complete and all required fees have been paid. Each application shall include
full information, and will be considered complete only when all of the required information is included.
(c) The application shall be provided by the city public works department.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-18. Permit filing fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-19. Hearing by city council.
(a) The application for a permit required by this article shall be referred to the city council, which shall call a public hearing on such
application as provided for herein.
(b) The official shall send written notice of such hearing to all owners of real property lying within five hundred (500) feet of the
proposed well location. Notice shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Notice is to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing, to all owners who have rendered their
property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. The notice shall contain the time and place
of the hearing, the legal description of the proposed drilling location and the location thereof by reference to streets.
(2) The notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in a mail depository.
(3) Failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate the hearings or the results thereof.
(c) At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council must approve the application by at least four (4) affirmative votes.
(d) The failure of the city council to review and approve an oil and gas well permit within a specified time limit shall not cause the
application for the oil and gas well permit to be deemed approved.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-20. Standards for approval.
Application to drill and operate a well shall be approved only if:
(a) All prerequisites contained in this chapter have been met.
(b) It appears that the drilling and operation of such well can and will be conducted in accordance with this chapter, all other
ordinances of the city, all laws of the state and the United States, and all rules and regulations of the state railroad commission
and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(c) Such proposed drilling and operation will not create a fire hazard; cause unsanitary conditions, cause excessive noise or
obnoxious odors; cause a danger of explosion; pollute any stream or water supply; restrict the orderly development of the city;
be a hazard to the operation of aircraft; interfere with drainage or flood control; create a nuisance, or, without limitation by
enumeration of the foregoing, otherwise adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public in general.
(d) In order to ensure compliance with the above standards, or any other provision of this chapter, the council may impose
reasonable restrictions and conditions, other than those contained herein, on the drilling and operation of the proposed well.
Failure to comply with any such restrictions shall be unlawful and grounds for revocation of any permit issued.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-21. Effect of denial of oil and gas well permit.
If an application for an oil and gas well permit is denied by the city council, nothing herein shall prevent a new permit application from
being submitted to the city council for the same proposed oil and gas well or a different location for a well. A new application may also
be filed on any of the mineral estate owned or leased by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/648
Sec. 21-22. Request for deeper drilling.
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill any well to a deeper depth than that allowed by any permit granted
hereunder without the operator filing a written request for an amendment to the original permit with the official specifying:
(1) The condition of the well and the casing therein;
(2) The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened;
(3) The legal description of the drilling location if an increase in area is necessary;
(4) A copy of the approved railroad commission form W-1.
(b) In the event the official is satisfied that such well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed under the original
permit and all other provisions hereof, including area requirements, can be complied with, the request for amendment authorizing the
depending and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for may be approved by the official without additional filing fee to
the operator.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-23. Request for other changes, new permit.
Any request for changing any of the conditions of the permit, other than depth, will require cancellation of the old permit and application
for a new permit.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-24. Expiration of permit.
Drilling must commence on the well covered by the oil and gas well permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of approval by the city
council, after which time the oil and gas well permit shall automatically expire if no drilling has commenced. A one-time one hundred
eighty (180) day extension of the permit may be granted by the director of public works upon written request prior to the expiration of the
permit and a showing of good cause by the operator.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-25. No vested property rights of permit holder.
An oil and gas well permit does not create a property interest or a vested right in the operator. This chapter creates no property interest or
right of entitlement of any kind.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-26. Prohibition.
(a) Under no conditions shall an oil and gas well drill bore be allowed within two hundred (200) feet of any existing building or
buildings without a variance from city council.
(b) Under no conditions shall an oil and gas well drill bore be allowed on land owned by the City of Abilene and used for park
purposes at Lake Fort Phantom Hill.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08; Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Sec. 21-27. Variance.
(a) A request for variance shall be indicated on the permit application and accompanied by documentation of any granted exceptions to
the railroad commission's statewide spacing rules that apply to the proposed well.
(b) When there is a request for variance submitted, the notice to the property owners must explicitly state a variance is being requested
for the permit that would allow an oil and gas well drill bore to be within two hundred (200) feet of an existing building or buildings.
(c) The city council must approve any application for variance by at least four (4) affirmative votes.
(d) In no instance may a well be drilled within two hundred (200) feet of a residence without the applicant obtaining the notarized
written consent of the owner of the residence.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Secs. 21-28–21-30. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/648
ARTICLE III. DRILLING OPERATIONS
Sec. 21-31. General obligations of operator.
The operator shall be required to:
(a) Comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, this Code, the rules and regulations of the railroad commission,
and any other state or federal agency that enforces land use, mineral use, or environmental protection regulations.
(b) Promptly clear drill and operation sites of litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the
operations.
(c) Comply with all requirements stated in the application.
(d) Promptly pay all penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any of the conditions herein.
(e) Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil and gas operation, including but not
limited to damage to public roadways.
(f) Provide to the official a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the railroad commission or any
other state or federal agency within thirty (30) days after operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-32. Financial guaranty.
(a) Performance bond. In the event a permit is issued by the city council under the terms of this chapter for the drilling and operation of
a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the operator files with the official a performance bond in the principal sum
as set by the city council, the bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by one good and sufficient corporate surety running
to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, and conditioned that the operator shall comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the well.
(b) Letter of credit. In lieu of a performance bond, there shall be on file with the official an irrevocable letter of credit from a federally
insured bank being in the same principal sum as set by the city for performance bond and running to the city for the benefit of the city and
all persons concerned, and conditioned that the operator shall comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and
operation of the well.
(c) Duration and conditions. Such bond or letter of credit shall become effective on or before the date it is filed with the official and
remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued. In addition,
the bond or letter of credit will be conditioned that the operator will promptly pay all penalties and other assessments imposed upon the
operator by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter; that the operator will promptly restore the
streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations to their former condition;
that the operator will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the drilling
or producing operations, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as
possible, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well or wells were first commenced; and that the operator will indemnify and
hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit.
(d) Insufficient bond or letter of credit. If, at any time, the official deems any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient for any
reason, it may require the operator to file a new bond or letter of credit.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-33. Insurance.
No well shall be produced unless the operator, during all periods of operation, maintains on file with the official a current certificate
evidencing public liability insurance in full force and effect with the minimum limits set by the city council and on file in the office of the
city secretary.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Secs. 21-34–21-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PRODUCTION PRACTICES
Sec. 21-41. Blowout prevention.
Protection shall be provided to control and prevent the blowout of a well. Protection equipment shall meet federal, state and other
applicable jurisdiction requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/648
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-42. Casing.
All surface casing must comply with all applicable rules of the railroad commission, as amended.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-43. Cleanup and maintenance.
(a) Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed
to the satisfaction of the city fire chief and the official all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak
or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the operator fails to begin site clean-up immediately the official may then
employ any cleanup expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and
material which the official deems necessary to clean up such spill, leak or malfunction. The city shall then be able to collect from operator
the costs involved in the site clean-up. The city may collect from the posted performance bond or letter of credit or any other legal means.
(b) Free from debris. The public street entrance and property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of mud,
debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material.
(c) Stormwater protection. All well sites must be maintained in compliance with section 32-244 of the City of Abilene Utilities
Ordinance “Review and Modification of Best Management Practices”, as amended.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-44. Compliance.
Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-45. Compressors.
No compressor of any type shall be used unless a plan for use is approved by the official.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-46. Discharge.
No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt,
tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any oil and gas operation or the contents of any container
used in connection with any oil and gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or
sewer, sanitary drain without permits from the appropriate city departments, or in any body of water or onto any private property in the
City of Abilene.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-47. Dust, vibration, odors.
All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and other
hydrocarbon substances in urban areas.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-48. Electric lines.
All electric lines to production facilities shall be buried underground. All electric lines going under city roadways must be bored and
encased pursuant to city standards.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-49. Electric motors.
Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on
location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city ordinances and state or federal requirements.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/648
Sec. 21-50. Emergency response plan.
The Operator shall develop an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling,
completion or producing of oil and gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the railroad commission, TCEQ,
Department of Transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and Abilene Fire Code, as amended. A copy of the emergency
response plan shall be kept on site and available for review by the official.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-51. Explosives.
Use of an explosive perforating gun during completion operations shall be allowed.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-52. Fencing.
No drilling operations shall be conducted hereunder unless and until adequate fences or similar barriers have been erected to keep the
public away from the drilling equipment.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-53. Fire notice.
In the event of a fire or discovery of a fire, smoke, or unauthorized release of flammable or hazardous materials on any property, the
operator shall immediately report such condition to the fire department in accordance with the City of Abilene Fire Code, as amended.
The reporting limits for hazardous materials release shall conform to the requirements of the railroad commission and not exceed any
state or federal permitting limit. A copy of the hazardous materials release records required by TCEQ shall be available to the fire
marshal upon request.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-54. Fire prevention; sources of ignition.
Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be
provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production
operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an
automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an
appropriately labeled emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-55. Fracing operations.
Fracing or formation fracture stimulation operations may take place only during the daylight hours.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-56. Gas emission or burning restricted.
(a) Operator shall not allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided
by law or as permitted by the railroad commission.
(b) If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted
by the railroad commission and shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners.
(c) Operator shall provide notice to the fire marshal prior to any open flaring of gas.
(d) Gas may be flared only during the daylight hours, except in an emergency.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-57. Gas processing onsite.
Except for a conventional gas separator or line heater, no refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall
be constructed, established or maintained on the premises.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/648
Sec. 21-58. Hazardous plan.
Hazardous materials management plan (HMMP) and all material safety date sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous materials that will be
located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the operations site must be available for inspection by the official.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-59. Lights.
Except under drilling or emergency circumstances, operator shall not operate any lights located at the drill site. To the extent practicable,
and taking into account safety considerations, emergency site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on
public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within five hundred (500) feet.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-60. Monitoring for H2 S gas.
Equipment for the monitoring of H2 S gas shall be used during initial drilling and a permanent monitoring station shall be installed and a
thirty-day maintenance and inspection program shall be established to ensure that the monitoring equipment remains functional in
accordance with the railroad commission rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-61. Muffling exhaust.
Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any
well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or
mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and
prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. Where soundproofing material is required, such material shall be
noncombustible.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-62. Painting.
All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, secondary containment
and buildings or structures.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-63. Pits.
(a) All pits and contents shall be de-watered following the schedule established by the statewide rules of the railroad commission. All
lined reserve pits shall have the lining cut to the water or mud edge of the pit, hauled out and transported to an approved disposal site.
(b) No pit shall be placed in a floodplain without obtaining a floodplain development permit from the city public works department.
(c) No fresh water pit may be placed in any city recognized drainage way, FEMA floodplain or floodway. Construction of the fresh
water pit must comply with all city, state and federal regulations.
(d) Every drill pit used for drilling operations shall be fenced on all open sides during drilling operations and enclosed after drilling
operations have ceased.
(e) No flowback wastewater produced by frac operations shall be placed in any open pit without a valid state permit.
(f) Fresh water fracing pits, not transferred to the surface owner, shall be closed and the site restored within one hundred twenty (120)
days after completion operations have ceased unless extended by the official.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-64. Plugged and abandoned wells.
(a) Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well sites. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the
railroad commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly
as practicable and in conformity with the requirements of this permit.
(b) Restoration of drill site. Restoration of the drill site must be accomplished in conformity with the following requirements:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/648
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface
casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the railroad commission;
(4) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and
(6) The drill site shall be restored, as close as practicable, to its original condition.
(c) Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current
abandonment requirements of the railroad commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No
structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-65. Salt water wells.
(a) Salt water produced on site (or other produced water) shall be stored in a closed steel or fiberglass tank, and shall be disposed of in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the state railroad commission and any other appropriate local, state, or federal agency. Any
salt water removed from a well may be injected back into the same zone or formation from which it was produced.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a), no salt-water disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-66. Signs.
Well locations shall have posted in a conspicuous place on or near such tank or tanks an approved sign with the name of the owner or
operator, name of the lessee or the lease number, the well number and the telephone number where a responsible person can be reached at
any time. Such signs shall be maintained on the premises from the time materials are delivered for drilling purposes until the well is
abandoned.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-67. Storage of equipment.
(a) On-site storage shall be in accordance with the City of Abilene Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
(b) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any
operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment
which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site.
(c) The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether any equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-68. Storage tanks.
(a) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications and comply with all
state or federal requirements and Section 3404 of the Abilene Fire Code, as amended.
(b) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the railroad commission and the National Fire Protection Association.
(c) No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities, other than the well head and flow lines, shall be
placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM or the 100-year floodplain without a floodplain development permit
obtained from the city public works department.
(d) Tanks or groups of tanks shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on or near such tank or tanks, an approved sign with the name of
the owner or operator, or the lease number and the telephone number where a responsible person can be reached at any time.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-69. Storage tanks and sources of ignition.
(a) Storage tanks or boilers, fired heaters, open-flame devices or other sources of ignition shall not be located within twenty five (25)
feet of well heads.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/648
(b) Smoking is prohibited at wells or tank locations except as designated and in approved posted areas.
(c) Exception. Engines used in the drilling, production and servicing wells are excluded from this provision.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-70. Sumps.
(a) Sumps associated with wells shall comply with Sections 3406.3.3.1 through 3406.3.3.3 of the Abilene Fire Code, as amended.
(b) Sumps or other basins for the retention of oil or petroleum products shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width.
(c) Sumps or other basins for the retention of oil or petroleum products larger than six (6) feet by six (6) feet by six (6) feet shall not be
maintained longer than sixty (60) days after the cessation of drilling operations.
(d) Sumps, diversion ditches and depressions used as sumps shall be securely fenced or covered.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-71. Valves.
Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have access to the well site and the shutoff
valve in an emergency.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-72. Waste disposal.
(a) All drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, reworking
or deepening of any well must be disposed of in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission, as amended.
(b) Unless otherwise directed by the railroad commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site
disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary.
(c) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with all state and federal air and water pollution control regulations,
the conditions of this permit, and any applicable ordinance of the city.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-73. Work hours for site development.
No construction activities involving the excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work on any access road or pad site shall occur
outside daylight hours.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Sec. 21-74. Zoning and subdivision requirement.
All oil and gas well sites must comply with the City of Abilene Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations, as amended. If a zoning
change is required, it must pass the zoning process before any permit will be issued.
(Ord. No. 15-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-10-08)
Chapter 22
PARKS AND RECREATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL*
Sec. 22-1. Definition.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words “public property” shall mean any property held for public use by any department or branch of
government, federal, state, county, school or municipal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/648
(Code 1965, § 20-1)
Sec. 22-2. Intoxicating beverages prohibited; confiscation.
(a) No person shall bring or carry or have in his possession within any public park in the city any intoxicating beverage.
(b) If any officer of the city or of the state sees any person violating the terms of subsection (a), he shall immediately seize such
intoxicating beverage and shall hold the same as evidence until the trial of the accused party, and shall thereafter dispose of such
intoxicating beverage.
(c) The prohibitions of subsection (a) shall not apply if a person is served an intoxicating beverage while in attendance at an event that
is pre-approved and permitted by the city, and that is being held within the Rose Park activity building, the Cobb Park activity building,
the Rose Park recreation center, the Cobb Park recreation center, the Sears Park recreation center, the G.V. Daniels Park recreation center,
the Rose Park Senior Center, Abilene Community Theatre building, Bridge Club building, or Rose Tennis Center complex, or Grover
Nelson Park softball complex, or within the perimeter fence of the Abilene Zoological Gardens, or within the perimeter fence of Festival
Gardens.
(d) A permit for the sale or service of intoxicating beverages only in accordance with subsection (c) may be granted by the city
manager or his designee if the following conditions are met:
(1) Written notice of a request for permit to sell or serve intoxicating beverages only as part of an event shall be submitted
by the applicant not less than 30 days prior to the date that the event is to take place.
(2) Applicants requesting said permit shall use the services of a caterer licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission to sell or serve intoxicating beverages subject to all applicable rules and requirements established by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission. The selected caterer must be on the community services approved concessionaire list. The
city manager or his designee may waive the requirement to use the services of a licensed caterer, and allow the applicant to
serve or allow self-service of intoxicating beverages subject to all applicable rules and requirements established by state law.
(3) Both the applicant and the licensed caterer must insure that no intoxicating beverage sold or served under the terms of
the permit will be allowed outside the permitted area.
(4) Security must be provided throughout the hours during which intoxicating beverages may be sold or served. At a
minimum, there must be at least one security person on site per 100 occupants in addition to the caterer's personnel. The city
may require additional security as a condition of permit issuance. The city manager or his designee may waive any security
requirement.
(5) Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 p.m. and 12:01 a.m. (midnight). The sale or service of intoxicating
beverages may occur outside of the stated hours with the prior approval of the city. Further hourly restrictions as imposed by
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission must be observed, should they be more restrictive.
(6) The applicant must agree to provide the types and terms of insurance as required by the city's legal and risk management
departments for the size and type of event being conducted. The required insurance shall name the city as additional insured
and must be primary insurance and not contributing with any other insurance available to city, under any third-party liability
policy.
(7) The applicant must agree to abide by all applicable municipal codes and ordinances pertaining to the sale or service of
intoxicating beverages including zoning, food service establishment, building or other codes. A permit from the city for the
purposes herein does not take the place of any other permits required under any other municipal code or ordinance, and the
applicant must agree to secure the same prior to the event.
(8) The city may impose other conditions which it deems appropriate or prudent as it pertains to the sale or service of
intoxicating beverages.
(9) The city manager or his designee may deny any permit for this activity if in his judgment the activity is inappropriate to
the park.
(10) In the event the city manager or his designee denies a permit application, the applicant may appeal the decision to the
parks and recreation board by filing a written appeal with the city manager within five (5) business days after the denial of the
permit application is mailed to the applicant or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. If no appeal is filed within five (5)
business days, the decision of the city manager or his designee becomes final and unappealable. The written appeal should
contain all information on which the parks and recreation board can make a decision. The parks and recreation board shall
hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the filing of the appeal, subject to the Open Meetings Act
provisions. The decision of the parks and recreation board shall be final and unappealable.
(Code 1965, § 20-1; Ord. No. 9-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 5-13-10; Ord. No. 61-2015, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 14-2019, pt. 1(Exh.
A), 3-14-19)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/648
Sec. 22-3. Interference with program.
(a) No person shall willfully interfere with, disrupt or prevent the orderly conduct of any supervised play or amusement program being
conducted by the recreation department of the city in any building, swimming pool, playground, golf course or park area located in or on
any public property within the city.
(b) No person shall remain in any building, swimming pool, playground, golf course or park area located in or on any public property
within the city, after being advised by the supervisor of a supervised play or amusement program being conducted by the recreation
department in or on any public property that he is interfering with, disrupting or preventing the orderly conduct of such supervised play or
amusement program, and after having been asked to leave any building, swimming pool, playground, golf course or park area located in
or on any public property within the city.
(Code 1965, § 20-1)
Sec. 22-4. Closing hours.
All parks shall be closed to the public between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. each day.
(a) This section shall not apply to the following persons if in the park in the performance of their duties: Peace officers,
physicians, ambulance operators or attendants, employees of the city, and employees of public utility companies.
(b) In the case of parks through which there are dedicated streets used for general travel (that is, not merely for access to the
interior of the park) this section shall not apply to persons traveling through the park on such dedicated streets.
(c) The parks and recreation director may grant permission for civic or educational meetings or entertainments to be held in
a park at any designated hours, and this section shall not apply to persons who are in the park in accordance with the terms of
such permission.
(d) The department of parks and recreation shall place in each of the above-designated parks legible signs stating the hours
when the park is closed. At least two (2) signs shall be placed in each park; and in parks which have vehicular entrances, there
shall be a sign at each such entrance.
(e) This section shall not apply to those individuals camping in Seabee and Johnson Parks where overnight camping is
permitted for periods up to forty-eight (48) hours in designated camp sites.
(Code 1965, § 20-1; Ord. No. 77-1981, pt. 1(2), (3), 8-13-81)
Sec. 22-5. Camping, sleeping, parking overnight.
(a) No person shall camp in any city park or playground or set up any tent, shack or other shelter or lay any bedroll or other sleeping
equipment therein. This section does not apply in camping in Seabee and Johnson Parks where camping is permitted by individuals up to
forty-eight (48) hours in designated camp sites. This section does not apply to camping in any city park or playground by special
permission of the community services director.
(b) No person shall sleep or park overnight within any park, parkway or playground within the city except properly designated
attendants, caretakers or persons with a special permit from the parks and recreation director or to persons camping in designated areas in
accordance with rules and regulations of the parks and recreation board.
(Code 1965, § 20-1; Ord. No. 77-1981, pt. 1(1), 8-13-81)
Sec. 22-6. Horses to be ridden on bridle paths only.
No person shall ride or drive a horse in or on any public park except on designated bridle paths.
(Code 1965, § 20-2)
Sec. 22-7. Operating, etc., model airplanes.
No person shall operate, manipulate, fly or cause to be operated, manipulated or flown any model airplane with a motor driven propeller
in the public parks of the city, except in areas designated for such activity by the director of parks and recreation.
(Code 1965, § 20-3)
Sec. 22-8. Fires.
No person shall build any fire in any park area except in a proper container, which container shall be so constructed that it will not
damage any park property, including grass, or will not be apt to cause the spread of fire.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/648
(Code 1965, § 20-5)
Sec. 22-9. Driving golf balls.
No person shall hit or drive a golf ball, or in any manner cause a golf ball to be hit or driven, in the public parks of the city, except in
areas designated for such activity by the director of parks and recreation.
(Code 1965, § 20-6)
Sec. 22-10. Damaging property.
Any player who shall be guilty of any willful, wanton or malicious damage to property on the Maxwell Municipal Golf Course, including
the greens and fairways, shall have his privileges to participate suspended and shall be barred from the course.
(Code 1965, § 20-9)
Sec. 22-11. Cemetery fees and miscellaneous recreation facility fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Ord. No. 25-1980, pt. 1, 3-27-80; Ord. No. 48-1980, pt. 1, 5-22-80; Ord. No. 35-1983, pt. 1(2), 4-14-83; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-
86)
Sec. 22-12. Golf and tennis fees and terms for concessions and lessons, etc.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Ord. No. 25-1980, pt. 2, 3-27-80; Ord. No. 54-1980, pt. 1, 6-12-80; Ord. No. 28-1982, pt. 1, 3-11-82; Ord. No. 35-1983, pt. 1(1), 4-14-
83; Ord. No. 6-1986, pt. 1, 2-13-86; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
Sec. 22-13. Parking in city parks prohibited.
No vehicle shall park off the paved portion of a parking lot or roadway, except in areas designated by the director of community services,
in any of the following parks:
Bowie, Carver, Cobb, Reyes Flores, C. W. Gill, Will Hair, Jackson, Kirby, Lee, Vera Hall Minter, Grover Nelson, North Park, Redbud,
Rose, Scarborough, Arthur Sears, South Park, Stevenson, Vaughn-Camp, Nelson Wilson, and Cal Young.
(Ord. No. 27-1987, pt. 1, 5-28-87)
Editor's note: Ordinance 27-1987, pt. 1, adopted May 28, 1987, enacted provisions designated as § 22-11, parking in city parks prohibited. Such section was
redesignated as § 22-13 inasmuch as other provisions are codified as § 22-11.
Secs. 22-14–22-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. YOUTH PROGRAMS' STANDARDS OF CARE*
DIVISION 1. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 22-21. Compliance with state law.
The following standards of care have been adopted pursuant to Texas Human Resources Code section 42.041(b)(14). The standards of
care are the minimum standards by which the city recreation division will operate the city's youth programs.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16)
Sec. 22-22. Organization.
(a) The governing body of the city's youth programs is the city council.
(b) Implementation of the youth program's standards of care is the responsibility of the recreation administrator and departmental
employees.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/648
(c) Youth programs (“program”) to which these standards apply are the programs held at the city recreation centers and designated
school sites currently operated by the city. Other programs may be subsequently designated by the city.
(d) Each of the city's youth program sites will have a current copy of the standards of care available for public and staff review.
(e) Parents of participants will be provided a current copy of the standards of care during the registration process or the standards of
care can be accessed on the city's website at www.abilenetx.gov/camps. Parents of participants will be informed that the city's youth
programs are not licensed by the state.
(f) Criminal background checks will be conducted on prospective youth program employees. If results of the criminal checks indicate
that an applicant has been convicted for any of the following offenses, he or she may not be considered for employment:
(1) A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person or family;
(2) A felony or misdemeanor classified as public indecency;
(3) A felony or misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled
substance or any violation of the city policy;
(4) Any offense involving moral turpitude;
(5) Any offense that would potentially put the city or participants of the program at risk;
(6) In addition, a nationwide check of databases for the sex offender registration program will be conducted on prospective
program staff. If results of the check indicate that an applicant is a registered sex offender, he or she will not be considered for
employment.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-23. Definitions.
Administrator. City's administrator of recreation services or his or her designee.
City. City of Abilene.
City council. City council of the City of Abilene.
Department. Community services department of the city.
Director. City director of community services department or designee.
Division. Recreation services division of the city.
Employee. Someone who has been employed by the city and has been assigned responsibility for managing, administering, or
implementing some portion of the city's youth programs.
Parent(s). A parent or guardian who has legal custody and authority to enroll a child in the city's youth programs.
Participant. A youth whose parent has completed all required registration procedures and who has been determined to be eligible for the
city's youth programs.
Playground supervisor or playground aide. Any city recreation division temporary employee who has been assigned responsibility to
implement the city's youth programs.
Program manual. A notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, and organizational and programming information relevant to city's
youth programs.
Program site. Any area or facility where the city's youth programs is held.
Recreation coordinator. City recreation division full-time programmer who has been assigned administrative responsibility for the city's
youth programs.
Recreation specialist or recreation leader. Any city recreation division employee (full-time or part-time) who has been assigned
responsibility to implement the city's youth programs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/648
Youth program(s) or program. City youth programs held at the city's recreation centers and designated school sites currently operated by
the city. Other programs may be subsequently designated by the city. These programs are not child-care facilities.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-24. Objective of youth programs.
(a) To provide youth with the opportunity of recreational activities which may include sports, games, arts and crafts, education, dance,
drama, special events, field trips, etc.
(b) To provide an encouraging atmosphere by emphasizing the positive development of physical skills, emotional development, and
growth of self-confidence.
(c) To provide a safe environment by promoting good health and welfare for all participants.
(d) To teach youth how to spend leisure time wisely in an effort to meet the emotional, physical, and social needs of youth.
(Ord. No. 65-2013, § 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No.
65-2016, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-25. Inspections/monitoring/enforcement.
(a) An annual facility inspection report will be initiated by the recreation coordinator of each program to confirm adherence to the
standards of care. This report will be submitted in March.
(1) Inspection reports will be sent to the administrator for review and kept on record for at least two years.
(2) The administrator will review the report and establish deadlines and criteria for compliance with the standards of care.
(b) The administrator will make visual inspections of the facilities, based on the following schedule. A parks and recreation
professional that is not associated with the city will assist on one of the following inspections.
(1) A pre-summer check in April of each year; and
(2) A fall check in October of each year.
(c) Complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care will be directed to the recreation coordinator. The recreation coordinator
will be responsible for taking the necessary steps to resolve the problems. Complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care and
their resolution will be recorded by the recreation coordinator and forwarded to the administrator, the complaint and the resolution will be
noted.
(d) The administrator will provide an annual report to the parks and recreation board on the overall status of the youth programs and
their operation relative to compliance with the adopted standards of care.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-26. Enrollment.
Before a child may be enrolled, a parent/guardian must sign registration forms that contain:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the child;
(2) Name and address of parents/guardian and telephone numbers during program hours;
(3) The names and telephone numbers of people to whom the child may be released;
(4) A statement of the child's special needs;
(5) A signed liability waiver which also includes permission for field trips and emergency medical authorization; and
(6) Signed acknowledgement of program code of conduct.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/648
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-27. Suspected abuse.
Program employees will report suspected child abuse in accordance with the Texas Family Code. In a situation where an employee is
involved in an incident with a child that could be considered child abuse, the incident shall immediately be reported to the recreation
supervisor. The recreation supervisor will immediately notify the police department and any other agency, as may be appropriate.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Secs. 22-28–22-35. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. STAFF RESPONSIBILITIES AND TRAINING
Sec. 22-36. Recreation center coordinators.
(a) Qualifications.
(1) Recreation coordinators will be full-time, professional employees of the city's recreation division.
(2) Recreation coordinators must meet the minimum education/experience requirements for employment with the city to
plan and implement recreation activities.
(3) Recreation coordinators must be able to pass a background investigation, including testing for illegal substances.
(4) Coordinators must have a current certification in first-aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) - adult and child.
These certifications must be from a nationally recognized certifying organization, i.e., American Heart Association or
American Red Cross.
(5) Recreation coordinators must complete city mandatory training.
(b) Job functions.
(1) Recreation coordinators are responsible for administering the youth programs daily operations in compliance with the
adopted standards of care.
(2) Recreation coordinators are responsible for hiring, supervising, and evaluating recreation specialist/leaders.
(3) Recreation coordinators are responsible for planning, implementing, and evaluating programs.
(4) Recreation coordinators maintain supplies, equipment and all necessary documentation for the operation of the youth
programs.
(5) Recreation coordinators must communicate with parent(s) as necessary.
(6) Recreation coordinators know and follow all city, division, and program manual standards, policies and procedures that
apply to youth programs.
(7) Recreation coordinators ensure that participants are released only to a parent(s) or an adult designated by the parent(s).
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-37. Recreation specialist or recreation leaders.
(a) Qualifications.
(1) Recreation specialist/leaders may be full-time, part-time, or temporary employees of the city's recreation division.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/648
(2) Recreation specialist/leaders should be able to consistently exhibit competency, good judgment, and self-control when
working with children.
(3) Recreation specialist/leaders must relate to children with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience.
(4) Recreation specialist must have a current certification in first-aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) - adult and
child. These certifications must be from a nationally recognized certifying organization, i.e., American Heart Association or
American Red Cross.
(5) Recreation specialist/leaders must pass a background investigation, including testing for illegal substances.
(6) Recreation specialist/leaders will be responsible for understanding and following all city, departmental, division, and
program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the city's youth programs.
(b) Job functions.
(1) Recreation specialist/leaders will be responsible for providing participants with an environment in which they can feel
safe, enjoy wholesome recreation activities, and can participate in appropriate social opportunities with their peers.
(2) Recreation specialist/leaders will directly lead activities using a method that will provide opportunities for involvement
of all participants on an equal basis.
(3) Recreation specialist/leaders must exhibit enthusiasm for the activity to impart a feeling of excitement in the
participants.
(4) Recreation specialist/leaders will promote a noncompetitive, positive, image-enhancing environment for each participant
through the direction of fun, varied, and well-organized activities.
(5) Recreation specialist/leader must be with participants at all times while they are participating in the program.
(6) Recreation specialist/leaders ensure that participants are released only to a parent(s) or an adult designated by the
parent(s).
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-38. Playground supervisor and/or playground aide.
(a) Qualifications.
(1) Playground supervisor/aides will be temporary employees of the city's recreation division.
(2) Playground supervisor/aides should be able to consistently exhibit competency, good judgment, and self-control when
working with children.
(3) Playground supervisor/aides must relate to children with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience.
(4) Playground supervisor/aides must pass a background investigation, including testing for illegal substances.
(5) Playground supervisor/aides will be responsible for understanding and following all city, departmental, division, and
program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the city's youth programs.
(b) Job functions.
(1) Playground supervisor/aides will assist in leading activities using a method that will provide opportunities for
involvement of all participants on an equal basis.
(2) Playground supervisor/aides must exhibit enthusiasm for the activity to impart a feeling of excitement in the
participants.
(3) Playground supervisor/aides will promote a noncompetitive, positive, image-enhancing environment for each participant
through the direction of fun, varied, and well-organized activities.
(4) Playground supervisor/aides will be responsible for picking-up the areas used by their group area each activity.
(5) Playground supervisor/aides must be with participants at all times while they are participating in the program.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/648
(6) Playground supervisor/aides ensure that participants are released only to a parent(s) or an adult designated by the
parent(s).
(Ord. No. 65-2013, § 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No.
65-2016, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-39. Training/orientation.
(a) The division is responsible for providing training and orientation to program employees in working with children and for specific
job responsibilities.
(b) Program employees must be competent with the standards of care for youth program operation as adopted.
(c) Program employees must be competent with the program's policies, including discipline, guidance, and release of participants as
outlined in the summer playground manual.
(d) Program employees will be trained in appropriate procedures to handle emergencies.
(e) Program employees will be trained in areas including city, departmental, division and program policies and procedures; provision of
recreation activities; safety issues; and organization.
(f) Program employees will be electronically tested annually over program manuals and standards of care.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Secs. 22-40–22-45. Reserved
DIVISION 3. OPERATIONS
Sec. 22-46. Staff-participant ratio.
(a) The city's youth programs, the minimum employee to participant ratio will be 1 to 20 for participants from ages 6–13.
(b) Each participant should have a program employee who is responsible for him or her and who is aware of details of the participant's
habits, interests, and any special needs as identified by the participant's parent during the registration process.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-47. Notification.
(a) Parents must be notified immediately when program employees are aware of the following:
(1) Participant is injured; or
(2) Participant has a sign or symptom requiring exclusion from the site (i.e. communicable disease, fever, and/or illness).
(b) All parents must be notified if there is an outbreak of any communicable disease. The disease will be reported to the Abilene Taylor
County Public Health District.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22.48. Discipline.
(a) Program employees will implement discipline and guidance in a consistent manner, based on the best interests of program
participants.
(b) There will be no cruel or harsh punishment or treatment, examples include, but not limited to:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/648
(1) Using physical punishment or any action administered to the body such as, but not limited to rough handling, or forcing
child(ren) to assume an uncomfortable position.
(2) Restraining movement by tying, enclosing in a confined space, shaking, or using exercise as punishment.
(3) Being verbally abusive, including, but not limited to, threats, belittling remarks, humiliation, embarrassment, or
frightening a child.
(4) Giving any child the authority to punish another child.
(5) Placing a child out of visual/hearing range, in the dark, or in an unventilated area.
(6) Punishing a child for a toileting accident.
(7) Taunting a child by or any other form of jeering.
(8) Giving preferential attention to any child over another child.
(c) Program employees may use brief, supervised separation from the activity if necessary.
(d) As necessary, program employees will initiate discipline reports to the parents of participants. Parents will be asked to sign
participant discipline reports to indicate they have been advised about a specific problem or incident.
(1) A sufficient number and/or severe nature of discipline report(s), as detailed by the disciplinary policy in the program and
operations manuals, may result in a participant being suspended from the youth program immediately. If a participant is
suspended from the program, an authorized person must pick up the participant.
(2) Participants will be removed from the program site as soon as possible in instances of danger to other participants or
program staff. This includes, but is not limited to, continuous disruption of the youth program, inappropriate sexual behavior,
bullying, hitting or biting other participants or program staff and damage to any city property.
(e) A sufficient number and/or severe nature of discipline reports as detailed in the program manual may result in a participant being
suspended and/or expelled from the program.
(f) In instances where there is a danger to other participants or staff, offending participants will be removed from the program site as
soon as possible.
(g) Any person(s) creating a nuisance, causing a disturbance, or creating an unsafe environment at any program site will be subject to
ejection from the site and possible arrest and legal action.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-49. Programming.
(a) Program employees will provide activities for each group according to the participants' ages, interests, and abilities. The activities
will be appropriate to participants' health, safety, and well-being. The activities also will be flexible and designed to promote the
participants' emotional, social, and mental growth.
(b) Program employees will provide indoor and outdoor time periods to include:
(1) Alternating active and passive activities;
(2) Opportunity for individual and group activities; and
(3) Outdoor time each day that weather permits.
(c) Program employees will be attentive and considerate of the participants' safety on field trips and during any transportation provided
by the program. Participants must be counted before leaving the program site and before boarding the transportation to return to the
program site.
(1) During trips, program employees supervising participants must have immediate access to emergency medical forms and
emergency contact information for each participant.
(2) Program employees will have transportation cards of the participants in the group and must check the roll frequently.
(3) Program employees should have first-aid supplies and a guide to first-aid and emergency care available on field trips.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/648
(4) Notice of any field trips will be displayed at a prominent location at each program site.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-50. Communication.
(a) Each program site will have access to a telephone for use in contacting the recreation center or making emergency calls.
(b) The recreation coordinator will post the following telephone numbers adjacent to a telephone accessible to all program employees
at each site:
(1) Ambulance or emergency medical services.
(2) City's police department.
(3) City's fire department.
(4) Poison control.
(5) The telephone number for the site itself.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-51. Transportation.
(a) First-aid supplies and a first-aid emergency care guide will be available in all program vehicles that transport children.
(b) All program vehicles used for transporting participants must have available a portable fire extinguisher located in the passenger
compartment of the vehicle which will be accessible to the adult occupants.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Secs. 22-52–22-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FACILITY STANDARDS
Sec. 22-56. Safety.
(a) Program employees will inspect program sites daily to detect sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the health and safety
of the participants.
(b) Buildings, grounds, and equipment on the program site will be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained to protect the health of
the participants.
(c) Program equipment and supplies should be safe for the participants use.
(d) Program employees should have first-aid supplies available at each site, during transportation and for the duration of any off-site
activity.
(e) Program employees should have first-aid supplies readily available to staff in a designated location. Program employees should
have an immediately accessible guide to first-aid and emergency care.
(f) Program air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters should be mounted out of participants reach or have safeguards that keep
participants from being injured.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/648
Sec. 22-57. Fire.
(a) In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or other emergency, program employee's first priority is to evacuate the participants to a
designated safe area.
(b) The program site will have an annual fire inspection by the city's fire department, and the resulting report will detail any safety
concerns observed. The report will be forwarded to the administrator who will review and establish deadlines and criteria for compliance.
(c) Each program site must have at least one (1) fire extinguisher approved by the fire marshal readily available to all program
employees. The fire extinguisher is to be inspected monthly by the recreation center coordinator. All of the city's youth program
employees will be trained in the proper use of fire extinguishers.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-58. Health.
(a) Illness or injury.
(1) A participant who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or staff will not be admitted to the
program.
(2) Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner to protect the health of all participants and employees. Emergency
responders will be notified in the event of an injury that cannot be remedied through basic first aid. An accident report shall be
completed and forwarded to the recreation supervisor.
(3) An ill youth will not be allowed to attend or participate if the youth is suspected of having a temperature and/or
accompanied by behavior changes or other signs or symptoms until a medical evaluation indicating that the youth can return to
the youth program.
(4) Program employees will follow plans to provide emergency care for injured participants or for participants with
symptoms of an acute illness as specified in the program manual.
(5) Program employees will follow the recommendation of the Texas Department of State Health Services concerning the
admission or readmission of any participant after a communicable disease.
(b) Toilet facilities.
(1) The program site will have inside toilets located and equipped so children can use them independently and program
employees can supervise as needed.
(2) There must be at least one flush toilet for every thirty (30) children. Urinals may be counted in the ratio of toilets to
children but must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total number of toilets.
(3) An appropriate and adequate number of lavatories will be provided.
(c) Sanitation.
(1) The program site must have adequate light, ventilation, and heat.
(2) The program must have an adequate supply of water, meeting the standards of the Texas Department of State Health
Services for drinking water, and ensure that it will be supplied to the participants in a safe and sanitary manner.
(3) Program employees must see that garbage is removed from program sites daily.
(4) The program site will have an annual health inspection by the city's health department, and the resulting report will
detail any health concerns observed. The report will be kept on file at the center. Information from this report will be included
in the director's annual report to the city council.
(Ord. No. 51-2007, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-07; Ord. No. 67-2008, § 2(Exh. A), 12-18-08; Ord. No. 41-2009, § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-09; Ord. No.
36-2010, § 2(Exh. A), 12-16-10; Ord. No. 50-2011, § 2(Exh. A), 11-17-11; Ord. No. 64-2012, § 2(Exh. A), 12-20-12; Ord. No. 65-2013,
§ 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No. 65-2016, pt. 2(Exh.
A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Sec. 22-59. Participants.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/648
(a) All participants must wear tennis shoes daily, unless the youth is in the swimming pool or participating in an activity that requires
no shoes to be worn.
(b) Youth must respect the employees, program site, and each other.
(Ord. No. 65-2013, § 2(Exh. A), 12-5-13; Ord. No. 74-2014, § 2(Exh. A), 12-4-14; Ord. No. 59-2015, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-3-15; Ord. No.
65-2016, pt. 2(Exh. A), 12-15-16; Ord. No. 46-2017, § 2(Exh. A), 12-7-17; Ord. No. 66-2018, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-18)
Chapter 23
SCOOTER AND BICYCLE SHARING*
Sec. 23-1. Scope.
This chapter governs the operation of scooter and bicycle sharing business operations, both dockless and with docks, in the public rightof-
way. Scooter sharing or bicycle sharing shall not be considered an itinerant business as regulated by the Land Development Code.
Scooters and bicycles under this chapter shall not be considered to be vehicles for hire under chapter 31. This chapter does not apply to a
moped, motorcycle or a motorized mobility device under Texas Transportation Code chapter 542. This chapter does not apply to an
electric personal assistive mobility device, a neighborhood electric vehicle, or a golf cart under Texas Transportation Code chapter 551.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
Bicycle. Every device propelled by human or electric power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) or more wheels, any of
which is over fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
Bicycle sharing. The renting of a bicycle(s) on a short-term basis generally in exchange for compensation.
Home zones. Zones designated by the city manager, which shall be identified on a map to be made available in the office of the city
secretary, wherein vendor shall use the city right-of-way on a nonexclusive basis, solely for the purpose of placement of scooters and
bicycles for rental.
Operator. Any person operating, riding on, or using a scooter or bicycle for rental.
Scooter. Every device propelled by human or electric power upon which any person may ride, having a narrow footboard mounted
between two (2) or more wheels with an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.
Scooter sharing. The renting of a scooter(s) on a short-term basis generally in exchange for compensation.
Vendor. Any person or entity that distributes scooters and bicycles for rental.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-3. Vendor permit required.
(a) It shall be an offense for a vendor that provides scooters and bicycles for the purpose of scooter sharing or bicycle sharing to place
scooters and bicycles in the city's right-of-way, or other city property, without a bicycle or scooter share permit obtained from and
authorized by the office of the city secretary.
(b) To obtain an operating authority permit, a person shall make application to the city secretary in the manner prescribed by the city
manager. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed scooter or bicycle sharing business.
(c) An applicant shall file with the city secretary a verified application statement, to be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee,
containing the following:
(1) The form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents
establishing the business and the name and address of each person with a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the
business;
(2) The verified signature of the applicant;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/648
(3) The address of the fixed facilities to be used in the business, if any, and the address of the applicant's corporate
headquarters, if different from the address of the fixed facilities;
(4) The name of the person designated by the applicant to receive on behalf of the applicant any future notices sent by the
city to the operator, and that person's contact information, including a mailing address, telephone number, and email or other
electronic address;
(5) Certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured as required by section 23-4;
(6) Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on property within the city, if any, to be used in connection with
the operation of the proposed scooter or bicycle sharing business;
(7) The number and types of scooters or bicycles to be operated;
(8) A permit agreement including indemnification to the city; and
(9) A copy of a current contract with one or more institutions of higher education within the city limits which the applicant
provides scooter and/or bicycle sharing services.
(d) A permit issued under this section shall be valid, unless otherwise revoked, for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of
issuance. A permit may be renewed for additional twelve (12) month periods following the process in this section.
(e) The permit fee shall be set forth and established in the fee ordinance.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-4. Insurance.
(a) A permit holder shall procure and keep in full force and effect no less than the insurance coverage required by this section through a
policy or policies written by insurance company that is authorized to do business in the state and is acceptable to the city.
(b) The insured provisions of the policy must name the city as an additional insured, and the coverage provisions must provide
coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a scooter or bicycle.
(c) A permit holder shall maintain the following insurance coverages:
(1) The commercial general liability insurance must provide single limits of liability for bodily injury (including death) and
property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence, with a two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
annual aggregate.
(2) If a permit holder will utilize motor vehicles in its operations, the business automotive liability insurance must cover
owned, hired, and nonowned vehicles, with a combined single limit for bodily injury (including death) and property damage of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence.
(3) Worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits.
(4) Employer's liability insurance with the following minimum limits for bodily injury by:
(A) Accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per each accident; and
(B) Disease, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per employee with a per policy aggregate of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
(d) Insurance required under this chapter must:
(1) Include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city secretary in writing not
fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling the insurance policy (for a reason other than nonpayment) or before making a
reduction in coverage;
(2) Include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city secretary in writing not
fewer than ten (10) days before canceling for nonpayment;
(3) Cover all scooters or bicycles during the times that the vehicles are deployed or operating in furtherance of the permit
holder's business;
(4) Include a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every covered claim on a first-dollar basis;
(5) Require notice to the city secretary if the policy is cancelled or if there is a reduction in coverage; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/648
(6) Comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
(e) No person who has a twenty (20) percent or greater ownership interest in the permit holder may have an interest in the insurance
company.
(f) A permit holder may not be self-insured.
(g) Any insurance policy required by this chapter must be on file with and approved by the city prior to the issuance of a permit
agreement, and must remain in effect during the term of the permit agreement.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-5. Permit denial and revocation.
The city secretary may determine that a vendor's permit should be denied or revoked for the reasons set forth below. The city secretary
shall provide written notice of the denial or revocation of a permit to the vendor, detailing the reason for the denial or revocation of the
permit, and a statement informing the vendor of its right to appeal the denial or revocation of its permit to the city manager.
(1) Denial of permit. The application shall be denied, and no permit shall be issued, if the city finds that:
(A) Any statement made in the application is incomplete, inaccurate, misleading, or false; or
(B) The vendor has not complied with this chapter or has had a history of noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Revocation of permit. The city may revoke a permit due to vendor's failure to comply with permit requirements, this
chapter, or any applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation. Permits may also be revoked for one or more of the
following reasons:
(A) Any statement made in the application is inaccurate, misleading or false;
(B) Failure to maintain insurance as required by this chapter;
(C) Operation of scooters and bicycles that are not authorized by the permit, or in a manner not authorized by this
chapter;
(D) Posing an unreasonable risk to the health, safety and welfare of the general public; or
(E) Nonpayment of permit fee owed city in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-6. Appeal of denial or revocation of permit.
(a) If the city secretary determines that grounds exist for the denial or revocation of a permit under this chapter, the applicant or
permittee shall be notified of such denial or revocation in writing by certified mail, stating the reasons for denial or revocation, the
effective date, and that the applicant or permittee has the right to appeal.
(b) The denial or revocation of a permit may be appealed to the city manager by filing written notice of appeal within ten (10) business
days of receipt of the denial or revocation with the city manager's office. The notice of appeal should contain all information on which the
city manager can make a decision.
(c) The city manager shall issue a decision on the denial or revocation in writing within five (5) business days of receipt of the written
notice of appeal.
(d) If no appeal is filed within 10 business days, the decision of the city secretary becomes final and unappealable.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-7. Home zones.
The city council authorizes the city manager to create, modify, or remove home zones for scooter and/or bicycle sharing within the city.
Vendors shall not operate a scooter or bicycle share service in areas of the city not designated as a home zone. If no home zones have
been established by the city manager, the home zones shall be:
(1) The area within one mile of any institution of higher learning which the vendor has a contract to provide scooter and/or
bike sharing services; and
(2) Within the central business district area map on file with the city secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/648
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-8. Operation of scooters and bicycles permitted in accordance with this chapter.
(a) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked in a manner that would impede normal and reasonable pedestrian access on a sidewalk or
in any manner that would reduce the minimum clear width of a sidewalk to less than 48 inches.
(b) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked in a manner that would impede vehicular traffic on a street or alley.
(c) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked in a manner that would impose a threat to public safety or security.
(d) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked on a public street.
(e) Scooters and bicycles may not be deployed on a block where the sidewalk is less than 96 inches in width, or on a block that does
not have sidewalks. The city manager may determine other blocks where deploying scooters and bicycles is prohibited.
(f) Scooters and bicycles must be deployed on a sidewalk or other hard surface, at a bicycle rack, or at a city-owned location. Scooters
and bicycles may only be deployed on private property with the express permission of the property owner.
(g) Scooters and bicycles must stand upright while parked.
(h) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked within five feet of a crosswalk or curb ramp, unless given specific permission by the city
manager.
(i) Scooters and bicycles may not be parked in a way that blocks:
(1) Transit stops, shelters, or platforms.
(2) Commercial loading zones.
(3) Railroad or light rail tracks or crossings.
(4) Passenger loading zones or valet parking service areas.
(5) Disabled parking zones.
(6) Street furniture that requires pedestrian access (for example, benches or parking pay stations).
(7) Building entryways.
(8) Vehicular driveways.
(j) Scooters and bicycles that are parked in an incorrect manner must be re-parked or removed by the operator.
(k) Scooters and bicycles that are parked outside of a home zone, may remain in the same location for up to 24 hours as long as they
are parked in accordance with this section.
(l) The city may remove and store any bicycle or scooter that is left parked outside of the home zone for more than 24 hours.
(1) Vendor is responsible for the costs of removal and storage.
(2) The city shall invoice vendor for the cost of removal and storage.
(3) Any bicycle or scooter that has been removed and is unclaimed for more than 30 days shall become the property of the
city.
(m) Every person riding a bicycle or scooter upon the streets of the city shall be subject to provisions of all laws and ordinances
applicable to the operator of any other vehicle, except those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their very nature, can have no
application; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful to ride a bicycle or scooter on a public sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 23-9. Criminal offenses.
(a) A person commits an offense if, within the city, the person operates or causes or permits the operation of a scooter or bicycle
sharing service without a valid permit issued under this chapter.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person violates or attempts to violate a provision of this chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/648
(c) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter. A separate offense is committed each
day in which an offense occurs.
(d) Prosecution for an offense under this chapter does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to
the person charged with the conduct or involved in the offense.
(e) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon adjudication or
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Ord. No. 13-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Chapter 24
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION NETWORK NODES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTOF-
WAY
Sec. 24-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to:
(1) Establish a permit process for the installation of wireless communication network nodes in the right-of-way;
(2) Authorize the city manager to maintain a design manual for wireless communication network nodes in the public rightof-
way in accordance with Texas Local Government Code chapter 284; and
(3) Manage access to the public right-of-way in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-2. Definitions.
The city hereby adopts the definitions found in Texas Local Government Code chapter 284.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-3. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant of any other
person to install a wireless communication network node, node support pole or transport facility pursuant to Texas Local Government
Code chapter 284, without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-4. Design manual.
The wireless services design manual (hereinafter “design manual”) for the installation and construction of network nodes, new node
support poles and transport facilities in the public right-of-way shall be incorporated by reference into this chapter. Each network node,
node support pole or transport facility shall comply with the city's design manual. An application that does not comply with the city's
design manual shall be denied.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-5. City council authority to maintain design manual.
The design manual for the installation and construction of network nodes, new node support poles and transport facilities in the public
right-of-way shall be approved by the city council and kept on file with the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-6. Application procedure.
(a) A network provider that wants to install a network node, network node support pole or transport facility in the public right-of-way
shall file application with the public works department.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/648
(b) An application form shall be on file with the city secretary.
(c) The city shall process applications in accordance with Texas Local Government Code chapter 284.
(d) Not later than the 30th day after the date the public works department receives an application for permit for a network node or node
support pole, or the 10th day after the date the public works department receives an application for a permit for a transport facility, the
city shall determine whether the application is complete. If the city determines that the application is not complete, the city shall
specifically identify the missing information.
(e) The city must approve or deny an application for a node support pole not later than the 150th day after the date the city receives the
complete application.
(f) The city must approve or deny an application for a network node not later than the 60th day after the date the city receives a
complete application.
(g) The city must approve or deny an application for a transport facility not later than the 21st day after the date the municipality
receives a complete application.
(h) Any application shall be deemed approved if it is not denied on or before the applicable date for approval or denial as prescribed by
this section.
(i) If an application is denied, the city must document the basis for the denial, including the specific code provision on which the denial
is based. This documentation must be sent to the applicant by electronic mail on or before the date the city denies the application.
(j) Not later than the 30th day after the city denies the application, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial
documentation and resubmit the application without paying an additional application fee. Thereafter, the city shall approve or deny the
revised completed application not later than the 90th day after the date the city receives the completed revised application. The city's
review of the revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the final documentation.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-7. Application fee.
The application fee shall be calculated in accordance with Texas Local Government Code section 284.156. This fee may be adjusted
annually and shall be on file with the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-8. Public right-of-way rate.
The city shall charge the rate established by and in accordance with Texas Local Government Code section 284.053. This rate may be
adjusted annually and shall be on file with the city secretary pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 284.054.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-9. Insurance.
The applicant for a permit shall furnish a certificate of insurance for public liability and property damage, issued by an insurance
company of sound and adequate financial responsibility authorized to do business in the state, or evidence self-insurance satisfactory to
the city. All policies are subject to examination and approval by the city's office of risk management.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-10. Removal or relocation.
(a) A network provider shall remove, relocate or adjust a wireless communication network node, node support pole or transport facility
at its own expense not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving written notice that the removal, relocation or alteration of
the facilities is necessary due to:
(1) Construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city
construction or maintenance project or other public improvement project;
(2) Maintenance, upgrade, expansion, replacement, removal or relocation of the city's pole or structure upon which
provider's network nodes are attached;
(3) The network node or node support pole, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of traffic signals,
streetlights or other city property;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/648
(4) Closure of a street or sale of city property;
(5) Projects and programs undertaken to protect or preserve the public health or safety;
(6) Activities undertaken to eliminate a public nuisance;
(7) Provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its network nodes or node
support poles; or
(8) Duty otherwise arising from applicable law.
(b) If the city manager reasonably determines that a wireless communication network node, node support pole or transport facility
poses a health, safety and welfare of the public, then the city may provide written notice to the network provider, who shall remedy the
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public within 30 days or the city may do so and bill the network provider for the actual cost
of repair, construction or relocation.
(c) If the city manager reasonably determines that wireless communication network node, node support pole or transport facility poses
an imminent danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the
applicable wireless communication network node, node support pole or transport facility and bill network provider for the actual cost of
construction or relocation.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-11. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
after receiving written notice of same from the city manager or his or her designated representative shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided by section 1-9 of this code.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-12. No waiver for nonenforcement.
No network provider shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter by any failure or omission of
the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon, enforce, or otherwise seek compliance with such terms and conditions.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-13. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any remedies that the city or a network provider may have at law or in equity for
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-14. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this chapter, or its application to any person is, for any reason
declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 24-15. Reservation of rights.
The city hereby reserves to itself all rights, privileges, and interests which it has or may hereafter acquire, and nothing in this chapter shall
be construed otherwise unless it is specifically set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 33-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Chapter 25
POLICE*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/648
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 25-1–25-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Sec. 25-16. Retained, etc., by chief.
All property which may be left abandoned on the streets of the city as well as all property which may come into the possession of the city
and belonging to known persons or unknown shall be preserved, protected, stored and retained by the chief of police.
(Code 1965, § 22-11)
Sec. 25-17. Records to be kept.
The time and occasion of the acquisition of abandoned or lost property in the possession of the city shall be carefully kept in a record kept
by the chief of police reflecting the description and manner of acquisition, as well as the manner of preservation, storage and ultimate
disposition of such property and the proceeds therefrom.
(Code 1965, § 22-12)
Sec. 25-18. Disposition, retention, sale; notice of sale.
In the event that abandoned or lost property in the possession of the city remains preserved, stored and belonging to known persons or
unknown persons for a period of one (1) month, then such property shall be disposed of as provided herein. The chief of police shall
determine what items of abandoned or lost property then available for disposition are useful to, and needed by, the police department or
other departments of the city. Such property may be disposed of by the chief of police by tendering that property to the appropriate city
departments, including the police department. All property not so disposed of shall be sold at a public sale in accordance with this section.
Such unclaimed property shall be sold by the director of finance of the city or his designee at a public sale on a date next following the
expiration of at least one (1) month after acquisition of the property. Sale dates shall be set by the director of finance. Before a public sale
of such properties and articles is had, fifteen (15) days' public notice shall be given showing the time and place of the sale, a brief
description of the property and articles to be sold, the nature of and names of the articles to be sold. Included in said notice shall also be a
brief description of property disposed of by the chief of police other than by sale in accordance with this section. Such public notice shall
be posted at a public place in the police department of the city, Abilene City Hall, and a copy thereof at the courthouse in the county. A
brief notice of such sale shall also be published one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city fifteen (15) days before the
date of sale, and all sales shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. Such published notice shall state the locations at which the
detailed list of items is posted for public review.
(Code 1965, § 22-13; Ord. No. 2-1989, pt. 1, 1-26-89)
Sec. 25-19. Claim by rightful owner; proceeds of sale.
In the event that the rightful owners claim abandoned or lost property in the possession of the city prior to the expiration of the one-month
holding period, such property shall be returned to them upon their payment to the city accountant of a sum of money equal to the costs of
the preservation and the towing and storage of such property. In the event the rightful owner appears subsequent to the public sale and
prior to the expiration of three (3) months after such public sale, then the rightful owner shall be entitled to the proceeds of such sale, less
the cost of the preservation, towing and storage of such property. In the event that a rightful owner shall claim such property for the first
time after three (3) months have expired after date of public sale, he shall have no claim whatsoever against the city. Likewise, in the
event that a rightful owner of property disposed of by the chief of police, other than by sale in accordance with section 25-18, appears
within three (3) months of such disposal, then the rightful owner shall be entitled to the return of the property, or the monetary equivalent
thereof (less cost of preservation, towing, and storage of such property) at the option of the chief of police. In the event that a rightful
owner shall claim such property for the first time after three (3) months have expired after disposal of such property (other than by sale)
in accordance with section 25-18, he shall have no claim whatsoever against the city for the property or its monetary equivalent. The
proceeds of the sale of the unclaimed property shall be turned over by the director of finance to the city accountant together with his
notations of the costs of the storage, towing and preservation of the property. The city accountant shall place such funds in the general
fund of the city.
(Code 1965, § 22-14; Ord. No. 2-1989, pt. 1, 1-26-89)
Chapter 26
RAILROADS*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/648
Sec. 26-1. Speed limit of trains.
No person shall operate or run a railroad locomotive, engine, car or train within the city at a rate of speed in excess of forty-five (45)
miles per hour.
(Code 1965, § 23-4)
Sec. 26-2. Playing, trespassing, etc., upon railroad property.
No person shall play upon the railroad tracks or upon any railroad car, engine or tender, whether such car, engine or tender is in motion or
standing. No person shall crawl under or go under any railroad car, engine or tender whether it is in motion or standing. This section shall
not apply to railroad employees or persons traveling thereon.
(Code 1965, § 23-6)
Sec. 26-3. Railroad crossings to conform to established grades.
All streets, alleys, public highways and public crossings in the city at any place where crossed by the railroad tracks of any railroad
company operating through the city shall conform to the grades established by the city engineer and approved by the city council;
provided, that such grades at such crossings shall remain as they now exist until otherwise ordered changed or permitted to be changed by
a resolution duly passed by the city council.
(Code 1965, § 23-7)
Sec. 26-4. Permit to change crossing grade–Required.
No company operating a railroad through the city shall raise, elevate, lower or reduce its track on or across any street, alley, public
highway or public railroad crossing in the city without first applying to and receiving a permit from the city council so to do.
(Code 1965, § 23-8)
Sec. 26-5. Same–Application.
Any railroad company desiring to elevate or lower any railroad tracks at the crossing of any street, alley, public highway or public
crossing shall file with the city council a written application therefor which shall state in detail the proposed change desired to be made,
the materials to be used and shall furnish such other information as requested by the city council.
(Code 1965, § 23-9)
Sec. 26-6. Same–Issuance.
If, upon investigation, the city council shall determine that it is to the best interest of the public to permit a change in a crossing grade
under this article, its decision shall be evidenced by a resolution, duly passed and entered on the minutes of the proceedings of the city
council, and its resolution shall direct the issuance of a permit signed by the city engineer.
(Code 1965, § 23-10)
Sec. 26-7. Same–Providing passageway for traffic during construction.
In the event any permit is issued as provided in this chapter the same shall require the railroad company to construct at its own expense
proper passageway for public traffic during construction in such manner as may be deemed best by the city council and set out in the
resolution authorizing the granting of such permit.
(Code 1965, § 23-11)
Sec. 26-8. Construction of tunnels and trestles.
No person shall construct any trestle over or any tunnel under any street, alley, public highway or public railroad crossing in the city
without first applying to and obtaining a written permit so to do as provided in this chapter for changes in crossing grades.
(Code 1965, § 23-12)
Chapter 27
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/648
SOLID WASTE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 27-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Abilene
(city) through the regulation of solid waste collection and disposal.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-2. Rates.
Residential and commercial rates are set by city council resolution and found in the “schedule of rates and charges” for the solid waste
services division and kept on file in both the city secretary's office and the solid waste services division.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-3. Fee, deposits, and bills.
(a) Fees for removal of collectible solid waste shall be billed to each occupant liable therefore with the water utility bill or refuse-only
bill. Solid waste collection charges shall become due and payable as established by the solid waste division and the water utilities
division.
(b) Fees for water services shall not be accepted without payment of the fees for the removal of solid waste.
(c) No customer shall be allowed to re-establish delinquent service with the city until all city utilities are paid current and a deposit for
two (2) months' service has been collected.
(d) Amounts and procedures to be followed regarding fees, deposits, and bills shall be set by the city council in a “schedule of rates and
charges” for the solid waste services division and kept on file the solid waste services office and the city secretary's office.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-4. Billing; disconnection of water for failure to pay bill.
(a) Charges for services under this chapter for the collection, removal, and disposal of all solid waste shall be entered in their respective
amounts as charges against each occupant, and the amount so fixed and charged shall be collected monthly in connection with and as a
part of the utility bill of the city and/or invoiced monthly if not billed through the city water billing system.
(b) Failure to pay fixed charges when due may result in the disconnection of water utility service.
(c) The fees shall accrue monthly and shall be paid to the water utility office.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
Administrator. The solid waste service manager, City of Abilene Peace Officers and Firefighters, code enforcement officers,
environmental enforcement officers, public health authority or designee, or city manager or designee who administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Bulky waste. Includes but is not limited to discarded large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, crates, air
conditioners, auto parts weighing more than five (5) pounds, mufflers, hot water heaters, large tree limbs, stumps or trunks, heavy pipes
or metals, fencing or fence posts, lumber greater than sixteen (16) inches in any one dimension, small non-contracted remodeling wastes
from single-unit or multi-unit dwellings and similar large and small items produced as refuse.
Business, commercial establishment or institution. Includes any building or structure or premises not defined as a residence, and includes
land extending beyond property boundaries to the centerline of adjacent public rights-of-way including alleys and streets.
Construction/demolition waste. Waste which typically results from construction or demolition projects and includes all materials which
are directly the byproducts of construction work or which result from demolition of buildings and other structures, including, but not
limited to paper, cartons, gypsum board, wood, excelsior, rubber and plastics.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/648
Disposal. Placement of municipal solid waste inside a permitted/approved landfill/site.
Excessive amounts/undue accumulation. Uncontained bulky waste in excess of a total volume of four (4) by three (3) by eight (8) feet.
Hazardous waste, special waste and industrial waste. As defined by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules.
Household hazardous waste. Includes but is not limited to paints, solvents, pesticides, lawn and pool chemicals, produced at residential
premises as defined by the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, or the Resource Conversation and Recovery Act of 1976 and
all amendments thereto, or regulations promulgated there under.
Landfill (sanitary). A controlled area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of in accordance with standards, rules or orders
established by the TCEQ.
Manager. The manager of the solid waste services division of the public works department or designee.
Medical waste. Special waste as defined in 25 Texas Administrative Code § 1.132(44), and as amended. The term does not include
medical waste produced on farm and ranch land as defined in Agricultural Code §252.001(6), and as amended, nor does it include
artificial, non-human material removed from a patient and requested by the patient, including but not limited to orthopedic devices and
breast implants.
Municipal solid waste. Includes but is not limited to durable goods, non-durable goods, containers and packaging, food waste, yard waste,
and miscellaneous inorganic and organic waste from residential, commercial, institutional, and recreational activities. Examples of waste
from these categories include, but are not limited to, appliances, newspapers, clothing, food scraps, boxes, disposable tableware, office
and classroom paper, wood pallets and cafeteria wastes.
Occupant. A renter, owner, lessee, individual, dweller, resident, tenant, user, and/or business that occupies any premises within the city or
that has care, custody or control of the premises.
Putrescible solid waste. Solid wastes which are capable of becoming decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause
nuisances from odors or gases and capable of providing food for or attracting birds and disease-carrying vectors.
Residence–Single-family. A building containing only one (1) or two (2) dwelling units. The term is general and includes such specialized
forms as single-family detached, single-family attached, duplexes and patio homes. The term also includes land extending beyond
property boundaries to the centerline of adjacent public rights-of-way including alleys and streets.
Residence–Multi-family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. The term includes cooperative apartments,
condominiums, and the like. The term also includes land extending beyond property boundaries to the centerline of adjacent public rightsof-
way including alleys and streets.
Recyclable solid waste. Includes but is not limited to bimetal/aluminum cans, glass, #1 & #2 plastic, paper, cardboard, appliances, scrap
metal, yard trimmings, tree limbs, and grass clippings, oil filters, automotive fluids, and tires.
Solid waste collection container. A polyethylene container, metal dumpster, or roll-off metal containers supplied by the city for the
collection of solid waste, or a metal or plastic container, not exceeding thirty-two (32) gallons, furnished by the occupant on manual
collection routes.
Yard waste. Includes but is not limited to tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, branches and dead trees and similar
materials.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Secs. 27-6–27-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESPONSIBILITIES
Sec. 27-11. Solid waste services division responsibilities.
The following are the responsibility of the solid waste services division. This list shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive,
limiting or restrictive:
(1) Collect, transport and dispose of all collectible municipal solid waste and adopt reasonable administrative policies,
procedures and regulations to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(2) Provide collection container service according to the kind and volume of solid waste to be removed, economy of
operation, and capability within the division. The type of solid waste service provided will be at the direction of the manager.
(3) Determine the necessity and feasibility of a collection vehicle entering any property to collect municipal solid waste.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/648
(4) Establish appropriate routes and schedules for municipal solid waste collection.
(5) Designate the size, location, and number of collection containers to be installed at any designated collection point in
accordance with City Code requirements.
(6) Designate the location of any collection containers used in the solid waste collection system in accordance with City
Code requirements.
(7) Designate all commercial collection container sites in accordance with City Code requirements.
(8) Require satisfactory solid waste handling including utilization of all solid waste collection containers, including
location, capacity, overflow situations and frequency of service.
(9) Investigate complaints.
(10) Notify the occupant of the premises of nonconforming collection containers and nonconforming pre-collection
practices.
(11) Suspend or temporarily move solid waste collection services or location when alleys or streets become impassable
because of inclement weather or other conditions. Resume services when conditions are conducive to the safe operation of
solid waste collection equipment in alleys and on city streets.
(12) Publish observed holiday schedules in the local media.
(13) Receive, transport, and process recyclable solid waste and adopt reasonable administrative policies, procedures and
regulations to carry out a voluntary recycling program.
(14) Receive, transport and process household hazardous waste and adopt reasonable administrative policies, procedures
and regulations to carry out a household hazardous waste disposal program.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-12. Commercial property occupant's responsibilities.
The following are the responsibility of the occupants of commercial properties. Any commercial property that is occupied and/or in
operation is evidence that collectible solid waste is being produced and accumulated on the premises. There is a presumption that items
found on a property were deposited there by the occupant. This list shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or
restrictive:
(1) Notify the city before the beginning of each occupancy, of changes to the existing property or to the usage of the
property that may alter the solid waste collection service required and request solid waste collection service. Service will not
begin or change until notification occurs.
(2) Meet all local, state and federal standards by ensuring there are collection containers of sufficient size and number on
the property in a location where they are accessible to the customer of such property for the disposal of municipal solid waste
items. Such collection containers shall have conspicuous signs conveying to customers a request that they use the collection
containers for the disposal of municipal solid waste.
(3) Sign a City of Abilene private property refuse collection agreement for collection containers placed on private property.
Failure to sign the agreement will result in a denial of service.
(4) Complete and maintain manifests, if required, for disposal of material in open-top and compactor containers, prior to
scheduled pickup. Failure to have the required manifest at the collection container may result in additional off-route charges as
listed in the “schedule of rates and charges” for the solid waste services division.
(5) Cover or enclose any collection container or vehicle used to transport municipal solid waste on any street or alley of the
city.
(6) Keep closed all commercial solid waste collection containers equipped with lids to prevent spillage of waste.
(7) Keep property clean of solid waste thrown or left by customers, and prevent same from drifting or blowing to adjoining
properties.
(8) Ensure all material is placed inside an open top collection container. No fill is allowed above the container's sides so as
to prevent tarping of the container.
(9) Soak all ashes and charcoal with water to extinguish all live embers and allow to cool for twenty-four (24) hours prior to
placement in collection containers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/648
(10) Bag and securely tie, box, or bundle lightweight waste and loose items prior to placing in a collection container.
(11) For developments requiring a site plan, indicate on the site plan and have approved through the city's planning review
process the location of all enclosures, gates, collection containers, approaches and means of ingress and egress from the
collection containers.
(12) For all new construction, all collection container locations shall have an approved concrete slab that meets design
specifications that are on file with the solid waste services division. If a concrete slab is not required by other City Codes, any
exceptions must be approved by the manager.
(13) Where screening or enclosure of collection containers is required by zoning or other City Code, the enclosure or
screening shall meet design specifications that are on file with the solid waste services division office.
(14) Ensure sites are free of overhead hazards to a height of twenty (20) feet.
(15) Ensure all municipal solid waste transported by the occupant is unloaded only at facilities authorized to accept the kind
of waste being transported.
(16) Unless location has been designated through the site plan process, failure to meet subsections (12)–(14) of this section
shall result in the collection container's placement at a location designated by the manager. The primary considerations in site
selection shall be the safety of the collection vehicle and the general public as well as compliance with City Code
requirements.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-13. Residential property occupant's responsibilities.
The following are the responsibilities of the occupants of residential properties. Any residential property that is occupied is evidence that
collectible solid waste is being produced and accumulated on the premises. There is a presumption that items found on a property were
deposited there by the occupant. This list shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
(1) Ensure solid waste collection containers on manual collection routes are of a durable grade of galvanized metal or other
suitable material approved by the manager, do not exceed thirty-two (32) gallons, and do not weigh more than fifty (50)
pounds when full. Collection containers shall have two (2) lifting handles on opposite sides, a tight fitting cover, and shall be
kept clean and in good repair. The collection container shall be without inside protrusions, and its contents shall discharge
freely when inverted. Containers that exceed fifty (50) pounds will not be collected.
(2) Ensure solid waste bags on manual collection routes are made of heavy multiple-ply paper or polyethylene or ethylene
copolymer resin and are designated for outdoor storage of solid waste. Bags must be securely tied or sealed to prevent the
emission of odors, be impermeable to liquids and greases, and be of sufficient thickness and strength to contain the solid waste
enclosed without tearing or ripping under normal handling. The bags shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds when full. Bags that
exceed fifty (50) pounds will not be collected.
(3) Soak ashes or charcoal with water to extinguish all live embers and allow them to cool for twenty-four (24) hours prior
to placement in collection containers.
(4) Bag and tie securely, box, or bundle loose municipal solid waste and place in the collection container with a closed lid.
Pick up small items lying loose on the ground as they will not be picked up by the solid waste division.
(5) For curb collection, place collection container within four (4) feet of the curb-line on which the residence/property is
serviced so as not to block the sidewalk, unless the manager designates a different location.
(6) For curb collection, place collection containers at the designated pickup point no sooner than 6:00 p.m. the night before
their collection day but no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of their collection. Containers must be removed from the curb by
8:00 a.m. on the day after collection.
(7) Dispose of municipal solid waste not prepared in accordance with this chapter or not permitted in residential solid waste
collection containers.
(8) Ensure bulky waste is prepared and set out for collection in accordance with this chapter.
(9) Ensure municipal solid waste transported by the occupant is unloaded only at facilities authorized to accept the kind of
waste being transported.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Secs. 27-14–27-20. Reserved.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/648
ARTICLE III. COLLECTION
Sec. 27-21. Commercial collection.
(a) Roll-off service will be provided for large volume municipal solid waste customers.
(b) Roll-off service will be provided either through stationary compactors or open top metal containers as determined by the manager.
(c) Municipal solid waste containing putrescible waste shall be collected at least once a week pursuant to state law, or more frequently
for public health concerns if designated by the administrator.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-22. Residential collection.
Residential collection shall be provided through curbside roll-out service, alley service, or manual collection as determined by the
manager.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-23. Bulky solid waste requirements.
The following requirements must be met for bulky waste collection. The solid waste services division may decline to accept items
containing other municipal solid waste, contraband, hazardous wastes or regulated items that cannot be disposed of in the landfill.
Occupants should check the solid waste service division's web site or call the solid waste services division for collection schedules.
(1) Only bulky waste generated by the occupant of the place of collection is eligible for collection.
(2) Bulky waste must be placed where designated by the administrator.
(3) Any claim of ownership to the bulky waste is relinquished when the waste is collected by the solid waste services
division.
(4) Small items lying loose on the ground shall be bagged, tied, and placed into the collection container by the occupant for
proper collection.
(5) Bulky waste shall not be commingled with yard waste or other municipal solid wastes.
(6) Doors on refrigerators and other bulky waste with affixed doors or panels shall be removed or disabled to prevent
closure before placement for collection.
(7) Uncontained bulky waste shall be limited to a total volume of less than four (4) by three (3) by eight (8) feet. It is the
responsibility of the occupant to notify the solid waste services division of excessive amounts or undue accumulations of
waste and arrange for collection. Such service shall be subject to the scheduling and availability of solid waste services
division's personnel and equipment. Rates are listed in the “schedule of rates and charges” for the solid waste services
division.
(8) Tree limbs shall be cut to a length of four (4) feet or less.
(9) Any tree trunks, tree stumps or root balls shall be free of dirt, less than four (4) feet in length, and weigh less than fifty
(50) pounds.
(10) Fencing and fence posts shall be cut into four (4) foot lengths, void of protruding nails, and neatly stacked. Concrete
bases are not handled by the solid waste services division and shall be removed by occupant.
(11) Bulky waste shall be placed so as to allow ten (10) feet of clearance from collection containers, utility meters and other
fixed obstacles.
(12) For alley collection, bulky waste must be placed in the alley in the rear of the residence where the waste was generated
so as not to block traffic in the alley.
(13) For alley collection, bulky waste shall be placed at the approved collection location no sooner than ten (10) days before
the published schedule of collection for the given area.
(14) For curb collection, bulky waste must be placed behind the curb in front of the property where the waste was generated
so as not to block any sidewalk.
(15) For curb collection, bulky waste shall be placed at the approved collection location no sooner than forty-eight (48)
hours before the published monthly schedule of collection for the given area.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/648
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Secs. 27-24, 27-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PROHIBITIONS
Sec. 27-26. Prohibited acts.
The following items, condition, or actions are hereby declared to be prohibited under this chapter and are therefore unlawful. Waste
prohibited for collection shall be disposed of directly, promptly and properly in an approved and legal location by the occupant of the
premises where such material is accumulated. Removal of bulky/uncontained items prohibited from placement in collection containers
may be provided at rates listed in the “schedule of rates and charges” for the solid waste services division. This list shall not be deemed or
construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
(1) No person other than a duly authorized employee of the city or law enforcement official acting within the official scope
of duties shall collect or remove any solid waste or recyclable material from a solid waste collection container used for
municipal solid waste or recycling collection.
(2) No person other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city shall empty city-owned solid waste or recycling
collection containers.
(3) The following items shall NOT be placed in any collection container:
a. Tires, oil, oil filters, lead acid batteries, commercial pesticides for residential use, liquid mercury as contained in
thermometers and mercury switches and any waste that is not permitted to be landfilled by the US Environmental
Protection Agency or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. These regulated items shall be disposed of at the
household hazardous waste unit in the environmental recycling center or as allowed by related programs.
b. Hazardous waste, special waste and industrial waste.
c. Medical waste not properly treated or contained.
d. Needles/sharps improperly contained that constitute a sticking hazard.
(4) The following items shall NOT be placed in residential collection containers:
a. Dead animals.
b. Major construction and demolition waste.
c. Any solid waste items likely to damage city collection equipment including but not limited to rocks, engine blocks,
steel, and lead pipes.
d. Unbagged leaves, grass clippings, shrubbery trimmings, and tree prunings.
e. Large tree stumps with root balls.
f. Tree trunks greater than six (6) inches in diameter and eighteen (18) inches in length or of a bulk weight of more
than fifty (50) pounds.
g. Any items defined as bulky waste in section 27-5.
(5) No person shall place, or permit another to place, any municipal solid waste in any solid waste collection container
unless the solid waste is from the premises served by the collection container.
(6) No person shall off-load municipal solid waste at an unauthorized location or at a facility not authorized to accept such
waste.
(7) No person shall park in such a manner that would interfere with the collection of municipal solid waste from any
collection container serviced by the solid waste services division. Blocked collection containers will not be emptied.
(8) On the day of normally scheduled municipal solid waste collection, the parking of a vehicle or trailer perpendicular or
diagonal to a curb within a cul-de-sac with roll-out collection service, shall be considered an obstruction to the removal of
solid waste from a solid waste collection container, and the collection container will not be emptied.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-27. Exceptions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/648
This section shall not prohibit any occupant from removing solid waste from the premises under their control to an approved landfill or
recycling site.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Secs. 27-28–27-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 27-31. Declared a nuisance.
Except where remedy has been specifically designated herein, violations of this chapter shall constitute a violation of chapter 19,
“nuisances and illegal dumping” and enforcement shall proceed under that chapter.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Sec. 27-32. Additional remedies.
(a) The manager may authorize discontinuance of service where any user repeatedly violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) For curb collection, if a collection container is not removed from the curb by 8:00 a.m. the day after the collection day, the
following procedure will take place.
(1) A notice describing the violation will be affixed to the collection container or left with the occupant.
(2) After the third notice within ninety (90) days, the container may be removed by the city and returned after payment of a
service fee as set in the “schedule of rates and charges” for the solid waste services division.
(Ord. No. 10-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-07)
Secs. 27-33–27-50. Reserved.
Chapter 28
SOLICITATIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL*
Sec. 28-1. Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary, protect the privacy of the citizens of the
city, and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt.
1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-2. City license officer.
For the purposes of this chapter, the city secretary shall act as the city license officer and as such shall administer the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Business day. Any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any city holiday.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Abilene or designee.
Official. City peace officers, city secretary, or city manager or designee who ministers, implements, and enforces the provisions of this
chapter.
Solicitation or solicit. The action of any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise to go in and
upon a private residence in the city, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such residence, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of services, goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or
hawking such services, goods, wares and merchandise, or to request contribution of funds or anything of value.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/648
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-4. Hours of solicitation at private residences.
Solicitation shall be unlawful at private residences between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. unless otherwise posted by the private
property owner or by someone with apparent authority to act for the owner. This provision does not apply where the person is on the
property by express, prior invitation of the owner of the property or a person residing on the premises. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A),
1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-5. Entry upon premises unlawful.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit at any time upon any private property in the city where the owner, occupant, or person
legally in charge of the premises has posted at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, the
words “no solicitation,” or words of similar import.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit at any entrance to a residence other than the front door.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Secs. 28-6–28-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERMIT
Sec. 28-11. Permit requirements and exemptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the city without first obtaining a permit issued by the city license officer, unless
otherwise exempted by state or federal law. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-12. Exhibition of permit required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to, while soliciting, fail to conspicuously display on or about their person the permit issued by
the city.
(b) “Conspicuously displayed” shall mean displayed to the front and visible to whomever the permit holder is conversing at all times
they are engaged in a permitted activity.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-13. Permits for minor solicitors.
(a) No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to engage in soliciting except as provided in this section.
(b) A permit shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company, or organization for the conduct of any solicitation activities involving
in whole or in part a sales force of one or more persons under the age of eighteen years of age.
(c) The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling all persons soliciting under the sponsor's permit.
(d) The sponsor shall provide to each individual in its sales force a badge or other easily readable form of identification that identifies
the name of the sponsor and the name of the individual. The sponsor shall require all individuals in their sales force to wear the
identification so that it is clearly visible at all times while soliciting.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-14. Application.
Applicants for permits under this chapter must file with the city license officer an application in writing on a form obtained from the
license officer and provide the following:
(1) A valid state issued driver's license or state issued photo identification.
(2) The number of the limited sales tax permit issued to the business by the state comptroller's office, if applicable.
(3) A brief description of the activity or business to be conducted.
(4) The appropriate fee.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-15. Required fee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/648
The fees and charges for permits furnished by the city shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
license officer. No application for a permit will be processed until the required fees are tendered to the city license officer. Permit fees are
nonrefundable and shall not be prorated. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-16. Exceptions to fee.
The payment of the permit fee shall not be held to be applicable to the following organizations, however, all solicitors and peddlers are
required to comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter unless otherwise exempted:
(a) Any local church or other religious group, or to ministers or agents thereof soliciting funds for the support of such
religious group;
(b) Any established society, association or corporation that is organized and operated exclusively for educational,
philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal or charitable purposes, not operated for pecuniary profit, where no part of the net earnings
inures to the benefit of any person, private shareholder, or individual, where the solicitation of such organization is:
(1) Conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without
remuneration for such solicitation; or
(2) In the form of collections or contributions at the regular exercises or services of any society, lodge, benevolent
order or fraternity or similar organization, or any branch thereof.
(c) Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural products in their natural state if raised on land owned or leased
by the vendor, or such products may be sold by any member of the owner's or lessee's household.
(d) Sales of goods, wares, and merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds of which are to be used and applied
to some charitable, religious or philanthropic purposes.
(e) Sales of goods, wares, and merchandise by any bonafide charitable, religious or philanthropic organization.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-17. Issuance.
Upon completion and presentation of the application, the city license officer shall issue a permit to the applicant within 5 business days
unless grounds for denial exist under section 28-21. (Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-18. Contents.
(a) Each permit issued under this article shall show the name of the permitted individual, business address, a description of the type of
solicitation, the date of issuance, and the expiration date of such permit.
(b) The permit shall be numbered and printed in black; except, that the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: “The
issuance of this license is not an endorsement by the City of Abilene, or any of its officers or employees, and expires ________.”
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-19. Expiration.
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire 30 days from the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-20. Transfer.
No permit issued under the provision of this article shall be transferred or assigned.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Sec. 28-21. Denial.
An application for permit may be denied to a person under this article for the following reasons.
(1) Because of a person's conviction of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to fraudulent or deceitful
conduct of a solicitor or solicitor's business or results from an assault against person.
(2) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application.
(3) The applicant is a registered sex offender.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/648
(4) The applicant has had a permit revoked for any reason within the past three years.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-22. Revocation.
(a) Permits issued under the provision of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes by any official of the city:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of a misdemeanor or any felony if the crime directly relates to the conduct of the business.
(5) Conducting the business of solicitation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
(b) Notice of revocation of a permit shall be given verbally or in writing, and specify the grounds of the revocation.
(c) When the solicitor receives notice that their permit has been revoked, they shall immediately surrender their permit to the revoking
official.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-28-19)
Sec. 28-23. Appeals.
(a) An appeal from any act of denial or revocation of any permit shall be filed with the city manager within five (5) business days from
the date of denial or revocation.
(b) Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
(c) The city manager shall issue a decision on the denial or revocation in writing within 5 business days of receipt of the appeal.
(d) The revocation or denial is not stayed pending the city manager's decision.
(e) The decision and order of the city manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 1-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Secs. 28-24–28-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PENALTY*
Sec. 28--31. Penalty.
Any person who engages in any activity specifically prohibited in this chapter, may be subject to prosecution for a class C misdemeanor
and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. No. 63-2013, pt. 2(Exh. A), 11-21-13; Ord. No. 12-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-
28-19)
Chapter 29
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 29-1. Authority to change lines, grades of streets.
The city, when putting down a permanent street pavement either by original construction or reconstruction, may change or alter the lines
and grades of such street, when in the opinion of the city engineer such change is necessary for the proper pavement or drainage of such
street, without liability on the part of the city by reason of such change.
(Code 1965, § 26-1)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/648
Sec. 29-2. Street, sidewalk, etc., contractors–Bond required.
No person shall engage in the business of construction, alteration, maintenance, repair and paving of streets, alleys and other public ways
and the construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bridges or culverts in the city until he has first filed with the building official a
surety bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), approved by the city council, payable to the city and conditioned on the
faithful performance of the rules and regulations of this Code and any other ordinances of the city and the specifications and plans of the
city engineer governing such work, and the surety on such bond shall be a company authorized to transact business in the state.
(Code 1965, § 26-2)
Sec. 29-3. Same–Insurance required.
Before any contractor shall engage in the work of constructing, altering, maintaining, repairing and paving of streets, alleys and other
public ways and constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bridges or culverts in the city he shall file with the city engineer, and
thereafter keep in full force and effect, a policy of public liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the state, which policy shall be approved by the city council and shall be performed in the county, insuring the public against any loss or
damage that may result to any person or property caused by the negligent or willful acts of such contractor or his agents or employees in
such construction or growing out of such construction. The amount of recovery in such policy of insurance shall conform to the
requirements of the state torts claim act. All policies of insurance shall contain a provision for continuing liability thereon up to the full
amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. It shall be the duty of such contractor and the insurer to give notice to the city, by
filing a written notice with the city engineer, of the expiration of such policy of insurance at least ten (10) days before the expiration
thereof.
(Code 1965, § 26-3)
Sec. 29-4. Goods, wares and merchandise on sidewalks.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any box, barrel, wood, hardware, goods, wares and merchandise or any substance or thing and
permit the same to remain on any sidewalk or store or cause to be stored or placed any box, barrel, wood, hardware, goods, wares,
merchandise or any other substance on any sidewalk; provided, that the adjacent property owner may occupy not more than one-half the
width of any sidewalk in front of his place of business for a reasonable length of time in receiving and forwarding goods, wares and
merchandise.
(Code 1965, § 26-5)
Sec. 29-5. Reserved.
Editor's note–Former section 29-5, which pertained to peddling in roadways, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 63-2013, pt. 1, adopted on November 21,
2013. Prior to its deletion, this section derived from the 1965 Code, § 26-6. Similar provisions can be found in chapter 28, article III.
Sec. 29-6. Defacing, marking, painting, etc., sidewalks, curbs, pavement, etc.
No person shall carve, mark, stain or paint with any substance any sign or advertisement on any sidewalk, pavement, gutter or curb within
the city or otherwise willfully deface or discolor the same. The word “deface” as used in this section shall apply to carving, marking or
breaking any such sidewalk, pavement, gutter or curb, or staining the same with any substance that will produce a discoloration of the
same.
This section shall not apply to the painting or marking of house numbers or street addresses upon curbs on driveway approaches so long
as the colors red or yellow are not used or the width of the area painted for each house number or street address does not exceed twentyfour
(24) inches.
(Code 1965, § 26-7; Ord. No. 29-1982, pt. 1, 3-25-82)
Sec. 29-7. Notice of defects or obstructions required prior to making claim for injuries sustained therefrom.
Any person who shall have actual knowledge of any obstruction or defect in the streets, curbs or sidewalks for a sufficient length of time
to have notified the city of such, and for the city to have removed such obstruction or repaired such defect after such notice, and who fails
to notify or cause to be notified, the city secretary in writing, of such defect or obstruction for a sufficient length of time for the city to
have removed the obstruction or repaired the defect, before any injury complained of, shall have no cause of action against the city on
account of personal injuries received by him because of such defect or obstruction. This section shall apply to actions by representatives
of beneficiaries of decedents, for injuries resulting in death of the injured person, who shall have no greater rights to sue the city than
such decedent would have had, had he lived. The provisions of this section shall not apply to idiots, lunatics, blind persons, children or
other persons who are incapable of knowing of such obstruction or defect.
(Code 1965, § 26-9)
Sec. 29-8. Placement of utility poles to conform to established lines.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/648
All posts or poles installed for the purpose of transmission or distribution of electric energy or communication in any street, alley,
sidewalk or public highway in the city shall be placed so as to conform to the lines established by the city engineer.
(Code 1965, § 26-36)
Sec. 29-9. Barricades and warning devices for post holes.
Any person digging or causing to be dug post holes under this article in any street, alley, sidewalk or public highway shall keep the same
well guarded with approved warning devices placed at such holes, or shall keep such holes securely covered.
(Code 1965, § 26-37)
Secs. 29-10–29-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OBSTRUCTIONS*
Sec. 29-21. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to or regulate signs or billboards.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 29-22. Enumeration.
The following are declared to be obstructions or traffic hazards subject to the regulations of this section:
(a) Any awning or other protrusion which hangs over or protrudes over any sidewalk or parkway in the city at a height of
less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or ground level.
(b) Any awning or other protrusion attached to the wall of any building or structure which projects over any sidewalk or
public space farther than:
(1) Four (4) feet behind the curb where the height of such awning or protrusion is less than ten (10) feet, or
(2) Two (2) feet behind the curb where the height of such awning or protrusion is ten (10) feet or more.
(c) Any bush, tree or other vegetation within the parkway which exceeds a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet above the
gutter elevation of the adjacent street or which overhangs a sidewalk, except single trunk trees which are pruned to eliminate
all leaves and branches as follows:
(1) Below seven (7) feet in height above the ground beneath the tree;
(2) Below eight (8) feet in height above a sidewalk beneath the tree; or
(3) Which would tend to obstruct the view of a traffic-control device.
(d) Any bush, tree or other vegetation which hangs over any street or alley which is not pruned as follows:
(1) To eliminate all leaves and branches below a height of thirteen and one-half (13 1/2) feet above the street or alley;
or
(2) To eliminate all leaves or branches which would tend to obstruct the view of a traffic-control device.
(Code 1965, § 26-4; Ord. No. 109-1984, pt. 1, 11-1-84)
Sec. 29-23. Notice to remove.
The director of traffic and transportation, or such other person as may be designated by the city manager, when it shall come to his
knowledge that any of the above obstructions, nuisances or traffic hazards exist shall notify the responsible person that the same is in
violation of this section and request that the same be either remedied or eliminated as deemed necessary by the notifying official. The
person so notified shall have ten (10) days in which to comply with such notice.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 29-24. Action by city upon failure to remove.
In the event that any person, for any reason, fails to comply with a notice issued under the provisions of this article within the prescribed
period, the city shall take the necessary steps to abate the condition described in such notice. Expenses incident to such action by the city,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/648
and a penalty charge as established by the city council, shall be assessed against the owners of all outstanding interests in such lot or
parcel. An itemized bill of such costs shall be mailed by the city accountant to each such owner if his address is known.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 29-25. Lien imposed, enforcement.
If the bill provided for in section 29-24 remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the date of the mailing of such bill, the city
accountant shall file a statement of such bill and the reasons therefor with the county clerk. From the date of such filing, the city shall
have a lien on the lot or parcel upon which such expenses are incurred second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The
amount of such debt shall accumulate interest at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum from the date on which payment was due. For any
such debt and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city. In such suits, the aforementioned
statement, or certified copy thereof, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the debt and all interest thereon.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 29-26. Violation deemed misdemeanor.
It shall be the duty of any person owning, leasing or occupying any lot or parcel of land in the city fronting upon a sidewalk, street or
alley to remove and prohibit any of the nuisances, obstructions or traffic hazards set out in this article, and failure to remedy, eliminate or
modify the same in accordance with the instructions of the notifying official shall be a violation of the provisions of this article and shall
be punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 29-27. Emergency situation.
If the director of traffic and transportation shall determine that any of the above obstructions, nuisances, or traffic hazards constitute an
emergency situation or immediate hazard, then the director may cause the immediate removal of said obstruction, nuisance, or traffic
hazard.
(Ord. No. 109-1984, pt. 1, 11-1-84)
Secs. 29-28–29-37. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 29-38. Duty of abutting property owner to repair and maintain sidewalks, sidewalk amenities, landscaping, driveways and
curbs.
(a) It shall be the duty of all persons owning real property within the city to keep any sidewalk, sidewalk amenities, landscaping,
driveway or curb abutting their property in good repair. Whenever a sidewalk, sidewalk amenity, landscaping, driveway or curb shall
become defective or dangerous, such owner shall reconstruct or repair the same at his expense.
(b) Each owner of real property shall keep the abutting sidewalks and sidewalk amenities free from snow, ice and other hazardous
substance.
(c) The owner of property abutting on any public street containing a sidewalk, sidewalk amenity, landscaping, driveway or curb that
has become defective and has resulted in causing damage or injury as a result of such defective or dangerous condition shall be solely
liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of such defective condition. The city shall not be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any construction made or
not made in accordance with standards or specifications of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code.
(Code 1965, § 26-10; Ord. No. 31-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-26-08)
Sec. 29-39. Notice to repair.
Notice to repair any defective or dangerous sidewalk may be given to the abutting property owner by the city engineer by personal service
or by mail to such owner's last known address. Upon the service of such notice, the owner shall comply with its terms within thirty (30)
days.
(Code 1965, § 26-10)
Sec. 29-40. Repair of sidewalks, curbs or driveway cutaways by city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/648
Should any person owning any property abutting on or adjacent to any street fail or refuse to repair any curb, driveway or sidewalk or
portions thereof in the manner required in this article, the city may proceed to repair or cause to be repaired such sidewalks, curb or
driveway cutaway, and the cost of repairing the same shall be charged against the owners of such adjacent or abutting property.
(Code 1965, § 26-11)
Sec. 29-41. City's cost declared lien.
The city's cost of work performed by it under the provisions of this article, together with legal interest and cost of collection, shall
constitute a personal claim against the abutting property owner and shall be secured by a lien on such property superior to all other liens,
claims or titles, except lawful taxes. Such lien may be enforced against such owner by suit in any court having competent jurisdiction.
(Code 1965, § 26-11)
Sec. 29-42. Applicability of article in connection with new construction.
This article, in addition to other situations set out in this article, shall apply to and govern the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks,
driveways, recess parking or curb and gutter in connection with the erection of buildings in the city.
(Code 1965, § 26-12)
Sec. 29-43. Notification of utilities prior to beginning construction work.
It shall be the duty of any owner, agent or contractor, before the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, driveway, recess
parking area or curb and gutter along and abutting on the property of such owner, or over which such agent has control, or in front of
which such contractor intends to make such improvements, to notify in writing the water and sewer superintendent of the city and the
light and gas companies of such intentions within a reasonable time before such work shall begin, in order that all water, gas and sewer
pipes and connections may be properly placed before construction is begun.
(Code 1965, § 26-16)
Sec. 29-44. Compliance with lines, grades, specifications, etc.; supervision.
All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed or repaired in the city shall be under the supervision of the city engineer and shall conform to
lines, grades and specifications furnished by the city engineer. Persons repairing or causing to be repaired such sidewalks shall comply
with all regulatory ordinances of the city governing such matters.
(Code 1965, § 26-17)
Sec. 29-45. Type material to be used for construction, etc.
Sidewalks, driveways, recess parking areas and curbs and gutters shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt. All such work shall be
inspected by the city engineer and approved by him before such work is accepted by the city.
(Code 1965, § 26-18)
Sec. 29-46. Property between sidewalk and curb to conform to established grade.
The owner of any lot or real estate of any kind within the city in front of or along which a sidewalk, driveway, recess parking area or curb
and gutter is to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall conform his property to the sidewalk grade abutting upon such property
which lies between such property line and the proper curbline in the street by cutting down or filling up the same, as may be necessary to
conform to such grade, and such owner shall pay all costs and expenses of such work.
(Code 1965, § 26-19)
Sec. 29-47. Gutters to be kept open; removal of debris, etc., upon completion of work.
Any person engaging in work under this article shall, during the time such work is being done, keep all gutters open so as not to interfere
with the drainage thereof, and shall upon the completion of such work remove all building material or other accumulation of debris on the
premises caused by such work.
(Code 1965, § 26-20)
Sec. 29-48. Installation of sidewalks required.
Installation of sidewalks shall be required relative to any new construction or substantial improvement on any lot or tract of land in
accordance with the sidewalk master plan as adopted by the city council. A final inspection or certificate of occupancy shall be withheld
until such sidewalk has been installed in conformance with city standards and policies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/648
(Ord. No. 43-1987, pt. 1, 7-9-87)
Secs. 29-49–29-54. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 29-55. Required.
No person shall open or take up any sidewalk, driveway, recess parking area or curbing without a written permit having first been
obtained by the owner, agent or contractor from the city engineer.
(Code 1965, § 26-13)
Sec. 29-56. Exception.
No permit shall be required under the provisions of this division for street paving, nor for curb and gutter work when such curb and gutter
is a part of the street paving project.
(Code 1965, § 26-13)
Sec. 29-57. Application.
Application for the permit required by the provisions of this division shall be made to the city engineer on such forms and containing such
information as he shall prescribe.
(Code 1965, § 26-14)
Sec. 29-58. Fees.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 26-15; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
Sec. 29-59. Issuance.
Permits required by the provisions of this division shall be issued on such terms and conditions as the city engineer may prescribe.
(Code 1965, § 26-14)
Secs. 29-60–29-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. UNDERGROUND ENCROACHMENTS
Sec. 29-71. Franchise–Required.
No person shall use or appropriate to his own use any area under any sidewalk, parkway or public street in the city without first having
obtained a franchise therefor and paying the fees provided in this article.
(Code 1965, § 26-21)
Sec. 29-72. Same–Application.
Any person desiring to use or appropriate to his own use for commercial or private purposes any area beneath any sidewalk, parkway or
public street shall first make application to the city council for a franchise for such use, which application shall state the nature of the use
to which such area is to be put, the location of the same, the legal description of the abutting property and a description by metes and
bounds of the public property sought to be employed, together with an accurate survey prepared by a licensed surveyor and a plat
showing the exact location of the area sought to be used with respect to existing buildings, lines, sidewalks, streets, utility lines and poles,
and all other structures pertinent to or which may be affected by the proposed excavation.
(Code 1965, § 26-22)
Sec. 29-73. Same–Fees.
For the privilege of a franchise under this article the grantee thereof shall pay to the city in advance an annual fee computed at the rate of
two cents ($0.02) per cubic foot of any public property so used. In addition the grantee shall pay in advance an annual fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for any sidewalk elevator or lift used in connection with the subsurface structure.
(Code 1965, § 26-23)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/648
Sec. 29-74. Same–Grant or denial; provisions and terms.
The city council may in its discretion deny a franchise under this article or may by ordinance grant such franchise with any modification
which may be deemed right and proper.
Such franchise ordinance shall provide that the grantee shall assume full and complete responsibility and liability for keeping the
premises in a safe condition up to the time of final completion of the construction project and approval and acceptance by the city
engineer. Such franchise shall further provide that the sub-area and the covering surface shall be kept in a safe condition throughout the
period of time covered by the franchise and that the grantee shall be liable and shall indemnify the city against liability to any person
injured or property damaged arising out of, or in any way related to the granting of such franchise.
(Code 1965, § 26-24)
Sec. 29-75. Approval of plans and specifications; filing of liability insurance policy.
After the granting of a franchise under this article no work thereunder shall be commenced and no building permit shall be issued until
the complete plans and specifications therefor have been presented to the city engineer for study. After the approval of such plans and
specifications by the city engineer, he shall so notify the applicant who shall, prior to beginning any excavation work, file in the office of
the city secretary a public liability insurance policy in any amount required by the franchise ordinance.
(Code 1965, § 26-25)
Sec. 29-76. Use of lift or elevator.
The plans and specifications of any elevator or lift used in connection with a franchise granted under this article, together with covers and
guards used in connection therewith, shall be subject to inspection and study by the city engineer and all reasonable changes ordered by
the city engineer shall be made. The operation of such lift or elevator together with all appurtenances shall be fully covered by liability
insurance throughout the period of the franchise.
(Code 1965, § 26-26)
Sec. 29-77. Defective or unsafe structures.
All property included within any franchise issued under the provisions of this article shall be subject to inspection by the agents and
employees of the city at all reasonable times, and when any such excavations or structures are found to be defective from an engineering
standpoint or structurally unsafe for any reason, such unsafe condition that be a public nuisance. When such defective structure is found
to exist, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the franchise holder who shall immediately commence the reconstruction or
repair of such structure so as to render the same safe. The failure of the franchise holder to remedy the defects pointed out by the city
engineer within a reasonable time shall operate to automatically revoke the franchise issued under the terms of this article.
(Code 1965, § 26-27)
Sec. 29-78. Barriers, etc., to be erected during construction.
It shall be the duty of the franchise holder under this article, the owner of the abutting property and the contractor, their agents and
employees, to erect suitable fences and barriers as directed by the city engineer so as to adequately protect the public and all persons
lawfully using the streets, sidewalks and parkways against injuries to their person and damage to public and private property.
(Code 1965, § 26-28)
Secs. 29-79–29-89. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STREET USE LICENSES
Sec. 29-90. Applicability and purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to provide a method to license or permit the privilege of making use of public streets, alleys, sidewalks or
other public ways which would otherwise be unlawful, and nothing in this article shall be deemed to conflict with sections 110 to 117 of
the Charter of the city requiring franchises in order to use the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways by public utilities in
order to furnish a public service which the public has a right to demand.
This article shall not apply where other provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city govern the use of streets, alleys, sidewalks
and other public ways by specific occupations.
(Code 1965, § 26-29; Ord. No. 53-1986, pt. 1, 7-24-86; Ord. No. 18-1988, pt. 1, 4-21-88)
Sec. 29-91. Required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/648
No person shall place any encroachment within any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or appropriate any portion thereof to
a private use without first obtaining a street, alley, sidewalk or public way use license from the city.
(Code 1965, § 26-30; Ord. No. 53-1986, pt. 1, 7-24-86; Ord. No. 18-1988, pt. 1, 4-21-88)
Sec. 29-92. Application.
All applications for a license to make a specific use of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways shall be made to the
director of public works. Such application shall be made on a form provided by the director of public works for that purpose. The
applicant shall state the complete purpose for making the application and all facts the director of public works deems pertinent to the
granting of such license. All information furnished by the applicant shall be correctly stated; otherwise, any license issued thereunder may
be declared void by the city manager or city council.
(Code 1965, § 26-31; Ord. No. 33-2016, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 7-28-16)
Sec. 29-93. Approval.
(a) All street, alley, sidewalk or public way license agreements prepared by the director of public works shall be submitted to the city
manager if the duration of the license is for thirty (30) days or less, and to the city council for approval if the duration of the license is for
greater than thirty (30) days.
(b) In the event the city manager denies a license application, the applicant may appeal the decision to city council by filing a written
appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) business days after the denial of the license application is mailed to the applicant or
personally delivered, whichever occurs first. If no appeal is filed within ten (10) business days, the decision of the city manager becomes
final and unappealable. The written appeal should contain all information on which the city council can make a decision. The city council
shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed with the city secretary.
(Code 1965, § 26-32; Ord. No. 33-2016, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 7-28-16)
Sec. 29-94. Contents; terms and conditions.
All street, alley, sidewalk or public way use license agreements shall state the specific nature of the use granted and the term thereof; shall
provide that the city will be held harmless and indemnified against bodily injury or property damage claims or suits arising out of or
connected with the issuance of such license; shall provide for revocation of such license upon thirty (30) days' notice, or sooner in case of
a violation of the agreement; and shall contain such other terms as may be appropriate.
(Code 1965, § 26-33)
Sec. 29-95. Application fee.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
Secs. 29-96–29-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. STREET OR ALLEY EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 29-106. Definition.
A standard trench shall be interpreted as one which does not exceed thirty (30) inches in width and which does not extend more than
fifteen (15) inches beyond the center line of the utility main, and is not lower than the utility main. Permit holders will be required to pay
the extra cost, as estimated by the street superintendent, for repairs made by the city where the width and/or length and/or depth of a
trench exceeds that of the standard trench. The permit holder will be billed for extra width and/or length and/or depth immediately upon
completion of work by the city.
(Code 1965, § 26-50)
Sec. 29-107. Waiver of standards.
The standards established in this article may be waived by the director of public works of the city only if the street or alley is in a
relatively undeveloped are area and development is not anticipated which would necessitate improvement of the street or alley within two
(2) years.
(Code 1965, § 26-51)
Sec. 29-108. Permit required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/648
Anyone desiring to make an excavation in any public right-of-way, particularly any street, alley or parkway within the city shall first
obtain a permit from the city building official.
(Code 1965, § 26-45)
Sec. 29-109. Application.
All applications for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a fee as below provided and, in all cases,
by a written description or a sketch showing the approximate location of the proposed excavation and the location of all underground
utilities in the immediate vicinity, which description or sketch shall have been verified by the city engineering department, the electric
utility company, the natural gas utility company and any other firms, parties or agencies whose approval may be reasonably required for a
particular permit by the city building official. The application shall reflect the name of the individual approving said description or
sketches, and the time and date of approval, at the foot thereof.
(Code 1965, § 26-45)
Sec. 29-110. Backfill, repair charges–Required.
The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city
secretary.
(Code 1965, § 26-46; Ord. No. 65-1986, pt. 1, 8-28-86)
Sec. 29-111. Same–Exception.
All holders of franchises for the use of streets and alleys from the city shall be exempt from the backfill and repair charges, except for
charges for work done by the city for franchise holders.
(Code 1965, § 26-46)
Sec. 29-112. Manner of work.
Excavation shall be done in a manner which disturbs the minimum area of the right-of-way. Adequate measures will be taken to insure
minimum interference with use by the public of the right-of-way and minimum damage to adjacent areas. Only those methods and
techniques which have been approved by the director of public works of the city will be used.
(Code 1965, § 26-47)
Sec. 29-113. Backfilling.
Backfilling shall be done by one or more of the following methods:
(a) Backfill with clean, dry sand or gravel. This method is preferred in most cases; however, the permittee may choose other
methods.
(b) Compacted backfill with natural material. This method requires compaction of existing soil in layers not exceeding six
(6) inches deep and with adequate moisture to compact soil to a density equivalent to adjacent undisturbed soil.
(c) Backfill compaction may be achieved by jetting. This method requires the trench area to be flooded and the soil
completely saturated to insure total consolidation and elimination of voids. Normally, this method will require a minimum of
two (2) or three (3) saturation cycles to effect adequate consolidation.
(d) Combinations of the above methods.
(e) A substitute method which has been approved in writing for a peculiar situation. Written approval of a substitute method
shall apply to a specified job only and shall not be construed as establishing a new standard method.
Regardless of method, all excavations shall be backfilled level with adjacent areas and the base material and surfacing installed must be
of at least equivalent grade and thickness to that of the adjacent area.
(Code 1965, § 26-47)
Sec. 29-114. Cleanup.
All excess material shall be removed from the right-of-way after an excavation. The backfilled area shall be smoothly and uniformly
finished to match adjacent grades. No mound or bump shall be left to offset settlement.
(Code 1965, § 26-47)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/648
Sec. 29-115. Protection of public.
The holder of a permit to open a street, alley or parkway under this article shall be responsible for properly and adequately safeguarding
the public from all hazards caused by such an opening and excess materials therefrom until such opening has been safely and
satisfactorily closed. The holder of the permit shall install and maintain at all times adequate barricades and good and sufficient warning
lights around all openings and obstructions and shall, as soon as possible and without delay, backfill the trenches and restore the surface
of the street or alley to such condition that it will be safe for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. No excess material shall be spread over the
street or alley surface adjacent to trenches. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the maintenance and safety of the backfilled
trench for a period of seventy-two (72) hours, excluding Sundays and holidays.
Where all or a part of an existing concrete sidewalk, driveway or curb and gutter has been damaged or destroyed in the course of
installing or repairing a private utility line, then the concrete surface shall be repaired and refinished by the holder of the permit as soon as
possible in such a manner as to meet the specifications of the city for such work.
(Code 1965, § 26-48)
Sec. 29-116. Work responsibilities.
(a) City to pave. The work of permanently repaving and resurfacing all excavations in paved streets or alleys under this section will be
done by the city; however, for major projects, the director of public works may authorize or require the permit holder to make such
repairs or contract this work to be done by a bonded paving contractor.
(b) Applicant may backfill and cleanup. The permit holder may elect to either accomplish all backfill, compaction, base repair and
cleanup himself or to have the city street department accomplish this work at the established rates. Permit fees will be computed on the
basis or work done by the city.
(Code 1965, § 26-49)
Sec. 29-117. Maintenance responsibility.
Permit holders shall be responsible for one year from the date of backfill for all defects in the work. Any settlement or grade changes
caused by failure to adequately compact the backfill shall be repaired by permit holder on notice from the city that failure has occurred. If
the permit holder fails to make the needed repairs within ten (10) days from notice, the city shall make such repairs; in this event, the
permit holder shall pay the repair cost upon receipt of bill from the city. Failure of the permit holder to pay any and all fees and charges
according to this section shall be cause for the city building inspection department to refuse any future permits until past due accounts are
paid.
No future charges will be made to the permit holder for failure of work originally done by city.
(Code 1965, § 26-49)
Secs. 29-118–29-128. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. HOUSE NUMBERS
Sec. 29-129. Required to be placed.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any house situated in the city to place or permit to be placed thereon in some conspicuous place on
such house an official street number, so that the number may be plainly seen and observed from the street. In case the owner is a
nonresident of the city it shall be the duty of the agent of the owner or the occupant of such house, when such agent or occupant is
notified by the building inspector, to place such official number on such house; provided, that such agent or occupant so notified shall be
allowed five (5) days' time from the date of the receipt of the notice to place such official number on such house.
(Code 1965, § 26-38)
Sec. 29-130. Numbering by city.
The city council may, if they deem it advisable, officially number the houses within the city and for such purpose may employ such
persons as they deem suitable to perform such work, and prescribe the compensation to be paid such persons. It shall be the duty of all
persons owning or occupying any house to permit such persons to freely enter thereon for the purpose of performing such work of
officially numbering any house.
(Code 1965, § 26-39)
Sec. 29-131. Charge for numbers when placed by city.
In case the city council determines to do the work of officially numbering houses in the city, the official numbers shall be furnished free
of charge, and it shall be unlawful for any person to charge any tenant, occupant or owner of any house compensation for any such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/648
official number.
(Code 1965, § 26-40)
Sec. 29-132. Numbering method generally.
All houses shall be considered officially numbered when numbered in strict accordance and compliance with the terms of this article and
in accordance with the plant delineating and prescribing the method of numbering houses adopted and on file and of record in the office
of the building official.
(Code 1965, § 26-41)
Sec. 29-133. Obtaining correct number.
It shall be the duty of the building official, upon application, to give the proper number for houses to persons requesting the same. Such
persons shall be required to state the street upon which the house to be numbered is situated and the direction and distance the same is
situated from the nearest cross street.
(Code 1965, § 26-42)
Sec. 29-134. Altering, removal, etc., of numbers placed by city.
In the event the city council shall determine to do the work of officially numbering the houses within the city, each official number shall
be placed on each house in the manner provided by this article and it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure
or remove any such number; provided, that a person shall have the right to remove such number when altering or changing the house and
then shall place such number temporarily at some other part of such house where it will show conspicuously from the street.
(Code 1965, § 26-42)
Sec. 29-135. Baselines.
The Texas and Pacific Railroad tracks shall be the base line for the purpose of numbering of houses for every street running north or south
or substantially in that course, and each street so running north or south shall, for the purpose of such numbering, have its beginning point
at the Texas and Pacific Railroad track. The numbering shall begin at such initial point with the number “100” increasing north or south
as the case may be, from such initial point to the city limits. Each street running east and west, or substantially with that course, shall have
its beginning point at the east line of the city limits. The numbering shall begin at such initial point with the number “0” increasing
westerly to the city limits.
(Code 1965, § 26-43)
Sec. 29-136. Assignment of numbers.
The odd numbers shall appear on the east side of streets running north and south, and the south side of streets running east and west. The
even numbers shall appear on the north side of streets running east and west, and on the west side of streets running north and south.
(Code 1965, § 26-43)
Sec. 29-137. Specifications for numbers.
The official number referred to in this article shall be at least three (3) inches high and composed of bright metal which will not tarnish or
corrode on account of the action of the elements (aluminum numbers are preferable); provided, that in case the city council should
determine to do the official numbering, then the official numbers shall be composed of such material and be of such size and character as
may be adopted by the city council. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any number from being painted by any person when such
character of material is used as will, in the judgment of the building official, be equal in strength, durability and service to the metal
number required. All such painted numbers shall be put in at the same time that the city council is placing the official numbers.
(Code 1965, § 26-44)
Secs. 29-138–29-148. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. TEMPORARY USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY RE CONSTRUCTION-RELATED ACTIVITY ON
ADJOINING PRIVATE PROPERTY*
Sec. 29-149. Applicability and purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to provide a method to permit the use of public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways in conjunction
with construction, alteration, renovation, demolition, repair and use of any building or structure on abutting property. (Ord. No. 86-1985,
pt. 1, 12-5-85)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/648
Sec. 29-150. Permit required.
No person shall use any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or appropriate any portion thereof in conjunction with
construction, alteration, renovation, demolition, repair and use of any building or structure on abutting property without first obtaining a
permit from the city. (Ord. No. 86-1985, pt. 1, 12-5-85)
Sec. 29-151. Application.
All applications for a permit to use the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways as a construction staging area shall be made
to the director of building inspection. Such application shall be made on a form provided by the director of building inspection for that
purpose. The applicant shall state the complete purpose for making the application and all facts the director of building inspection deems
pertinent to the granting of such permit. All information furnished by the applicant shall be correctly stated; otherwise, any permit issued
thereunder may be declared void. (Ord. No. 86-1985, pt. 1, 12-5-85)
Sec. 29-152. Fees.
Application and permit fees shall be as set by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ord. No. 86-1985, pt. 1, 12-5-
85)
Editor's note: The city council approved an oral resolution on Dec. 5, 1985, setting the above-referenced fees.
Sec. 29-153. Bond requirement.
Permit applicant (or permittee) shall prior to issuance of a permit, file with the department of building inspection a good and sufficient
surety bond issued by a corporate surety authorized by the State Board of Insurance to do business in the State of Texas in the principal
sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), made payable to the City of Abilene in guarantee of faithful performance of the conditions of
this article of the City Code. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one (1) year following the completion of the
project for which the permit will be issued. (Ord. No. 86-1985, pt. 1, 12-5-85)
Secs. 29-154–29-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE
Sec. 29-160. Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public at special events which utilize city rights-of-way by
creating a licensing process for these events.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-161. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Business day. Any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any city holiday.
City licensing department. The department of the city responsible under the special event license policy for accepting applications for a
special events license. These departments include the police department and the department of public works.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Abilene or designee.
Official. City peace officers, the director of public works or designee, or the city manager or designee who administers, implements, or
enforces the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-162. License requirements and exemptions.
(a) Any event that utilizes city rights-of-way shall comply with the licensing requirements of the special event license policy adopted
by city council and kept on file with the police department and the department of public works.
(b) This article does not apply to events which require a street use license under article V of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-163. Application.
Applicants for special event licenses under this article must file with the applicable city licensing department an application in writing on
a form obtained from the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/648
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 26-164. Required fee.
(a) The fee for a special event license shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city secretary. No
application for a license will be processed until the required fees are tendered to the city. The license fee is nonrefundable and shall not be
prorated.
(b) Expenses for any additional costs for city services necessary for the event shall be billed separately. These expenses include but are
not limited to costs for police escort, security, traffic control, refuse collection and street sweeping.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-165. Issuance.
Upon completion and presentation of the application, the city shall issue a license to the applicant within the timelines indicated in the
special event license policy.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-166. Expiration.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire at the termination of the licensed event.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-167. Transfer.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred or assigned.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-168. Denial.
An application for license may be denied to a person under this article for the following reasons.
(1) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application.
(2) An official has determined that the health, safety or welfare of the citizens would be impaired by allowing the event to
occur as requested.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-169. Revocation.
(a) Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes by any official of the city:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying out the licensed event.
(3) The applicant refuses to comply with the terms of the license.
(4) The applicant has not provided proof of insurance, if required.
(b) Notice of revocation of a license shall be given verbally or in writing, and specify the grounds of the revocation.
(c) When the applicant receives notice that their license has been revoked, they shall immediately surrender their license to the
revoking official.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-170. Appeals.
(a) An appeal from any act of denial or revocation of any license shall be filed with the city manager within five (5) business days from
the date of denial or revocation.
(b) Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/648
(c) The city manager shall issue a decision on the denial or revocation in writing within 5 business days of receipt of the appeal.
(d) The revocation or denial is not stayed pending the city manager's decision.
(e) The decision and order of the city manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Sec. 29-171. Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each
offense. Each and every hour that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 70-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-19-13)
Secs. 29-172–29-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. STREET MAINTENANCE FEE
Sec. 29-181 General regulations.
(a) Definitions.
Benefitted property, or property. A property located within the city limits that reasonably benefits from vehicular or pedestrian traffic or
use.
Category or categories. One of 63 categories, or as many categories as may be modified from time to time, recognized in the trip factor
index determined from the land uses of the nonresidential customers.
City limits. The corporate boundaries of the City of Abilene, Texas.
Municipal services statement. The monthly invoice that residences and businesses receive for services provided by the city, which may
include water and wastewater, solid waste, drainage, and other municipal services and charges.
Street maintenance fee. A fee that is established by this section and which is assessed against, and collected from, owners or occupants of
a property for the purpose of funding the planning, construction, operation, monitoring and maintaining of the transportation system of
the city.
Transportation system. The structures, traffic controls, streets and other facilities in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to
bridges, sidewalks and alleys, which are dedicated to the use of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, all of which are owned and/or controlled
by the city, and including provisions for additions, improvements and extensions to the system.
Trip factor. A principle basis of service measurement, principally derived from the average weekday trip rates calculated using the
Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual Edition 9 as modified by the city.
Trip factor index. The table of applied land uses recognized by the city for purposes of implementing the street maintenance fee.
Utility account. An account or accounts between a customer and the city for services provided by the city, which may include water and
wastewater, solid waste, drainage, street maintenance, and other municipal services and charges.
Utility customer (“customer”). The holder of a utility account or the person who is responsible for the payment of charges of a utility
account.
(b) Establishment and revision of street maintenance fee.
(1) The city has established a street maintenance fee to be paid by utility customers within the city limits. Such fee shall be
set in amounts which will provide funds to properly maintain the transportation system.
(2) Collection of the fee shall be made by a monthly charge to be added to the city municipal account statement.
(3) There is established a street maintenance fee schedule based upon the cost of properly maintaining the transportation
system as shown in subsection (p) below and which may be changed or modified as set forth in subsection (o) below.
(c) Street maintenance fund.
(1) A separate and dedicated fund shall be created effective October 1, 2018, to be known as the street maintenance fund.
All fees collected by the city for the purpose of construction and maintenance of the transportation system shall be deposited
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/648
in the street maintenance fund. It shall not be necessary or required for the expenditures from the fund to specifically relate to
any particular property from which the fees were collected.
(A) Billing will begin for commercial and residential accounts on January 1, 2019.
(2) A report of the street maintenance fund and the street maintenance fee program will be provided to the city council on an
annual basis.
(d) Street maintenance advisory and appeals board.
(1) The board shall:
(A) Advise the director of public works, as may be necessary from time to time, to identify and determine the
sequencing of street maintenance projects, and thoroughfare alignments;
(B) Recommend a list of projects for funding to the city manager for incorporation into the city's annual budget;
(C) Advise the director of public works in determining accountability criteria to measure the performance of the city's
street maintenance program;
(D) Submit an accountability report to the city council on an annual basis;
(E) In the event the city council adopts a street maintenance fee, serve as a final appeals board for any land use
category classification disputes arising from the administration of the street maintenance fee program; and
(F) Aid the director of public works in establishing new land use categories, amending land use categories, and
determining trip factors based on the ITE Trip Generation Manual 9th edition to the same.
(2) That the board shall be comprised of seven (7) voting members, who will be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
an affirmative vote of at least four members of the city council. All voting members of the board shall be residents of the city.
(3) That the board shall follow the rules of procedure adopted by the city council, as applicable, for its rules of procedure.
(4) That the director of public works for the city, shall be an ex officio, non-voting member of the board and may act in an
advisory capacity to the board.
(e) Imposition of fee. There is hereby imposed upon the utility customers within the city limits, a street maintenance fee. This fee is
deemed reasonable and necessary to pay for the operation, administration and maintenance of the transportation system.
(f) Findings.
(1) The number of motor vehicle trips generated by a benefitted property may reasonably be used to estimate the prorated
cost of the street system attributable to a benefitted property.
(2) The size and use of a benefitted property may reasonably be used to estimate the number of motor vehicles trips
generated by the property.
(3) Based on the best available data, the method of imposing the street maintenance fee reasonably prorates the cost of the
transportation system among the benefitted properties.
(4) It is reasonable and equitable to impose a set monthly fee per each residential and nonresidential benefitted property in
order to avoid a disproportionate burden on any residential or nonresidential benefitted property.
(5) If available, appraisal district property tax records may be relied upon to determine the size of nonresidential benefitted
property.
(6) It is reasonable and equitable to consider trip generation rates for nonresidential property from the Institute of
Transportation Engineers in determining the trip factor used for benefitted properties.
(g) Determination of street maintenance fee.
(1) The street maintenance fee for residential property shall be charged monthly to a utility customer within the city limits,
or to the person or entity responsible for the municipal account statement for such lot, unit, tract, or parcel used for a
residential purpose. Residential property is defined on the street maintenance fee schedule as rate codes R1, MF, LM1, and
R65.
(2) The calculation of the street maintenance fee for residential property is determined by multiplying the per month fee for
the rate code by the multiplier identified in the street maintenance fee schedule, and further defined as follows: R1, R65, and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/648
LM1 units are charged per non-irrigation meter, MF units are charged per dwelling unit.
(A) For example, a single-family residence (rate code R1) with one nonirrigation meter is charged $6.75 per month
($6.75 X 1 = $6.75).
(B) For example, a multifamily residential property (rate code MF) with 100 dwelling units is charged $600.00 per
month ($6.00 X 100 = $600.00).
(3) (A) The street maintenance fee for nonresidential property shall be charged monthly to a utility customer within
the city limits, or to the person or entity responsible for the municipal account statement for such lot, unit, tract, or parcel
used for a nonresidential purpose. The monthly fee for the nonresidential property is determined by its base trip rate
range as shown in the attached street maintenance fee schedule rate codes (C1–C6), and further defined as follows:
Rate Code Base Trip Rate Range
C1 0 to 4.99
C2 5.00 to 14.99
C3 15.00 to 49.99
C4 50.00 to 199.99
C5 200.00 to 999.99
C6 1,000.00 or greater
(B) The calculation of the base trip rate for nonresidential property is determined by identifying the appropriate land
use category on the trip factor index for the property, multiplying the trip factor for that land use category by the unit of
measure for that land use category, and dividing by two.
(C) The land use categories, trip factors, and units of measure listed on the trip factor index are based on the Institute
of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual, 9th edition, as modified by the city, and are the number of trips
anticipated to and from a benefitted property per its land use and established units, as amended for local conditions.
(D) The trip factor index shall be created by separate resolution of the city council, and may be amended or modified
as determined by the city council with or without recommendation of the street maintenance advisory and appeals board.
The current trip factor index shall be kept on file with the city secretary.
(4) The following mathematical formula shall be used to determine the base trip rating for the street maintenance fee
program:
(A) Base trip rate = (Number of units X trip factor) 2.
(B) Base trip rates are calculated to the nearest hundredths of a decimal point, and are not rounded up.
(i) For example, a 2,500 square foot general office has a trip factor of 11.03 per 1,000 square feet of building
area. In this example, the general office would have a base trip rating of 13.78. [(2,500 square feet ÷ 1,000) X 11.03
÷ 2 = 13.78]. This general office would be charged rate code C2.
(ii) For example, a gas service station, with a market has 24 fueling stations, and has a trip factor of 162.78. In
this example, the gas station would have a base trip rating of 1,953.36. [(24 X 162.78) 2 = 1953.36]. This gas
station would be charged rate code C6.
(5) Collection of the street maintenance fee contribution from McMurry University, Hardin-Simmons University, and
Abilene Christian University properties shall be charged pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding between the
universities and the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/648
(6) The street maintenance fee for a single building with a single use, and with multiple water meters, shall be calculated
and charged monthly to the utility customer for one meter only.
(A) For example, a church building, having a single use, and having multiple water meters, would be charged monthly
for one meter only.
(h) Billing and collection of fee. The fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly municipal account statement, and shall be due
upon receipt.
(i) Recovery of unpaid fee. Any fee due hereunder which shall not be paid when due may be recovered in action at law by the city. In
addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this section or this code, failure of any customer of the city utilities to pay the fees
promptly when due shall subject such customer to the discontinuance of utility services provided by the city.
(j) Request for modification or adjustment.
(1) The city manager, or his or her designee, shall consider a written request for a modification or adjustment of the
payment of a street maintenance fee only for the following reasons:
(A) The customer believes the street maintenance fee was charged in error; or
(B) The customer disputes the category of land use used in calculating the fee for the owner's benefitted property.
(2) Such written request for modification or adjustment must be received by the city manager no later than ten (10) business
days from the date of delivery of the municipal account statement which is being disputed. The city manager shall make his or
her decision based upon the information provided in the written request. The city manager may also, in his or her sole
discretion, contact the customer directly for additional information. It is the responsibility of the customer to provide such
documentation as may be necessary to prove the sufficiency of their request for an adjustment or modification.
(3) The city manager shall determine and inform the customer in writing of his or her decision within 30 days from receipt
of the written request for modification of adjustment.
(4) Appeals of requests. In matters relating to subsection (j)(1)(A) above, the decision of the city manager shall be final, and
no appeal may be taken therefrom. In matters relating to subsection (j)(1)(B) above, the customer may file a written appeal to
the street maintenance advisory and appeals board. Such written appeal must be received by the city manager no later than 10
business days from the delivery of the city manager's determination letter. The street maintenance advisory and appeals board
shall hear the appeal at a public meeting within 60 days from the date of receipt of the written appeal. The decision of the
street maintenance advisory board shall be final, and no further appeal may be taken.
(5) During all periods of the request for modification or adjustment process, including any appeal, the customer shall be
responsible for the payment of the street maintenance fee in full.
(6) A customer appealing the street maintenance fee may not receive a refund resulting from the modification or adjustment
except for a street maintenance fee billed within six months of the date of the customer's original written request for
modification or adjustment to the city manager.
(k) Disposition of fees and charges. The fees paid and collected by this section shall not be used for the general government
administrative purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government thereof.
Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the actual costs of operation, planning, engineering,
development of guidelines and controls, inspection, maintenance, repair, improvement, additions, extensions, renewal, replacement and
reconstruction of the transportation system and costs incidental thereto.
(l) General exemption. Properties owned by the United States of America, the state, an agency, or institution created by the state, or a
political subdivision of the state are exempt from the payment of the street maintenance fee.
(m) New business exemption. A property that establishes a new utility account for the purposes of starting a new business within the
city on or after January 1, 2019, is exempt from the street maintenance fee until the third anniversary of their utility start of service. This
exemption shall not be applied to the same utility account more than once. The city manager shall determine if the business constitutes a
new business. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the street maintenance advisory and appeals board.
(n) Fee reduction. Those persons who make 50% or less of the median family income as defined by the city's office of neighborhood
services are eligible to pay the reduced “LM1” rate as provided in the street maintenance fee schedule. The city manager, or his or her
designee, shall administer this application process, and such applications shall be on file with the city secretary.
(o) Periodic “sunset” review. The street maintenance advisory and appeals board shall review the street maintenance fee program as
may be requested by the city council, and shall recommend to the city council whether the street maintenance fee program should be
continued or discontinued, or if a reduction or increase in fees are necessary to properly maintain the transportation system. The city
council shall consider the recommendations of the street maintenance advisory and appeals board and shall take such actions as they
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/648
deem necessary in regard to the street maintenance fee program. Nothing herein shall limit or restrict the city council from increasing or
decreasing the street maintenance fee.
(p) Street maintenance fee schedule.
Street Maintenance Fee Schedule
Rate Code Rate Multiplier
R1 $6.75 Per nonirrigation meter
MF $6.00 Per dwelling unit
LM1 $1.75 Per nonirrigation meter
Rate Code Rate Base Trip Rate
C1 $25.00 0.00 to 4.99
C2 $35.00 5.00 to 14.99
C3 $45.00 15.00 to 49.99
C4 $55.00 50.00 to 199.99
C5 $65.00 200.00 to 999.99
C6 $75.00 1,000 or greater
(Ord. No. 35-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-18; Ord. No. 18-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-28-19)
Chapter 29.5
SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS*
Sec. 29.5-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the operation and maintenance of public and restricted access pools, spas, and
interactive water features and fountains, to minimize health and safety hazards, and to regulate the design and construction of all
swimming pools, spas, and interactive water features and fountains. The standards in these sections shall cover public and restricted
access pools, spas, and interactive water features and fountains, operated by an owner, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a
fee is charged for use, residential aboveground/in-ground swimming pools, permanently installed residential swimming pools and spas,
and residential portable spas. Except where cited otherwise, the standards shall apply to those pools/spas/interactive water features and
fountains constructed after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter applies within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/648
Sec. 29.5-2. Design and construction of residential swimming pools.
The National Spa and Pool Institute “Standard for Residential Swimming Pools,” together with a residential swimming pool design and
construction pamphlet amending and supplementing those standards, are hereby enacted and adopted by reference as the “City of Abilene
Residential Swimming Pool Design and Construction Standards.” The code and the pamphlet are on file with the building official and
city secretary.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 29.5-3. Operation, maintenance, design, and construction of public and restricted access swimming pools, spas, and
interactive water features and fountains.
Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L of the Texas Administrative Code, “Standards for Public Pools and Spas,” Chapter 265, Subchapter
M of the Texas Administrative Code, “Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains,” together with an operation, maintenance, design,
and construction of public and restricted access pools and spas pamphlet amending and supplementing the Code, are hereby enacted and
adopted by reference as the “City of Abilene Operation, Maintenance, Design and Construction of Public and Restricted Access Pools
and Spas Standards.” The code and the pamphlet are on file with the building official and city secretary.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 29.5-4. Appeal.
Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by an interpretation or decision regarding the codes and standards adopted or enacted in this
chapter may appeal such interpretation or decision. An appeal regarding design and construction of swimming pools and spas shall be to
the mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and swimming pool board of appeals, established in section 8-391 of this Code. The provisions of
Chapter 8, Article V, Division 3, regarding the procedures of the mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and swimming pool board of appeals
apply to this section. An appeal regarding the maintenance and operation of public and restricted access pools, spas and interactive water
features and fountains shall be to the public health authority and the director of planning and development services, as stated in Part I,
Article A, Section 4.4 of the Abilene Swimming Pools and Spas Code pamphlet.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 29.5-5. Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as set forth in section
1-9 of this code.
(b) Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Sec. 29.5-6. Civil remedies.
(a) The city attorney may enforce any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated under this section by injunction, declaratory relief, or
other action at law or in equity.
(b) The city attorney may initiate injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other action available in law or equity to prevent, enjoin,
abate, correct or remove the construction, use, or work done on any swimming pool or spa that is done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 43-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-28-08; Ord. No. 17-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-12)
Chapter 30
TAXATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Occupation taxes.
The tax assessor and collector of the city shall collect occupation taxes on all occupations enumerated in the occupation tax laws of the
state to the amount of half the state occupation taxes on the respective occupation enumerated in such statutes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/648
(Code 1965, § 28-1)
Sec. 30-2. Property statement, persons required to render; time for rendition.
All persons shall, on or before the first day of April of each year, furnish the tax assessor and collector a full and complete statement, list
and schedule, verified by affidavit, of all real and personal property situated in the city and all personal property located elsewhere and
subject to taxation in the city, owned, held or controlled by them or in their possession as agent, bailee, warehouseman or custodian on the
first day of January next preceding and shall, in such statement, list and schedule, state the name and address of the owner of such
property.
(Code 1965, § 28-2)
Sec. 30-3. Freeport property; ad valorem taxation continued.
Pursuant to the option given in Amendment 5 to the Texas Constitution passed on November 7, 1989, the City of Abilene elects not to
grant an exemption and will continue ad valorem taxation of freeport property situated in the city, even though such property may be
remaining in the State of Texas for less than one hundred seventy-five (175) days for the purpose of assembly, storage, manufacturing,
processing, or fabricating only.
(Ord. No. 51-1989, pt. 1, 12-21-89)
Sec. 30-4. Taxation of tangible personal property in transit.
(a) Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(1) The terms “dealer's motor vehicle inventory,” “dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory,” “dealer's heavy equipment
inventory,” and “retail manufactured housing inventory” have the meanings assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the
Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(2) The term “goods-in-transit” is defined to mean tangible personal property that:
(A) Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state;
(B) Is detained at a location in this state in which the owner of the property does not have a direct or indirect
ownership interest for assembling, storing, manufacturing, processing, or fabricating purposes by the person who
acquired or imported the property; is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than one
hundred seventy-five (175) days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this
state; and
(C) Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and
outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory.
(3) The term “location” means a physical address.
(4) The term “petroleum product” means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or
natural gas.
(b) A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of
goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section 11.253 of
the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(Ord. No. 50-2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-6-07)
Secs. 30-5–30-14. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 30-15. Municipal Hotel Occupancy Tax Law.
Chapter 351, Municipal Hotel Occupancy Taxes of the Local Taxation Act (and as may be subsequently amended) is hereby incorporated
for imposition, collection, use, and allocation of the tax imposed in section 30-16 hereof
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-16. Levy of tax.
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel or motel where the cost of occupancy is
at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day; such tax to be equal to seven (7) per cent of the consideration paid by the occupant of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/648
the sleeping room to the hotel.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-17. Collection.
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel or motel within the city shall collect the tax imposed in section 30-16
hereof, for the City of Abilene, Texas.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-18. Reports.
On the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, every person required in section 30-17 hereof to collect the tax
imposed herein shall file a report with the city showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the
amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as may be required. Such person shall pay the tax due on
such occupancies at the time of filing such report.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-19. Rules and regulations.
The city shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall
upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable them to determine the correctness of any report filed as
required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-20. Beneficiary funds.
The city may enter into contracts with agencies outside the city government to administer the funds made available by the city council.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Sec. 30-21. Penalties and refunds.
If any person, firm or corporation shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to
pay the tax as imposed herein, when said report or payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). In addition, such person who
fails to remit said tax or violates the reporting provisions imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit an additional fifteen
(15) per cent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). The city manager or his designee
may settle a claim for a tax penalty or refund on a tax imposed by this section if there are legal or other extenuating circumstances.
(Ord. No. 45-1999, pt. 1, 9-9-99)
Secs. 30-22–30-32. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD
Sec. 30-33. Exemption for seniors.
Upon compliance with all requirements of this article and all other applicable laws and ordinances, fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00)
of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes
levied by the city.
(Code 1965, § 33-1; Ord. No. 36-1990, pt. 3, 8-23-90)
Sec. 30-34. Effective date.
Such exemptions shall be effective as to residence homesteads as may qualify hereunder from and after January 1, 1973. Eligibility for
such exemption shall be determined each year as of January first of such year.
(Code 1965, § 33-2)
Sec. 30-35. Application for senior exemption.
The exemption provided for by this article shall not be allowed for the year of 1973 unless the person claiming such exemption shall file
with the city tax assessor-collector between the dates of April 16, 1973, and June 15, 1973. And all subsequent years the exemption shall
not be allowed unless the person claiming such exemption shall file with the city tax assessor-collector between January first and April
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/648
first of the year for which such exemption is claimed, documentary proof of age satisfactory to the tax assessor-collector, and a sworn
claim for such exemption describing the property for which exemption is sought on forms prescribed by the tax assessor-collector, giving
complete information as provided for by such forms. In the event of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the tax assessor-collector, late
applications may be accepted, but no later, in any event, than ten (10) days prior to time for submission of assessment rolls to the board of
equalization. After the filing of such proof of age and claim for exemption, the tax assessor-collector may, if he deems it necessary,
require further information in order to determine eligibility for such exemption, which such information shall be provided by the
applicant as a prerequisite to obtaining such exemption. Such application for exemption shall be made annually as provided for herein for
each year that such exemption is sought.
(Code 1965, § 33-3)
Sec. 30-36. Eligibility determination by tax assessor-collector.
After said application, all necessary proof and any other necessary information has been filed, the tax assessor-collector shall determine
eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the tax assessor-collector shall be final and the property in question shall be placed
on the tax rolls of the city in accordance with such determination. However, in the event the tax assessor-collector should deny such
application for exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant within ten (10) days of such determination and in any event no later than
the submission of all assessment lists to the board of equalization. However, there shall be no appeal of the tax assessor-collector's
determination.
(Code 1965, § 33-4)
Sec. 30-37. Limitations of exemption.
The exemption authorized hereby shall extend only to a residential homestead as same may be defined by the laws of the state. Such
exemption shall be allowed only if the property in question is in fact the residential homestead of the applicant and such person has
attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on January first of the taxable year in question. Exemption shall be granted if one spouse has
attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on such applicable date even though the other has not attained such age.
(Code 1965, § 33-5)
Sec. 30-38. Determinative date for exemption.
January first of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for such exemption and qualification therefor shall be
determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year in question with each
subsequent year requiring application and determination of eligibility as provided herein. There shall be no proration of the exemption
provided for in this article for any taxable year either in the event of qualification or disqualification of either any applicable person or
property for such exemption after January first of the applicable year.
(Code 1965, § 33-6)
ARTICLE IV. HISTORIC ZONE TAX REDUCTION*
Sec. 30-39. Purpose.
The historic tax reduction program is intended to encourage historic preservation within Abilene by providing a property tax reduction to
property owners with property in historic overlay zones. The program consists of two (2) major parts entitled the historic zone tax
reduction and the historic project tax reduction. The historic zone tax reduction will provide an incentive for property owners to request
historic overlay zoning and, once zoned, the zone tax reduction will compensate the property owner for the additional regulations
imposed within such zones. The historic project tax reduction will provide the property owner with an incentive to improve, rehabilitate
and maintain property within the historic zoning district.
(Ord. No. 75-1985, 10-10-85)
Sec. 30-40. Historic zone tax reduction.
The historic zone tax reduction requires no application from the property owner and shall be automatically provided when a property is
zoned historic overlay. The historic zone tax reduction shall stay in place until the city council decides to discontinue the program or the
historic tax reduction is removed from a subject property as provided under subsection (3) of this section.
(1) Council approval of historic zoning. Upon final council approval of historic zoning, the planning director shall, within
ten (10) days, notify the tax assessor. The tax assessor shall reduce the real property taxes for said zone starting on January
first of the following year and each year thereafter.
(2) Reduction methods. One of two (2) methods may be used by the tax assessor to reduce the taxes for properties within
historic overlay zones. The tax assessor shall apply the method which renders the larger tax reduction to the property owner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/648
a. The tax assessor shall provide a real property tax reduction of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for a
historic overlay zone; or
b. The tax assessor shall provide a real property tax reduction equal to twenty (20) per cent of the annual taxes from
the historic overlay zone.
c. Neither method of tax reduction shall be construed to mean a reduction per year which is greater than the annual
taxes which would normally be charged a subject historic overlay zone.
d. The tax assessor shall apply the historic tax reduction prior to any other tax reductions that the historic overlay zone
may be eligible for as described in article IV of this chapter.
(3) [Alteration or destruction of historic landmark.] If an historic landmark within a historic overlay zone is altered or
destroyed, the following shall apply:
a. If the planning director or director of community development has reason to believe that a historic landmark within
a historic overlay zone has been totally or partially demolished or has had the structural, physical, or visual integrity
adversely affected by the owner or his representative, the planning director shall immediately cause the matter to be
scheduled for the earliest possible consideration by the landmarks commission. If, after giving notice and hearing to the
owner, the landmarks commission determines that the historic landmark has been totally or partially demolished or has
had the structural, physical, or visual integrity adversely affected by the owner or his representative, the commission
shall recommend to the planning and zoning commission that either the historic overlay zoning be removed from the
property and/or the appropriate zoning violation penalties be applied, or that remedies be sought pursuant to state laws
for adversely affecting historic structures or properties. In addition, the landmarks commission may recommend
discontinuance of the historic zone tax reduction for the subject zone and other tax reduction provided in this article for
the zone. Furthermore, the landmarks commission may recommend the owner, or his heirs, assigns, or successors, be
required to pay during the forthcoming seven-year period, any taxes that may have been reduced during the previous
seven (7) years under section 30-41 of this article. Upon making such findings, the landmarks commission or its
representative shall file a written request with the tax assessor to discontinue the historic zone tax reduction on said zone
and remove the historic plaque and/or add additional taxes if applicable.
b. Where a historic landmark is totally or partially demolished or has had the structural, physical, or visual integrity
adversely affected other than by the owner or his representative, the owner shall, within thirty (30) days, request a
demolition permit when restoration is not feasible, or request a building permit to reconstruct the historic landmark in
accordance with the landmarks ordinance. The determination as to whether restoration is feasible shall be made by the
landmarks commission, as part of the certificate of appropriateness review procedure required to be followed in
obtaining a demolition or building permit. In cases where a demolition permit is issued by the city because restoration is
not feasible, the commission shall recommend to the planning and zoning commission that the historic overlay zoning be
removed. In addition, the landmarks commission shall remove all historic zone tax reductions and, any other tax
reductions described in this article and applicable to the subject zone.
(Ord. No. 75-1985, 10-10-85; Ord. No. 15-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-27-00)
Sec. 30-41. Historic project tax reduction.
The historic project tax reduction shall be made available to owners of property with [within] an historic overlay zone. Such owner shall
be considered eligible to apply to the landmarks commission for a project tax reduction.
(1) General provisions.
a. Only properties within historic overlay zones are eligible to be considered for historic project tax reduction.
b. A property owner, or his or her agent may apply for up to a fifty (50) per cent property tax reduction for property
improvements within historic overlay zones.
c. Eligible projects shall amount to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or more and may include exterior improvements
and some interior improvements limited to the frame (walls, floor and ceiling) as well as plumbing, electrical wiring, and
mechanical items (heating and air conditioning). Fixtures, decorative items, taxes and personal property shall not be eligible
for consideration. The project tax reduction shall last a period of ten (10) years and the credit shall run sequentially and not
concurrently. (see city council resolution 10-1993)
d. A property owner currently receiving a project tax reduction may apply for additional tax reduction for additional projects
which, if approved, will be credited to the owners project tax reduction account. After a current project has been reimbursed,
then tax reductions may commence on another approved project.
e. All approved project tax reductions shall run with the land and shall not be affected by changes in property ownership.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/648
f. If a project tax reduction has been approved and where the historic property within the historic overlay zone is totally or
partially demolished or has had the structural, physical, or visual integrity adversely affected by the owner or his
representative, the owner shall be required to pay during the forthcoming seven year period back taxes equal to those reduced
during the previous seven (7) years (see section 30-40(3)).
(2) Application and approval process:
a. Prior to filing an application with the planning director for a historic project tax reduction, the prospective applicant shall:
1. Certify to the planning director or his representative that the subject property is within an historic overlay zone;
2. Certify to the planning director or his representative, that the project reduction request is for a project which has
received a certificate of appropriateness. If a certificate of appropriateness has not been required, the applicant shall
submit a “project proposal” to the landmarks commission. The project proposal will enable the landmarks commission to
give preliminary approval or disapproval before the property owner invests additional time and money; and
3. Certify to the planning director or his representative that the improvement project for which the applicant wishes to
apply a tax reduction has been completed.
b. An application for a project tax reduction shall be initiated by the owner of the subject property or by his or her agent, by
completion of the appropriate application forms provided by the planning director or his representative. The application shall
include all receipts for the cost of the project as well as an affidavit affirming that all information on the application is correct
and that the receipts presented are for the cost of the project. Said application shall be received by the planning director or his
representative at least twenty (20) days prior to a public hearing by the landmarks commission.
c. No fees shall be required either upon filing of the application or upon approval or disapproval by the landmarks
commission.
d. The planning director or his representative shall prepare a report for the landmarks commission members delineating the
contents of the application, an assessment as to whether the projects was completed as put forth in the project proposal or the
certificate of appropriateness and other materials deemed useful by the commission in performing its duties.
e. The landmarks commission shall hold a public hearing on all requests for historic project tax reductions. Said hearing
shall not be scheduled until the completed application form is submitted.
Public notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing, legal description of the property and a general
description of the applicant's request for a project tax reduction. Said notice shall be posted at City Hall and published in the
official newspaper as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act.
The planning director shall be responsible for notice requirements. When the planning director has provided such notice as
required on a request for historic project tax reduction, the interest of the public will be deemed to have been attached to the
request, and the proponent may not then withdraw the request prior to the hearing.
After hearing the request, the landmarks commission may allow the withdrawal of the request upon the affirmative vote of
six (6) of its members or alternates.
f. At the public hearing, the landmarks commission shall determine, from the data submitted by the applicant and the
information provided by staff, if the completed project is substantially in compliance with the property proposal or the
certificate of appropriateness. If the commission finds that additional information relative to the pending application is
necessary for its review, the landmarks commission may postpone the public hearing on an application until such information
is provided. The landmarks commission shall have the authority to approve or disapprove an application for a project tax
reduction, or to approve a request with such conditions as the landmarks commission deems necessary to bring the project into
compliance with the approved project proposal or the certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall not approve of
requests for historic project tax reductions where the project was completed prior to the adoption of the Ordinance No. 75-
1985, where the applicant has not obtained a certificate of appropriateness, if one is required, or where the applicant has not
substantially complied with the requirements imposed on a project proposal or certificates of appropriateness.
g. Any request for historic project tax reduction that has been denied by the landmarks commission may, within ten (10)
days of said decision, be appealed to the city council. The appellant must, within the time specified, submit a written notice to
the city secretary. The planning director and the city secretary shall ensure that the proposed change is placed on the agenda of
the city council for the first reading at the earliest practical date.
If the city council shall call a public hearing to consider the appellant's request, the city secretary shall cause to be
published a public notice thereof in the official newspapers of the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
public hearing.
After such public hearing and second reading of said request, the city council may enact said ordinance as in other cases or
may decline to enact said ordinance. The action then taken by the city council shall be final.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/648
(3) Effective date. The tax assessor shall reduce taxes upon final landmarks commission approval or where the city council has
provided approval for a historic project tax reduction. Upon approval the planning director shall, within ten (10) days of said decision,
notify the tax assessor. The tax assessor shall reduce the taxes for the subject zone in accordance with the general provisions herein and as
indicted by the approved request. Such reduction of taxes shall take effect starting on January first of the following year and each year
thereafter until the tax reimbursement is complete or until the city council notifies the tax assessor to terminate the project tax reduction.
(4) Program discontinuance. Should the city council decide and discontinue the historic project tax reduction program, all project tax
reductions approved shall be permitted to continue for up to twenty (20) years. Once the council discontinues the program, the planning
director shall not accept any new applications for historic project tax reductions.
(Ord. No. 75-1985, 10-10-85; Ord. No. 15-2000, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-27-00)
Sec. 30-42. Historic tax reduction in tax increment districts.
Sections 30-40 and 30-41 within this article shall be applicable to all real property within historic overlay zones including those
properties within the Reinvestment Zone Number One City of Abilene (Tax Increment Financing District).
(Ord. No. 75-1985, 10-10-85)
Secs. 30-43–30-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. BINGO GAMES GROSS RECEIPTS TAX*
Sec. 30-51. Imposition.
There is hereby imposed a two (2) per cent gross receipts tax on the conduct of bingo games within the city as authorized by Section 3 of
Article 179d, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas.
(Ord. No. 31-1989, pt. 1, 8-10-89)
Sec. 30-52. Payment.
Such gross receipts taxes shall be due and payable by the licensee conducting bingo games to the comptroller of public accounts of Texas
as provided in Section 20 of such Article 179d.
(Ord. No. 31-1989, pt. 2, 8-10-89)
Sec. 30-53. Disposition of funds.
The funds received by the city from such gross receipts tax may be used by the city for any purpose for which the general funds of the
city may be used, as provided in Section 26 of said Article 179d.
(Ord. No. 31-1989, pt. 3, 8-10-89)
Secs. 30-54–30-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 30-61. Premises licensed or permitted to sell alcoholic beverages.
(a) Levy. There is hereby levied a fee of one-half the state fee for each permit issued for premises licensed or permitted under the
Alcoholic Beverage Code of the State of Texas located in the City of Abilene.
(b) Collection by city secretary. The city secretary is hereby authorized to collect the fee levied in subsection (a) above.
(Ord. No. 1107, Pts. 1, 2, 8-24-78)
Chapter 31
VEHICLES FOR HIRE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/648
Sec. 31-1. Statement of policy.
It is the policy of the city to promote efficient, safe, reliable, and quality ground transportation services in the city. To this end, this
chapter provides for the regulations of such services to be carried out in a manner that protects the public health and safety, promotes
public convenience, and respects free enterprise.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-2. Scope.
This chapter governs the operation of vehicles for hire in the city. It does not limit the city council's authority to grant specific operating
authority with special provisions. In the event there is a conflict with this chapter, the special provisions shall apply.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this article, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the
following meanings:
City shall mean the City of Abilene, Texas.
Courtesy vehicles shall mean a vehicle that provides a passenger ground transportation service exclusively for the clients of a sponsor of
the vehicle for no fares or compensation paid to the driver or to the sponsor and such sponsor does not engage in providing a vehicle for
hire service of any kind.
Limousine service shall mean service that is chartered or reserved by the customer well in advance of the time the service is rendered and
is on irregular routes and schedules and with a pre-arranged flat fee.
Non-motorized vehicle shall mean any vehicle that is not self-propelled.
Taxicab service shall mean service is rendered in prompt response to receipt of the request for service from the customer. Such requests
are typically received in one of the following ways:
(1) Via telephone, internet, or any other voice, data or electronic communication, in which case a dispatcher forwards the
customer's request to a taxicab driver or in which the customer contacts the driver directly.
(2) Via direct contact, in which case the customer communicates directly with the driver of a taxicab waiting at a motel,
hotel, airport, or bus terminal or similar location.
(3) Via direct contact in which case a customer hails or flags down a passing taxicab.
Vehicles for hire shall mean all vehicles, whether motorized or non-motorized which transport passengers for hire, except for those classes
of vehicles which are specifically excluded by section 31-4.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the operation of vehicles that are:
(1) Operated under state or federal authority unless subject to the city's regulatory authority;
(2) In the performance of a service involving a point of origin or destination outside the city that was authorized by a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Texas Railroad Commission, except that the director shall
prescribe routes, times, and locations for loading, unloading and stopping on public streets in the city for a ground
transportation service operated under such a certificate;
(3) Operated for a funeral home in the performance of funeral services;
(4) Provided by an employer or employee association for use in transporting employees between the employees' homes and
the employer's place of business or between work stations, with the employees reimbursing the employer or employee
association in an amount calculated only to offset the reasonable expenses of operating the vehicle;
(5) Owned and operated by the federal or state government, by a political subdivision of the state, or by a person under
contract with the city for operation of the vehicle;
(6) Used in a carpool to transport the person and others on a prearranged basis between their homes and places of
employment or places of common destination, if only a fee calculated to reasonably cover expenses is charged;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/648
(7) Used to transport children to or from school if only a fee calculated to reasonably cover expenses is charged;
(8) Owned by a nonprofit organization and carrying only passengers associated with that organization, if no compensation is
received from any other person for carrying the passengers;
(9) A courtesy vehicle, as defined in section 31-3 of this chapter, if the name of the business or sponsor of such vehicle is
permanently affixed to the outside of the vehicle;
(10) Those services provided by Abilene Transit System wherein persons are transported along regularly scheduled routes
throughout the city for loading and unloading, at frequent intermittent stops, alongside the curb or curblines of a street; and
wherein the disabled and the elderly are provided with special services.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-5. Fees.
Fees specified in this chapter shall be determined by city council from time to time and placed on file in city secretary's office. Fees for
licenses or permits issued for less than a full year shall not be prorated. Fees are not refundable in the event the license or permits are
cancelled or revoked prior to expiration. Documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a document
replacement fee.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 26-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-23-04; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-6. Application.
Every application for a license or permit under this chapter shall be in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant, and shall be filed with
the city secretary. The application shall be on a form provided by the city secretary and shall contain any information that the city
secretary considers necessary for implementation or enforcement of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-7. Term; expiration; renewal.
The term of all licenses and permits shall be for not more than one year with expiration on January 31. Renewals shall be applied for in
the same manner as specified for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of January for expiration on
January 31 of the following year.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 26-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-23-04; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-8. Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation of license or permit.
(a) If the city secretary or chief of police determines that grounds exist for the denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit
under this chapter, the licensee or permittee shall be notified of such denial, suspension, or revocation in writing by certified mail, stating
the reasons for denial, suspension or revocation, the effective date, and that the licensee or permittee has the right to appeal.
(b) The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license or permit may be appealed to the city manager by filing written notice of appeal
within ten (10) business days of receipt of the denial, suspension, or revocation with the city manager's office. The notice of appeal
should contain all information on which the city manager can make a decision.
(c) The city manager shall issue a decision on the denial, suspension or revocation in writing within five (5) business days of receipt of
the written notice of appeal.
(d) If no appeal is filed within 10 business days, the decision of the city secretary or chief of police becomes final and unappealable.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Secs. 31-9–31-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OPERATING LICENSE
Sec. 31-16. Required.
No person shall operate or dispatch or cause to be operated or dispatched a vehicle for hire without being properly licensed by the city
under procedures set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-17. Dispatch license.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/648
Any entity which receives requests for taxicab service via telephone, internet, or any other voice, data or electronic communication and
then forwards the request to a vehicle for hire must have a license to operate in the city.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-18. Exempt vehicles.
Licenses are not required for dispatch for limousine service or for non-motorized vehicles, as defined in section 31-3.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-19. Insurance–Minimum coverage.
(a) Applicants for operating or combined operating/dispatching licenses shall furnish evidence of vehicle liability insurance currently in
effect as part of their application. Evidence shall be in the form of a properly executed certificate of insurance (or a certified copy of the
insurance policy) and shall be written through an insurance company approved by the risk manager or designee.
(b) Said insurance shall clearly evidence coverage for each and every vehicle to be licensed or permitted and shall provide coverage for
personal injury and property damage and types and amounts of coverage with minimum limits set by the city council.
(c) Said policy shall include a requirement that thirty (30) days' advance written notice of cancellation or material change be provided
to the city secretary.
(d) Minimum amounts not withstanding, the city reserves the right to increase the minimum required insurance to be effective ninety
(90) days after notice is sent to the holder of a license.
(e) Minimum insurance requirements for taxicabs/limousines:
TYPE AMOUNT
Comprehensive auto (or business
auto) liability insurance covering:
(1) All owned/leased vehicles
(2) All hired vehicles
Limits of liability bodily injury:
$100,000.00 per person
$300,000.00 per occurrence
and
Property damage:
$100,000.00 per occurrence
or
$300,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence
for bodily injury and property damage
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-20. Same–Policy to comply with state standards.
Should the state board of insurance adopt changes to policies of insurance in excess of those required by these regulations, the holder of a
license shall be required, on issuance of the next policy, to comply with the newly adopted insurance standards.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/648
Sec. 31-21. Denial.
(a) Applications for license that are incomplete under this article shall be denied by the city secretary.
(b) The chief of police shall recommend disapproval of an application if the applicant's past criminal history, including known criminal
investigations, includes felony or misdemeanor charges that relates to the conduct of the operator's business or results from an assault
against person.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-22. Transfer.
Licenses shall be issued to a person, partnership or corporation and shall not be transferable or assignable.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-23. Revocation of license.
Every license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the chief of police for any of the following reasons:
(1) Because of an operator's conviction of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the conduct of an
operator's business or results from an assault against person.
(2) The license was obtained by an application of which any material fact was omitted or state falsely.
(3) The operator has persisted in permitting his vehicles, drivers, and/or dispatching operation to be operated in violation of
any law.
(4) Failed to pay ad valorem taxes to any entity on any property the applicant uses in connection with taxicab or limousine
service.
(5) The operator has failed to comply with any of the provisions hereof.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-24. Suspension of license.
(a) Every license issued under this article shall be subject to suspension by the chief of police in the event the license holder is charged
with or is the subject of any known criminal investigations of any felony or crime that relates to the business or results from an assault
against person. Said suspension may take effect at the time charges are filed under the Texas Penal Code and may remain in effect until
final disposition of the charges.
(b) Every license issued under this article shall be subject to suspension by the city secretary in the event the driver fails to comply with
the above regulations.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Secs. 31-25–31-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. VEHICLE PERMITS
Sec. 31-31. Required.
No vehicle for hire shall be operated within the city until a vehicle permit has been issued by the city secretary for such vehicle.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-32. Exempt vehicles.
Permits are not required for vehicles used for limousine service or that are non-motorized vehicles, as defined in section 31-3.
(Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-33. Vehicle requirements.
Taxis must meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Conform to all minimum safety standards as required by the State of Texas.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/648
(2) Display the city permit inside the vehicle at a place visible to the occupants.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-34. Inspection of vehicle.
No permit shall be issued or reinstated until the vehicle has an approved state vehicle inspection.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-35. Transfer; transfer fee.
Vehicle permits may be transferred from one vehicle to another only upon application to the city secretary. A non-proratable fee shall be
charged.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-36. Revocation of vehicle permit.
Every vehicle permit issued under this article shall be revoked by the city secretary if the dispatching license under which the permit was
granted has been terminated. Every vehicle permit issued under this article shall also be subject to revocation for any of the following
reasons:
(1) The permit was obtained by an application of which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely.
(2) The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or has persisted in permitting his vehicle to be
operated in violation of any law.
(3) Excessive complaints regarding the condition of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-37. Suspension of vehicle permit.
Every vehicle permit issued under this article shall be suspended by the city secretary if the vehicle has ceased to comply with the
requirements set forth inthis article.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-38. Reinstatement of suspended permit; fee.
Vehicle permits suspended because of failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be reinstated as soon as the vehicle is
brought back into compliance. Application for such reinstatement shall be made in writing to the city secretary on a city provided form.
Reinstatement requires payment of a non-prorated reinstatement fee.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 26-2004, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-23-04; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Secs. 31-39–31-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DRIVER'S PERMITS
Sec. 31-46. Required.
No person shall drive a vehicle for hire within the city unless such person has a valid driver's permit as provided for under this article.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-47. Driver's license requirements.
Applicants must possess a valid Texas driver's license.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-48. Grounds for refusal to issue.
The chief of police shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application. Recommendation for disapproval shall be made if the
applicant's past criminal history including known criminal investigations or traffic record indicates unfitness for driving a taxicab or
limousine.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/648
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-49. Display of driver's permit.
No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine within the city unless a copy of the driver's permit issued by the city is displayed at a
conspicuous place inside the vehicle in view of the passengers. The identification photo affixed to the permit by the city shall not be
removed or substituted.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-50. Revocation of driver's permit.
Every driver's permit issued under this article shall be subject to revocation by the chief of police for any of the following reasons:
(1) The permit was obtained by an application of which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely.
(2) The permit holder convicted of a felony or any crime or offense that relates to the business or results from an assault
against person.
(3) The permit holder's traffic record has, in the opinion of the chief of police, become unfit for driving a taxicab or
limousine.
(4) Alters, forges, counterfeits, or possesses an altered, forged or counterfeited driver's license, badge, sticker, emblem or
permit required by law.
(5) The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or has persisted in permitting his vehicle to be
operated in violation of the law.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-51. Suspension of driver's permit.
(a) Every driver's permit issued under this article shall be subject to suspension by the chief of police in the event the license holder is
charged with or is the subject of any known criminal investigation of any felony or crime that relates to the business or results from an
assault against person. Said suspension may take effect at the time charges are filed under the Texas Penal Code and may remain in effect
until final disposition of the charges.
(b) Every driver's permit issued under this article shall be subject to suspension by the city secretary in the event the driver fails to
comply with the above regulations.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Secs. 31-52–31-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MAXIMUM RATES AND FARES
Sec. 31-61. Generally.
All rates and fares set forth in this article shall be maximum rates which shall not be exceeded. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to prevent the charging of an amount less than the maximum.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-62. Maximum fares.
The maximum allowed fares under this section shall be updated and approved by city council through written resolution as needed. The
city secretary shall make available official copies of the maximum fare schedules.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-63. Posting of fares.
A current fare schedule shall be posted in view of the passenger at any time the taxicab is in service.
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Sec. 31-64. Limousine fare.
Fares for limousine service or non-motorized vehicles, as defined in section 31-3, are not regulated by this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/648
(Ord. No. 6-1985, pt. 2, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 77-2014, pt. 1, 12-18-14)
Chapter 32
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the word “utility” shall be construed to mean and include water, sewer and/or any other utility service
furnished by the city to consumers thereof.
Sec. 32-2. Scope of provisions.
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility
service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections, or perform any work of any kind in connection with the
furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the city council.
Sec. 32-3. Service to comply with technical provisions.
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable
technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.
Sec. 32-4. Rules, regulations.
The city council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary
for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city
and under the management of the council. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city
secretary. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
Sec. 32-5. Inspection outside city.
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps or supply or furnish water outside the city
limits until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector; provided, however, that nothing
contained in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be construed to compel the city to furnish water to consumers outside the
city or to continue such supply once begun.
(Code 1965, § 31-2)
Sec. 32-6. Right of entry.
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the
purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use.
(Code 1965, § 31-9)
Sec. 32-7. Termination of service authorized.
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the following reasons:
(a) Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law;
(b) Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service;
(c) Nonpayment of bills;
(d) Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise;
(e) Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service;
(f) Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/648
(g) Vacancy of premises.
Sec. 32-8. Liability of city for damage.
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage
system failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city.
(Code 1965, § 31-15)
Sec. 32-9. Utility service–Application required.
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the utility office. Such application
shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired.
Sec. 32-10. Same–Permit.
Approval of the application for any utility service by the utility office shall be deemed permission for such service.
Sec. 32-11. Same–Use assumed.
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall
be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the utility service.
Sec. 32-12. Not to use contrary to permit.
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any
purpose other than mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Code 1965, § 31-12)
Sec. 32-13. Damage, trespass of equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished
by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city
connected with any utility service.
(Code 1965, §§ 31-6, 31-16, 31-17)
Sec. 32-14. Temporary interruption of service.
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary
for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit.
(Code 1965, § 31-7)
Sec. 32-15. Restricting use.
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of
emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use.
Sec. 32-16. Sale of service by customer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city except only by special arrangement with
the city council.
(Code 1965, § 31-11)
Sec. 32-17. Connections to service.
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the plumbing inspector.
(Code 1965, § 31-4)
Sec. 32-18. Unlawful connections.
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior
knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/648
Sec. 32-19. Unlawful use.
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by
the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service.
Sec. 32-20. Utilities for mobile homes restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any public utility company handling gas, water or electricity to provide service to any housetrailer or mobile home
which is not lawfully situated within the limits of the city as specified in the city's zoning ordinance.
Sec. 32-21. Maintenance of system by consumer.
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other
apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service.
(Code 1965, § 31-15)
Sec. 32-22. Discontinuance of service.
The city shall give consumers of utility services at least twenty-five (25) days from the issuance date to pay such bills before terminating
or disconnecting such service under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 88-1983, pt. 1, 8-11-83)
Secs. 32-23–32-33. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 32-34. Meters.
Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by, and shall remain the property of,
the city.
(Code 1965, § 31-18)
Sec. 32-35. Metering of water used for sewer rates.
In the event that any person using the city sewer system is not a user of water supplied by the city and the water used on the premises of
such person is not measured by a water meter acceptable to the director of water utilities then such person using such sewerage system
shall install a water meter which is acceptable to the director at his own expense, so that the amount of water so used shall be metered or
otherwise measured or determined by the director. The sewer rates shall be determined by the water usage.
(Code 1965, § 24-31)
Sec. 32-36. Access to meters.
Free access to utility meters shall be granted the city at all reasonable times.
Sec. 32-37. Fees, deposits and bills.
The amounts and procedures to be followed in regard to fees, deposits, and bills shall be as set by the city council in a “Schedule of Rates
and Charges” for the water and sewer divisions and kept on file in the city secretary's office and the utility service office.
(Ord. No. 25-1982, pt. 1, 2-25-82; Ord. No. 26-1982, pt. 1, 2-25-82)
Editor's note: Ord. Nos. 25-1982 and 26-1982, both adopted Feb. 25, 1982, repealed sections of the former Code that were codified as §§ 32-37, and 32-40–32-43 of
this Code. Said repealed provisions concerned utility rates and billing and derived from Code 1965, §§ 24-33, 31-3, 31-26 and 31-27.
Ordinance 25-1982 added a new § 31-3 to the 1965 Code and Ordinance 26-1982 added a similar § 24-8 to the former Code, which sections have been codified as §
32-37 of this Code.
Sec. 32-38. Refund of deposit.
Refunds of deposits made for utility service shall be made upon the termination of such utility service only after payment of all
indebtedness to the city for such utility service. Application of the deposit may be made in partial or total settlement of accounts when the
supply is cut off for nonpayment of the bill, or for any infraction or violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city relative to
utility services offered by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/648
Editor's note: The user's attention is directed to § 32-37 of this Code, which section derived from Ordinance 25-1982, pt. 1 and Ordinance 26-1982, pt. 1, both
adopted Feb. 25, 1982. Upon instruction from the city attorney's office, §§ 32-38, 32-39, 32-44 and 32-45 have not been deleted.
Sec. 32-39. Determination of charges.
The rates and charges for the consumption of utility services furnished by the city, as well as the charges and fees for connection thereto,
shall be as determined by the city council from time to time and on file in the office of the city secretary.
Note: See the editor's note following § 32-38.
Secs. 32-40–32-43. Reserved.
Note: See the editor's note following § 32-37.
Sec. 32-44. Voluntary discontinuance of service.
Consumers wishing to discontinue the use of any utility service shall give written notice thereof at the city hall. Failure to do so shall
render them liable for the payment of all bills until such notice has been given.
Note: See the editor's note following § 32-38.
Sec. 32-45. Manner of billing.
All rates and charges for utility services shall be billed on one bill. Payment of the amount due on such bill shall be in full for the total
amount billed.
(Code 1965, § 24-32)
Note: See the editor's note following § 32-38.
Secs. 32-46–32-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. INDUSTRIAL WASTES*
Sec. 32-57. General provisions.
(a) Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of
Abilene and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code §
1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly
owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned
treatment works;
(3) To protect publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the courts of
their employment and to protect the general public;
(4) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly
owned treatment works; and
(6) To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
(b) Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel.
(c) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/648
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, oil, and grease
gpd gallons per day
L liter
mg milligrams
mg/l milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
QA/QC Quality assurance/quality control
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
TOC Total organic carbon
TPH Total petroleum hydrocarbons
TSS Total suspended solids
TWC Texas Water Commission
U.S.C. United States Code
(d) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated.
Abnormal industrial waste. Any industrial waste having a pollutant content in excess of that found in normal waste, but which is
otherwise acceptable to a sanitary sewer under the terms of this article.
Act or “the Act.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
Approval authority. The regional administrator of EPA Region 6 or, upon approval of a State pretreatment program within a delegated
Texas NPDES permit program, the Director of the Texas Water Commission (TWC).
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred
fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00)
(in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures;
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
(4) The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the director.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/648
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S.
EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
City. The City of Abilene or the City Council of Abilene.
Daily average limit. The highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
Daily maximum limit. The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged during a calendar day or any
twenty-four (24) hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling. For pollutants with limitations
expressed in units of mass, it is calculated as the total mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For pollutants with limitations
expressed in other units of measurement, it is calculated as the average measurement of the pollutant over the day.
Director. The Director of the City of Abilene Water Utilities Department, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Domestic waste (or domestic wastewater). Waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water, and industrial waste.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water
management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a
period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
Hazardous waste. Any substance which, if disposed of otherwise than by discharge into the POTW, would be identified as a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Hold-haul tank. A storage tank installed by a user to hold industrial waste, the contents of which are prohibited from being discharged to
the sanitary sewer and must be hauled to an approved disposal site.
Industrial user or user. Any person who discharges industrial waste into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), any other source
of “indirect discharge” as defined herein, and any waste hauler discharging waste or wastewater into the POTW.
Industrial waste. Water-borne solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, or food-processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource including oil or gas,
or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater. (The term is generally synonymous with “nondomestic wastewater” or
“nondomestic waste.”)
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at
any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including
Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; [and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act].
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act
which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
a. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/648
b. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to
which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above
but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be
used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this paragraph.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, pollutant, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
Normal waste. Waste which, when analyzed, indicates that:
a. The concentration of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in the waste will not exceed two hundred (200) milligrams per
liter (mg/l) average over any twenty-four-hour period; and
b. The concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) in the waste will not exceed two hundred (200) milligrams per liter
(mg/l) average over any twenty-four-hour period; and,
c. The concentration of total organic carbon (TOC) in the waste will not exceed two hundred (200) milligrams per liter
(mg/l) average over any twenty-four-period; and
d. The concentration of free or emulsified animal oil, vegetable oil or grease (FOG) will not exceed one hundred (100) mg/l;
and
e. The concentration of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) will not exceed twenty (20) mg/l; and
f. The quantity of other pollutants shall be those levels determined in the latest domestic waste survey.
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state,
and local governmental entities.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion activity as measured and calculated in accordance with approved methods.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater [i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical
oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor].
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/648
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to
40 CFR 403.5.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section 32-58 of this article.
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A “treatment works,” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned
by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries wastewater to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.)
Shall is a mandatory statement; May is a permissive statement.
Significant industrial user.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
a. Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
b. Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) per cent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic
or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
c. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may at any time, on his own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a user [and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)]
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
Similar installation. Gasoline dispensing facilities which furnish equipment for or have designated areas for any of the following types of
vehicle maintenance service: oil changes, lubrication, mechanical repair, or car wash.
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
section 32-58 of this article.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
State. The State of Texas.
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
Surcharge. The additional wastewater charge levied against any person for discharging abnormal industrial waste into the POTW.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOC (total organic carbon). The measure of organic carbon present in water, wastewater, industrial waste or other liquid as determined
by standard laboratory procedure as specified in 40 CFR Part 136, or as approved by EPA, expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
Treatment plant effluent. The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United States.
User. Any person who discharges industrial waste into the POTW, any other source of “indirect discharge” as defined herein, and any
waste hauler discharging waste or wastewater into the POTW.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/648
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater discharge permit (or permit). A permit to discharge pollutants, waste, or wastewater into the POTW that is issued to
significant industrial users, waste haulers, and other users as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage
and industrial waste.
Waste hauler. Any person who transports industrial waste or wastewater, chemically-treated human waste, septic tank waste and/or trap
waste.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-58. General sewer use requirements.
(a) Prohibited discharge standards.
(1) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
a. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a
closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
b. Wastewater having a pH less than five and five-tenths (5.5) or more than eleven (11), or otherwise causing corrosive
structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
c. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in
interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
d. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the
POTW;
e. Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed 104°F (40°C);
f. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through;
g. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems;
h. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director in accordance with section 32-
59(d) of this article;
i. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or
repair;
j. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby
violating the city's NPDES permit;
k. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
l. Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/648
m. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
n. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
o. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that
they could be discharged to the POTW.
(b) Federal categorical pretreatment standards. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405–471 are hereby incorporated.
(c) State pretreatment standards. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent
than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article.
(d) Local limits.
(1) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits.
0.80 mg/L arsenic
10.0 mg/L barium
1.00 mg/L beryllium
0.50 mg/L cadmium
0.50 mg/L chromium
1.10 mg/L copper
0.50 mg/L cyanide
0.80 mg/L lead
8.00 mg/L manganese
0.02 mg/L mercury
0.70 mg/L nickel
0.70 mg/L selenium
0.20 mg/L silver
1.80 mg/L zinc
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in
place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
(2) No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW wastewater containing any of the following amounts or
levels of pollutants or substances:
a. Total suspended solids (TSS) in excess of twenty-five hundred (2,500) lbs. per day.
b. True color which passes through the POTW greater than forty (40) color units.
c. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than two thousand (2,000) lbs. per day, or total organic carbon (TOC)
greater than two thousand (2,000) lbs. per day, or substances causing a chlorine demand greater than the oxygen demand.
d. Free or emulsified animal or vegetable oil or grease (FOG) exceeding eight hundred thirty-four (834) lbs. per day.
e. Total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) exceeding one hundred sixty-seven (167) lbs. per day.
(3) In no case shall a discharge into the POTW have a flow rate and/or concentration of pollutants which exceeds more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour flow and/or concentration in a one-hour period.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/648
(e) City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
(f) Special agreement. The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they
may discharge to the POTW. A user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. A
user also may request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority. Such a request will be approved
only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
establishing that categorical pretreatment standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
(g) Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-59. Pretreatment of wastewater.
(a) Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve
compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 32-58(a) of this article within
the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall
be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such
plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the director under the provisions of this article.
(b) Grease, oil and sand traps, catch basins, interceptors or hold-haul tanks; additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Grease, oil and sand traps, catch basins, interceptors or hold-haul tanks shall be provided for the proper handling of
waste containing grease in excessive amounts, sand and other prohibited materials; however, interceptors, traps and catch
basins are not required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors, traps and catch basins shall meet the city
plumbing code as filed in the code administration. All fixtures draining to interceptors, traps and/or catch basins shall be rated
as specified in the City of Abilene Plumbing Code. The code may be revised from time to time as necessary. Hold-haul tanks
shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer.
(a) All interceptors, traps and catch basins shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. They shall be of substantial construction and equipped with easily removable covers or grates. Grease and oil
interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature.
(b) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand traps and/or interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant at
his/her own expense and in continuously efficient operation.
(c) A facility which generates liquid waste shall have all traps serviced by a licensed transporter at a frequency which
ensures the elimination of drain blockages, overflows and emissions of concentrations of contaminates which exceed
discharge limits. The director may also require traps to be serviced on a single event basis or schedule basis if the
director deems it necessary for proper operation of trap.
(d) Materials removed from these facilities shall be either utilized by industry or disposed of at approved locations.
The owner(s) shall verify the accuracy of the trip ticket from the transporter and maintain a copy of all trip tickets for a
period of five (5) years at the site of generation, unless otherwise approved by the city. The director may inspect and
copy these records at any time.
(2) A generator of liquid waste shall maintain sanitary conditions, free of litter and odors. They shall also immediately
report spills and accidents involving liquid waste to the director. Spills shall be cleaned up immediately and all unsanitary
conditions abated, and have materials used for abatement, such as absorbent materials, disposed of by approved means in a
timely manner.
(3) Use of hot water, enzymes, chemicals, or other agents or devices for the purpose of causing the oil, grease, or sand to
pass through the trap, interceptor, or any other such facility provided is prohibited.
(4) Carwash facilities, service stations and similar installations. All wash facilities shall be protected from rain and runoff.
a. Existing installations. Those facilities in operation as of September 1983, having drainage from those areas
protected from the rain and runoff and provided with grease, oil, and sand traps as specified in section 32-59(b)(1).
above, and which are in use, shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/648
b. New installations. Facilities constructed after September 1983 shall be provided with grease, oil, and sand
traps as specified in section 32-59(b)(1) above with discharge into the sanitary sewer.
(5) Machine shop, garages, special manufacturing facilities. Drainage from the work area of machine shops or of any
industry that manufactures, rebuilds or overhauls motors, engines, transmissions, hydraulic systems or similar machinery may
be discharged to the sanitary sewer only if the effluent can meet all the requirements of this section.
(6) Steam cleaning and chemical cleaning facilities. Drainage from steam cleaning and/or chemical cleaning facilities shall
not be discharged to the sanitary sewer unless a facility or process is provided that will consistently and constantly produce an
effluent containing no hazardous waste or other pollutant that will cause pass through or interference.
(7) Any sewer line stoppage, damage or restriction of flow caused by an illegal discharge shall be considered a violation of
this section and the person or persons responsible will be held liable.
(8) Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge,
separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this section.
(9) The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued solely for flow equalization.
(10) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved
combustible gas detection meter.
(c) Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two (2) years the director shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 32-62(f) of
this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not
limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic
organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(d) Hauled waste and wastewater.
(1) No waste hauler may discharge any industrial waste or wastewater, septic tank waste, chemically-treated human waste,
and/or any trap waste into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director. The director
may prohibit the discharge of any such hauled industrial waste. The Director also may issue wastewater discharge permits to
any generators of hauled industrial waste discharged. The discharge of hauled waste is subject to all other requirements of this
section.
a. Trip tickets. Persons who collect and transport waste subject to control under state rule 30 TAC 312.145 shall
maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records will be in the form of a trip ticket and shall
include:
Name, address, telephone, and Texas Commission registration number of transporter;
Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected;
Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;
Date and place where the waste was deposited;
Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was
deposited; and;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/648
Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste
received;
The volume of the grease and grit trap or the septic tank.
b. Records and reporting of trip tickets shall be maintained as follows:
One part of the trip ticket shall have the generator and transporter information completed and given to the generator at
the time of waste pickup;
The remaining parts of the trip ticket shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the
appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket;
One part of the trip ticket shall go to the receiving facility;
One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all trip tickets showing the collection and disposition of
waste;
One copy of the trip ticket shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within fifteen
(15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility;
Copies of trip tickets shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by city or be submitted to the
city upon request.
(2) Waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
The director may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
(3) Industrial waste haulers who discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW must provide a waste-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit
number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall
identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
The director may require such waste-tracking forms to be provided by haulers of non-industrial trap waste, septic tank waste,
or chemically treated human waste that is discharged into the POTW.
(4) Any person hauling industrial waste or wastewater, septic tank waste, chemically-treated human waste, and/or trap waste
generated within the Abilene city limits that is not discharged into the POTW must provide written notice of such waste
hauling to the director specifying, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler and the location at which the waste
is disposed of. The director may prohibit disposal within the city of any such hauled waste.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-60. Wastewater discharge permit application.
(a) Wastewater survey. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater by completing a wastewater survey within the time specified by the director. The director is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for
terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this article.
(b) Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) No significant industrial user or waste hauler shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit from the director.
(2) The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article
and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 32-66 through 32-68 of this article.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(c) Wastewater discharge permitting; existing permits. Permits in force at the time of this ordinance passage shall expire at the date
specified by the permit.
(d) Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article without a permit and who wishes to continue such
discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/648
accordance with section 32-60(f) of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred eighty
(180) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director.
(e) Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 32-60(f) of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) days
prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(f) Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by section 32-62(2) of this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances
by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(g) Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(h) Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-61. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
(a) Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
(5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the
discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(b) Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following conditions:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in
accordance with section 32-61(e) of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
c. Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/648
d. Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law; and
e. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and
any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state, or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance
with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(c) Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The director shall provide notice to the user of the issuance, modification, or denial of a
wastewater discharge permit. Any affected person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of an issued or
modified wastewater discharge permit, or the denial of a permit, within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance, modification, or denial.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for
this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. Any reasons presented
against a permit denial must be fully explained.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal
unless the director expressly so states.
(4) The director shall respond in writing to any petition for reconsideration within sixty (60) days. In his response, the
director shall indicate his decision whether to affirm or modify the terms of any permit issued or modified, or whether upon
reconsideration to deny the permit. If the permit was initially denied, the director shall indicate his decision whether to affirm
the initial denial or to vacate the initial denial and issue the permit upon specified terms. The director's action upon any
petition for reconsideration shall be considered final for purposes of any judicial review.
(5) If the director fails to act on any petition for reconsideration within sixty (60) days, the petition for reconsideration shall
be deemed to be denied. Such deemed denial shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(6) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by
filing a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction within the appropriate statute of limitations.
(d) Wastewater discharge permit modification. The director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but
not limited to, the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving
waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(e) Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer.
The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/648
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility
transfer.
(f) Wastewater discharge permit revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 32-62(e) of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
A user will be notified of any proposed permit revocation and offered an opportunity to show cause under section 32-66(c)
of this article why the proposed revocation should not occur.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to
that user.
(g) Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 32-60(f) of this article, a minimum of ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(h) Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(1) If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city
council shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
(2) Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (1), above, the director shall request the following information
from the contributing municipality:
a. A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
b. An inventory of all industrial users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW;
and
c. Such other information as the director may deem necessary.
(3) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (1) above, shall contain the following conditions:
a. A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this
article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 32-58(d) of this article. The requirement
shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance
or local limits;
b. A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual
basis;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/648
c. A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit
issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these
activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the director;
d. A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the director with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
e. Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it
discharges to the POTW;
f. Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
g. A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director;
and
h. A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-62. Reporting requirements.
(a) Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either one hundred and eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the
final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4) (whichever is later) existing categorical
users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the director a report which
contains the information listed in paragraph (2), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall be required to submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new source
shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
a. Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
b. Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
c. Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
d. Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day,
to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestreams
formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
e. Measurement of pollutants.
1. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
2. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by
the standard or by the director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum, and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section
32-62(j) of this article.
3. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 32-62(k) of this article.
f. Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
g. Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/648
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 32-62(b) of this
article.
h. Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section
32-60(g) of this article.
(b) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 32-
62(a)(2)(g) of this article:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine
operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress,
the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and,
(4) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director.
(c) Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a
report containing the information described in section 32-62(a)(2)d–f of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-60(g) of this article.
(d) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in
July and January), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All period
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 32-60(g) of this article.
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to
keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
director, using the procedures prescribed in section 32-62(j) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(e) Report of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, decrease the quality, or increase the volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the
change.
(1) The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 32-60(f) of this article.
(2) The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 32-60(h) of this article or modify an existing
wastewater discharge permit under section 32-61(8) of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty-five (25)
per cent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
(f) Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume (if known) and corrective actions taken by the user.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/648
(2) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user
of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article.
(3) Failure to notify the director of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(4) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause
such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(g) Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to
the director as the director may require.
(h) Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
(i) Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management
division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW,
the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of
such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later
than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted
under section 32-62(e) of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported
by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 32-62(a), (c) and (d)
of this article.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge
no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous
waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste
management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
(5) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article,
a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(j) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge
permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the director.
(k) Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in section (2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time
proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/648
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(3) All samples collected for analysis shall be accompanied by a properly completed chain of custody form.
(l) Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(m) Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of
information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed;
who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; the results of such analyses; and all QA/QC data required by
permit. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
the director.
(n) Fraud and false statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained by local, state, or federal law
shall be subject to:
(1) The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 regarding fraud or false statements;
(2) The provisions of 309 (c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representations, or certifications; and
(3) The provisions in section 309 (c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate officers.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-63. Compliance monitoring.
(a) Right of entry, inspection and sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the
user is complying with all requirements of this article, and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. The owners and
occupants of premises where industrial waste is created or discharged into a sanitary sewer shall allow the director, his inspectors, agents,
and representatives ready access at any time necessary to all parts of such premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, characterizing
the waste, setting up and using monitoring equipment, inspecting and copying records, and the performance of any of their duties; and the
failure or refusal of such owners or occupants to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for the disconnection of water or sewer
service or both.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(2) The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
(3) The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow shall be calibrated yearly to ensure their accuracy. Instruments used to measure quality shall
be calibrated as per accepted EPA QA/QC protocol.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
(6) Determining the character and concentration of industrial waste. The industrial waste discharged or deposited into a
sanitary sewer shall be subject to inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the director, but at least
annually. In determining the surcharge to be made, samples shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the
character and concentration of the waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination and
analysis of the samples shall be in accordance with the techniques and procedures required by section 32-62(j) of this article.
The sampling schedule for determining the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be made by the director at
such times and on such basis as he may reasonably establish. Should the owner or occupant discharging industrial waste into a
sanitary sewer desire that a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that
scheduled by the director, such special determination may be made by the director at the expense of the owner or occupant
discharging the waste.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/648
(b) Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part
of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-64. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit application, wastewater discharge permits,
and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any
claim of confidentiality must be made at the time of submittal by stamping the words “Confidential Business Information” on each page
containing such information. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction. (Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-65. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of the users which, during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant
noncompliance shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) per cent or more of
wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) per cent or more of
wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of
the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and
1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports,
reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-66. Administrative enforcement remedies.
(a) Notification of violation. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon
that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. If the
user denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such
denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/648
section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
(b) Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect
as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 32-66(d) and (e) of this article and shall be judicially enforceable.
(c) Show cause hearing. The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director
and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(d) Compliance orders. When the director finds a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time limit. If the user does not come into
compliance within the specified time limit, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard
or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of
a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(e) Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past
violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
(f) Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after any reasonable notice to the user that is
practical under the circumstances, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event
of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings in section 32-66(g) of this article are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any termination hearing under sections 32-66(c) or (g) of this
article.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(g) Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 32-61(f) of this article, any user who violates the following
conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/648
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to
discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 32-58 of this article.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 32-66(c)
of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-67. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(a) Injunctive relief. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition any court of
competent jurisdiction through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains
or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities
of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the
user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a user.
(b) Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard to requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(2) The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, as well as civil
penalties, in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit
gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as
justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(c) Criminal prosecution.
(1) A user who has willfully or negligently violated any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day.
(2) A user who has willfully or negligently introduced any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or
property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) per day of offending discharge. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal
injury or property damage available under state law.
(3) A user who knowingly made any false statement, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report,
plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or who falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
violation, per day.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. The director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-68. Supplemental enforcement action.
(a) Performance bonds. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/648
standard or requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by
the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(b) Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(c) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director.
Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code (Chapter 19) governing such nuisances,
including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-69. Affirmative defenses.
(a) Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this section,
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section.
(3) a. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
b. A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also
be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain
a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass
has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(4) a. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
3. The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this section.
b. The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (4)a. of this section.
(b) Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 32-51(a)(1) of this article or the specific prohibitions in sections 32-51(a)(2)c–g
and 32-58(a)(2)i–g through (15) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and
during, the pass through or interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in
compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/648
(c) Act of God. In an action brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a
violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under this ordinance was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other
catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 36-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-03)
Sec. 32-70. Other requirements.
(a) Other sections applicable. Other sections of the City Code dealing with cross connections, items pertaining to safeguarding the
water supply, waste traps, and items safeguarding the sanitary system remain applicable.
(b) Compliance with this article does not exempt or excuse a person from complying with provisions of the Texas Water Quality Act
and its amendments, the Clean Water Act and its amendments, or the requirements of any applicable waste discharge permit, order, rule
or regulation issued by the Texas Water Commission and/or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) No section or clause in this article shall exclude any agreement between the director and any person to discharge wastewater, which
complies with the objectives of this article, for treatment by the city. Said agreements shall provide for reimbursement to the city for any
expenses incurred in the treatment and disposal of such wastewater.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Sec. 32-71. Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Pretreatment charges and fees. The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's
pretreatment program which may include:
(1) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's
discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
(3) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4) Fees for filing appeals; and
(5) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city.
(b) Abnormal waste discharge requirements. Persons generating abnormal industrial waste may discharge the waste into the sanitary
sewer provided:
(1) The waste will not cause interference; and
(2) The waste will not endanger or be harmful to the operating personnel of the sewer system; and
(3) The waste will not cause damage to the collection system; and
(4) The waste will not impair the treatment processes; and
(5) The waste will not affect sludge quality and/or require modifications in sludge disposal practices; and
(6) The waste will not have an effect on receiving water quality; and
(7) The discharge is in compliance with all limitations and requirements in section 32-58 of this article; and
(8) The waste shall be assessed a surcharge for any abnormal levels of BOD or TOC, TSS and FOG or TPH. There shall be
one surcharge rate for BOD or TOC and FOG or TPH and a separate rate for TSS; and
(9) All required permits are in force and approval in writing has been given by the director for any waivers or special
agreements.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
(c) Computation of surcharges.
(1) Computation of the surcharge for the abnormal industrial waste shall be based on the following formulas:
S = V (8.34) [X (BOD/TOC-200) + Y (TSS-200) + Z (FOG-100) + Z (TPH-20)]
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/648
S = Surcharge in dollars that will appear on the customer's monthly bill
V = Volume of wastewater discharge from user, in millions of gallons. This volume may be calculated from discharge
meter or by a percentage of water consumption, as determined by the director
8.34 = Pounds per gallon of water
X = Unit charge in dollars per pound of BOD or TOC
BOD = BOD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
TOC = Total organic carbon strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
200 = Normal BOD/TOC strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
Y = Unit charge in dollars per pound for TSS
TSS = Total suspended solids concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
200 = Normal TSS concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
Z = Unit charge in dollars per pound for FOG and TPH
FOG = Fats, oil, and grease concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
TPH = Total petroleum hydrocarbons in mg/l
100 = Normal FOG concentration in mg/l
20 = Normal TPH concentration in mg/l
X, Y, and Z values shall be set by the city council from time to time.
(2) If the strength or concentration for BOD, TOC, TSS, FOG or TPH is less than the normal strength for that category,
there shall be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit given to the total surcharge if the strength or
concentration of all three (3) categories is less than the normal. Surcharges payable under this paragraph shall become due
monthly after the effective date of the surcharge.
(3) All BOD, TOC, FOG, TPH and TSS values in determining the surcharge shall be re-evaluated and adjusted to reflect
any changes in wastewater characteristics as sampling results deem it necessary.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
(d) Governmental functions. The inspectors, agents, and representatives of the city charged with the enforcement of this article shall be
deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the city, the director, nor the individual
inspector, agent or representative shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been
caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function.
(Ord. No. 36-1992, pt. 1, 9-24-92)
Secs. 32-72–32-94. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CREEKS AND WATERWAYS
Sec. 32-95. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to those parcels of property which extend into the channels of Big Elm, Little Elm, Catclaw,
Buttonwillow, Lytle or Rainey Creeks, or their tributaries, and that area within fifty (50) feet of each side of the center line of any of the
above named creeks.
(Code 1965, § 31-31)
Sec. 32-96. Duty to clear, maintain channels.
Each owner of property within this city shall clear that portion of his property coming under the provisions of this article of all growths of
trees, brush and weeds which materially obstruct or divert the flow of water in the creek channels, and shall maintain his property in such
cleared condition.
(Code 1965, § 31-31)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/648
Sec. 32-97. Exception.
In the event the property owner, or his predecessor in title, of property coming under the provisions of this article has granted the city a
drainage maintenance easement in the channel of a creek, such owner shall not be required to clear the trees, brush or weeds within any
such easement.
(Code 1965, § 31-31)
Sec. 32-98. Failure of owner, city may act.
In the event of failure or refusal by a property owner to remove the growth of trees, brush and weeds which materially obstruct or divert
the flow of water from the channel of a creek, the city is authorized to remove and clear such obstructions and the reasonable expense of
such clearing shall be charged against the abutting properties respectively.
(Code 1965, § 31-31)
Sec. 32-99. Recovery of city's expenses.
The city attorney is authorized to proceed to collect the expenses of the city incurred under the provisions of this article and to affix them
as a lien against the property affected in the manner and mode provided by law.
(Code 1965, § 31-31)
Sec. 32-100. Right of entry to inspect.
The city and its agents and employees shall have the right of access to inspect, within the city, the creek channels coming under the
provisions of this article. No owner of property abutting such creeks, after being given reasonable notice, shall refuse an employee or
agent of the city, in the discharge of his official duties, access to inspect the channels of such creeks.
(Code 1965, § 31-32)
Secs. 32-101–32-111. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. WATER, SEWER CONNECTIONS, EXTENSIONS AND TAPS*
Sec. 32-112. Intent and purpose of article.
(a) The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for connection to water mains and sanitary sewers, based on
the proportionate cost of extending water and sewer service on a front-foot basis. This article is also intended to set forth procedures for
extending mains and sewers to property within corporate boundaries.
(b) No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-113. Connections to water and sewer mains.
(a) When a person owning a duly platted parcel of land, or unplatted as provided for by farmland exception provisions, requests
connection of such land to water and/or sanitary sewer services owned by the city, there shall be a service charge due on all such property
to which lines are connected. This charge shall also include all costs necessary to connect mains or sewers which lie across streets
bordering property to which connection is proposed. This charge shall be known as the pro rata charge. It shall represent a portion of the
costs of providing water or sewer facilities to serve the property on which the pro rata is paid. It shall be payable before service is
provided. Application for connection shall be made with the director of water utilities.
(b) The fees and charges for services furnished by the city, shall be determined from time to time and placed on file in the office of the
city secretary.
(1) At such time the average cost of main construction exceeds the above rates, the city council may revise said rates based
upon the recommendation of the director of water utilities.
(2) There shall be a separate charge for tapping mains to make a connection and setting meters.
(3) The basis for pro rata charges is as follows:
a. The pro rata charge is based on the entire front-foot length of the property for which connection has been requested,
parallel and/or running along side the main to which service is to be connected, except as provided below.
b. The maximum footage used as the basis for calculation shall be two hundred (200) feet when the applicant desires
no greater than a one-inch tap and one-inch meter to connect service.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/648
Where facilities larger than those described above are desired, the pro rata charge shall be based on the entire frontfoot
length of lot frontage parallel and/or running alongside main(s) to which service is to be connected. Where the lot is
irregular in shape, the basis for calculation shall be as determined below.
c. Irregularly shaped lot: An irregularly shaped lot is characterized by one or more of the following:
1. Is not a rectangle or square.
2. The entire lot width is not found at the right-of-way line.
3. The mean horizontal distance between side lot lines is greater than that found at the street right-of-way line.
4. Boundary lines are defined by more than four (4) ninety-degree angles.
To arrive at a basis for the pro rata charge on an irregularly shaped parcel, all sides of the property shall be
added together to arrive at an average front-foot length and the resulting figure shall be applied to the appropriate
per foot cost above.
d. Connections to land not included within a duly recorded plat shall apply to farmland meeting the following
specifications:
1. Not be legally platted;
2. Have twenty (20) acres or more in area;
3. Be used for no primary purpose other than farming or ranching;
4. Have no more than one (1) single-family residence thereon.
Under this farmland exception, the pro rata charge shall be based on just two hundred (200) feet of frontage, although the actual frontage
may be greater. In order to obtain a water or sewer connection under this exception, the applicant must execute a farmland exception
application provided by the director of planning. Pro rata application may then be made with the director of water utilities. Only one (1)
exception shall be granted for such tract of land. Land eligible for service under this exception shall have only one (1) three-quarter-inch
water line and one (1) five-eighths-inch water meter provided.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-114. Extension of water and sewer mains.
When a person owning a parcel of land within city limits, either platted for record or unplatted as allowed by farmland exception
provisions, requests extension of water or sewer mains and appurtenances owned by the City of Abilene to serve such property, the city
shall permit the extension in accordance with provisions included herein:
(1) Upon the request of the owner or his agent, also referred to as applicant, the city may allow construction of all necessary
water mains, sanitary sewers and all appurtenances at the expense of the applicant to provide service to the property for which
application is made. The minimum size of water or sewer mains shall be six (6) inches in diameter.
Such extensions shall be made across the entire frontage of the property being served. Where such property has more than
one (1) frontage on a public right-of-way the extensions shall be made along the entire side of at least one (1) front. Extensions
shall carry beyond driveways or other openings to the property.
The mains shall be located in rights-of-way or easement provided by applicant.
(2) Where, in the opinions of the directors of planning and water utilities, other intervening or nearby property owners will
benefit from the extensions and request connection, the city may participate in the cost of extending a main.
(3) The city may participate with the applicant in the oversize cost of any water main larger than eight (8) inches in
diameter, or any sewer main larger than ten (10) inches, unless such larger size is necessary to serve the property, in which
case municipal participation will not occur. Size of mains necessary for adequate service shall be determined by the water
utility department.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-115. Installation of water and sewer extensions.
(a) Unless otherwise specified in this article, required water and sewer extensions (including mains, valves, manholes, hydrants, etc.)
may be installed either by private contractor or by city crews, at the expense of the individual landowner or developer requiring the
extension.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/648
(b) All water and sewer facilities, whether installed by the city or by private contractor, shall be completed in accordance with city
subdivision regulations as well as all construction standards, codes and specifications adopted by the city. Water and sewer service shall
only be provided to property owners from dedicated rights-of-way, or easements. No construction of water or sewer facilities shall be
started until the developer has provided the city engineer with survey corners for all lots to be served by the extensions.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-116. Engineering water and sewer extensions.
(a) Engineering work necessary to prepare plans, estimate costs, and inspect construction required to provide water or sewer service
under the terms of this article shall be done either by private professional registered engineer or by the city engineer's office. In either
case, all such work shall be approved by the city engineer.
(b) If engineering work is performed by a private engineer, he shall furnish the city with such reproducible drawings as the city
engineer shall request, as well as estimates of quantities and costs of construction work to be completed. Cost estimates shall include all
engineering, materials, labor, paving repair, etc., necessary to complete the required facilities. Persons submitting cost estimates for water
and sewer facilities may also be required, at the city's option, to receive competitive bids to determine the fair value of the system. Such
bids shall be submitted in accordance with the city's forms, plans, and specifications.
(c) If engineering work is prepared by the city, but a developer has employed a private contractor to do the construction, the city shall
provide the developer copies of the plans and cost estimates upon request.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-117. Pro rata water and sewer account; disposition of revenue.
(a) There shall be a pro rata water and sewer account maintained as part of the city's account. All money received for pro rata payments
or for payment of the total cost of water and sewer extensions as provided in this article shall be deposited in the pro rata water and sewer
account.
(b) Payment of the pro rata charge or the total cost of extensions as provided in this article shall authorize the director of water utilities
to cause the required construction to be done. All charges for work done to extend water and sanitary sewer service shall be charged to the
water and sewer pro rata account.
(c) Pro rata charges shall be refunded to certain landowners or developers who, under the terms of a previous ordinance, are entitled to
pro rata charges collected from property owners connecting to mains which they, the landowners or developers to be refunded, have paid
to be installed. In accordance with that previous ordinance, refunds shall be made only for a period of fifteen (15) years following the
city's acceptance of such mains.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-118. Extensions by city to alleviate certain conditions.
(a) Nothing in this article shall prevent the city council from authorizing extensions of water or sewer mains, at its own expense, into
densely populated areas and other locations where the public welfare would best be served by making water or sewer service available.
(b) The city may also extend water or sewer facilities through an entire block upon payment of pro rata charges by the owner(s) of just
one or a few of the adjacent lots, when the director of water utilities determines it is more economical to make one long extension rather
than several short extensions as pro rata payments are made.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-119. Tapping water mains.
(a) A separate tapping charge shall be payable for each connection to a city water main. The utility department shall perform all taps to
water mains. A tap shall include all appurtenances to carry water from the main to the water meter. The property owner to which service
is being extended shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of service lines beyond the meter.
(b) Tap sizes of one inch and larger that require a meter set shall have a main size that is at least fifty (50) per cent greater in size than
the meter.
(c) Fees charged for tapping shall be outlined in the schedule of rates and charges established by the water utility department.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Sec. 32-120. Tapping sewer mains.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/648
(a) Tapping sewer mains shall be performed either by the city or a licensed plumber. All tapping procedures shall follow the standard
procedures and requirements of the building inspection department.
(b) All sewer mains twelve (12) inches and larger shall require a manhole entrance for access to the main. Any exceptions shall require
the director of utilities approval.
(Ord. No. 59-1987, pt. 1, 9-24-87)
Secs. 32-121–32-139. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. WATER CONSERVATION PLAN*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 32-140. Declaration of policy.
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic
water use, sanitation, and fire prevention and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts
of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Abilene hereby adopts the following regulations and
restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water.
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this water conservation plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of
such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions are deemed to constitute a waste of water which
subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in sections 32-147 through 32-155 of this plan.
No person shall make, cause, use or permit the use of water from the City of Abilene Water Utility System for residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to provisions of this plan or in an amount in excess of
that use permitted by the plan in effect pursuant to action taken by the mayor or his/her designee in accordance with the provisions of this
plan.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-141. Authorization.
The mayor, mayor pro tempore, or the city manager, if so designated, is hereby authorized, consistent with the Charter of the City of
Abilene, Sections 21 and 22 to exercise those powers considered to be reasonable or necessary for the protection of persons or property in
assessing the current state of our water supply and directing the city manager to implement or terminate any stage, phase, or portion of the
water conservation plan. Implementation and termination of any stage may occur, but is not mandated to occur, when conditions warrant.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-142. Application.
The provisions of this plan shall apply to persons, customers, and property utilizing the Abilene Water Utility System wherever situated,
including customers such as water supply corporations, and any others that receive water from the city on a contract basis. If a shortage of
water in the city's water supply occurs, the water to be distributed shall be divided among all users pro rata, according to the amount each
may be entitled to, so that preference is given to no one and everyone suffers alike.
These water use restrictions do not apply to the use of alternate water sources from groundwater (well water). Customers using water
from private groundwater wells on days other than those designated in this plan, or those watering from private groundwater wells during
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., must post a sign stating “WELL WATER.” The sign must be properly sized and posted so it is
visible from the street. The city strongly encourages the use of alternative water sources from groundwater for landscape purposes.
These water use restrictions do apply to those persons without a reclaimed water contract who divert raw surface water from Lake Kirby
or Lake Fort Phantom Hill for landscape irrigation. Whenever the term or reference to water, or potable water or similar and like words
are used in this “water conservation plan,” it shall be understood to include the use of raw surface water from Lake Kirby and Lake Fort
Phantom Hill for landscape irrigation.
These water restrictions do apply to the time for the use of treated wastewater (reclaimed water) for landscape irrigation. Use of reclaimed
water or raw water under a reclaimed water contract for landscape irrigation is only allowed during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00
a.m., and from 6:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. All other uses of reclaimed water shall be in accordance with Title 30 Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 210 and the City of Abilene's Authorization No. R10334-004, as amended.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03; Ord. No. 61-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-9-14)
Sec. 32-143. Regional water planning groups; public involvement and education.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/648
(a) Coordination with regional planning groups. The service area of the City of Abilene is currently located within the Region G water
planning area. The City of Abilene will cooperate and provide information regarding the plan as needed to all regional planning area
groups.
(b) Public involvement. The adoption of this plan and any amendments will provide for public input at a public hearing held in
conjunction with one of the readings of said ordinance enacting the plan or amendments thereto.
(c) Public education. The initial implementation of the plan and any subsequent stage shall be made public via announcement at a
media conference. Year round water use management and any subsequent water conservation stages shall be publicized and shall become
effective immediately upon such announcement. All implementation and termination of water conservation stages shall likewise occur via
media conference.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
DIVISION 2. WATER CONSERVATION PLAN PROCEDURES
Sec. 32-144. Year round water use management.
To conserve water supplies available to the City of Abilene, year round water use management shall be implemented to restrict certain
potable water use activities by all customers of the City of Abilene Water Utility System.
When conditions warrant, pursuant to section 32-141, the water conservation plan will be implemented in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this plan.
(1) Year round water use management. The following year round provisions shall apply to all potable water customers of
the City of Abilene Water Utility System:
a. Watering days: Customers are encouraged to conserve water by watering their lawn areas only once every seven (7)
days on one of their designated watering days.
A customer's watering day is determined by the last digit of the house number or property address. Multi-unit
properties will use the lowest address number, customers on rural routes will use the last number of their post office box
number or their route number if they do not have a post office box number. Customers at Ft. Phantom Lake will use the
last number of their lake lot. Customers in trailer parks will use the last number of their lot number.
When Ft. Phantom Reservoir is above 1630.9 feet elevation (less than five (5) feet below the spillway) the following
three (3) day a week watering schedule applies:
Designated Watering Days:
Wednesday, Friday, Sunday Odd numbered addresses
Tuesday, Thursday,
Saturday
Even numbered addresses
Monday, Wednesday,
Friday
Industrial, commercial, government
customers, public and private schools and
universities
When Ft. Phantom Reservoir is between 1630.9 feet and 1625.9 feet elevation (between five (5) and ten (10) feet
below the spillway), the following two (2) day a week watering schedule applies:
Designated Watering Days:
Thursday, Sunday Odd numbered addresses
Tuesday, Saturday Even numbered addresses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/648
Monday, Friday Industrial, commercial, government
customers, public and private schools and
universities
b. Watering times: Watering by all commercial, industrial, and residential customers utilizing individual sprinklers, or
sprinkler systems, on lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is prohibited except on designated
day(s) and then only during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 am and from 6:00 pm until 12:00 midnight.
c. Watering of gardens, flowerbeds, trees and shrubs is permitted at any time of any day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
ii. A faucet-filled container of five gallons or less is used, or
iii. A drip irrigation system such as a soaker hose, deep root water system, or bubbler is used. For the purpose of
this section a drip irrigation system is defined as an irrigation device or system designed to emit water at low
volumes and low pressures directly onto soil surface or below soil surface without airborne streams or droplets.
d. Irrigation of lawns is permitted at any time on any day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
ii. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used.
A drip irrigation system shall not be used to irrigate lawns except on designated days and at designated times.
e. New lawns that have been seeded (not to include re-seeding or overseeding existing turf), sodded or mulched may
be watered daily for eight minutes once during each of the following periods: 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.; 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and at regular intervals between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. for a maximum of three (3)
weeks. To qualify under this section, new lawns are those installed in conjunction with the construction of a new
residence and for a period six (6) months thereafter or the re-tilling of an area equaling at least fifty (50) per cent of an
existing yard.
f. Water wasting. The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:
i. Allowing water to run off a property through the street, gutter, ditch, alley, or drain for more than seventy-five
(75) feet from the downgrade of the property line;
ii. Failure to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken
pipes, or a leaking faucet.
iii. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with a broken sprinkler head; a sprinkler head that is
spraying over a street or parking lot because it is out of adjustment; or a sprinkler head that is misting due to high
pressure.
g. Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting activities or other activities necessary to maintain
public health, safety, and welfare. The director of water utilities will review written requests on a case by case basis for
the purchase and withdrawal of fire hydrants for land development and building construction processes.
h. Ornamental fountains are allowed if the fountain is equipped with a device for recycling water and water may be
added to sustain appropriate maintenance levels only on the customer's regularly designated watering days.
i. Water may be added to swimming pools to sustain appropriate maintenance levels only on the customer's regularly
designated watering days.
j. The operation of charity car washes must:
i. Not allow water to run-off more than seventy-five (75) feet, and
ii. Use hoses with on/off nozzles and buckets.
k. Large-scale recreational development, such as, but not limited to, water parks, shall submit a plan to the director of
water utilities that detail expected water consumption and maintenance requirements. Any deviation from the
requirements of this article will be resolved on a case by case method.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/648
(2) Administrative enforcement, presumption of ownership and control; hearing officers; administration of hearings,
hearings, appeals, payment, subsequent violations, fees, and requests for variances as pertaining to year round water use
management are addressed in sections 32-147 through 32-156.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-145. Water conservation stages.
(a) Watering days.
(1) During water conservation stages, a customer's watering day is determined by the last digit of the house number or
property address. Multi-unit properties will use the lowest address number. Customers on rural routes will use the last number
of their post office box number or their route number if they do not have a post office box number. Customers at Ft. Phantom
Lake will use the last number of their lake lot. Customers in trailer parks will use the last number of their lot number.
If a residential customer's last
number is:
Customer's watering day is:
7 or 8 Sunday
9 Monday
0 Tuesday
1 Wednesday
2 Thursday
3 or 4 Friday
5 or 6 Saturday
For example: If an address is 555 Walnut Street, the last number is five (5) and the watering day is Saturday.
For purposes of this section only, residential usage includes single family residences, multi-family residences and
apartment complexes. Non-residential customers shall follow the above schedule with the exception of the following changes:
7 or 8 Wednesday
5 or 6 Tuesday
(2) Bi-weekly watering as prescribed in Stage 2 will occur according to location in east or west sides of the city, bounded on
the north side of the city by Grape St. and then Pine St. to the north city limits (north of Grape St.) and on the south side of the
city by Sayles Blvd. to Buffalo Gap Road and then Buffalo Gap Road to the south city limits.
(3) Entities with large, open spaces (e.g., schools, universities, city parks, golf courses) using potable water may submit
alternate watering schedules to the director of water utilities except as otherwise prohibited in this article. Upon his/her written
approval acknowledged by the entity in question, these entities may follow the approved schedule rather than the calendar
system, and will be held responsible for all the provisions of this article, based on the approved schedule.
(b) Stage 1 water alert–Implementation criteria: Combined treatment plant pumpage in excess of 49.5 (mgd) for two (2) consecutive
days; or, continually falling water storage facility levels which do not refill above fifty (50) per cent overnight; or, depletion of the Ft.
Phantom Reservoir to the elevation 1625.9 (10 ft. below spillway) if Hubbard Creek Reservoir is at sixty (60) per cent capacity or less or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/648
1624.9 (eleven (11) ft. below spillway) if Hubbard Creek Reservoir is at greater than sixty (60) per cent of capacity, or any unforeseen
conditions that may occur that cause the city manager to recommend implementation to the mayor.
Upon announcement and implementation by the city, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(1) Landscape irrigation.
a. Irrigation by all commercial, industrial, (including agricultural irrigation), and residential customers utilizing
individual sprinklers, or sprinkler systems, of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is prohibited
except on a designated day which shall be once every seven (7) days and then only during the hours of 12:00 midnight to
10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight.
Provided, however, irrigation of gardens, flowerbeds, trees and shrubs is permitted at any time of day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
ii. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used, or
iii. A drip irrigation system such as soaker hose, deep root water system, or bubbler is used. For the purpose of
this section a drip irrigation system is defined as an irrigation device or system designed to emit water at low
volumes and low pressures directly onto soil surface or below soil surface without airborne streams or droplets.
Irrigation of lawns is permitted at any time on any day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
ii. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used.
A drip irrigation system shall not be used to irrigate lawns except on designated days and at designated times.
b. New lawns that have been seeded (not to include re-seeding or overseeding existing turf), sodded or mulched may
be watered daily for eight (8) minutes once during each of the following periods: 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.; 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and at regular intervals between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. for a maximum of three (3)
weeks. To qualify under this section, new lawns are those installed in conjunction with the construction of a new
residence and for a period six (6) months thereafter or the re-tilling of an area equaling at least fifty (50) per cent of a
new yard.
(2) Vehicle washing.
a. It is permissible to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and other types of mobile equipment at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station or at any location including a residence by
using a five (5) gallon container and/or a hand held hose equipped with a quick shut-off nozzle for quick rinses.
b. If the health, safety and welfare of the public depends upon frequent vehicle cleaning, as determined by the director
of water utilities or his/her designee, then washing of vehicles such as emergency vehicles, aircraft, garbage trucks, and
vehicles used to transport food and perishables will be allowed.
c. Charity car washes are prohibited.
(3) Water may be added to swimming pools to sustain appropriate maintenance levels only on designated irrigation day.
(4) Ornamental fountains are allowed if the fountain is equipped with a device for recycling water and water may be added
to sustain appropriate maintenance levels only on the customer's regularly designated watering day.
(5) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting activities or other activities necessary to maintain public
health, safety and welfare. By written approval from the director of water utilities, businesses may purchase and draw water
from fire hydrants for land development and building construction processes.
(6) The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:
a. Allowing water to run off a property through the street, gutter, ditch, alley, or drain for more than seventy-five (75)
feet from the downgrade of the property line;
b. Failure to repair a controllable leak; including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a
leaking faucet.
c. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/648
i. A broken sprinkler head;
ii. A sprinkler head that is spraying over a street or parking lot because it is out of adjustment; or
iii. A sprinkler head that is misting due to high pressure
d. Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except to alleviate
immediate fire, health and safety hazards, or to prepare an area for pavement repair or application.
(7) Commercial and industrial users.
a. Commercial and industrial users of water shall, in addition to complying with other applicable articles in this article,
reduce their monthly consumption of water by a minimum of fifteen (15) per cent compared to use during the same
month of the previous year.
b. Industrial users may, in order to justify water use, present a conservation plan for approval by the director of water
utilities.
c. Golf courses will submit a conservation plan for approval by the director of water utilities if potable irrigation water
is to be used.
(c) Stage 2 water warning–Implementation criteria: Combined treatment plant pumpage in excess of 49.5 mgd for two (2) days; or,
continually falling water storage facility levels which do not refill above fifty (50) per cent overnight or, depletion of the Ft. Phantom
Reservoir to the elevation 1618.9 (seventeen (17) ft. below spillway); or, major line breaks, or pump system failure which causes
unprecedented loss of capability to provide service, or any unforeseen conditions that may occur that cause the city manager to
recommend implementation to the mayor.
Upon announcement and implementation by the city, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(1) Landscape irrigation.
a. Irrigation by all commercial, industrial and residential customers utilizing individual sprinklers, or sprinkler
systems, of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is prohibited except on a designated day which
shall be once every two (2) weeks and then only during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m.
until 12:00 midnight.
Provided, however, irrigation of gardens, flowerbeds, trees and shrubs is permitted at any time of day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the
ii. Irrigation event, or
iii. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used, or
iii. A drip irrigation system such as soaker hose, deep root water system, or bubbler is used. For the purpose of
this section a drip irrigation system is defined as an irrigation device or system designed to emit water at low
volumes and low pressures directly onto soil surface or below soil surface without airborne streams or droplets.
Irrigation of lawns is permitted at any time on any day if:
i. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
ii. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used.
A drip irrigation system shall not be used to irrigate lawns except on designated days and at designated times.
b. New lawns may be watered daily for eight (8) minutes once during each of the following periods: 11:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m.; 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and at regular intervals between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. for a
maximum of three (3) weeks. To qualify under this section, new lawns are those installed in conjunction with the
construction of a new residence and for a period six (6) months thereafter. Re-tilling or any replanting or reseeding of
existing lawns shall not qualify for new lawn status in this section.
(2) Vehicle washing.
a. It is permissible to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and other types of mobile equipment at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station or at any location including a residence by
using a five (5) gallon container and/or a hand held hose equipped with a quick shut-off nozzle for quick rinses.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/648
b. If the health, safety and welfare of the public depends upon frequent vehicle cleaning, as determined by the director
of water utilities or his/her designee, then washing of vehicles such as emergency vehicles, aircraft, garbage trucks, and
vehicles used to transport food and perishables will be allowed.
c. Charity car washes are prohibited.
(3) Water may be added to swimming pools to sustain appropriate maintenance levels weekly, on the customer's regularly
designated irrigation day.
(4) Ornamental fountains are allowed if the fountain is equipped with a device for recycling water and water may be added
to sustain appropriate maintenance levels only on the customer's regularly designated watering day.
(5) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting activities or other activities necessary to maintain public
health, safety and welfare. By written approval from the director of water utilities, businesses may purchase and draw water
from fire hydrants for land development and building construction processes.
(6) The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:
a. Allowing water to run off a property through the street, gutter, ditch, alley, or drain for more than seventy-five (75)
feet from the downgrade of the property line;
b. Failure to repair a controllable leak; including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a
leaking faucet;
c. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with:
i. A broken sprinkler head;
ii. A sprinkler head that is spraying over a street or parking lot because it is out of adjustment; or
iii. A sprinkler head that is misting due to high pressure.
d. Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except to alleviate
immediate fire, health or safety hazards, or to prepare an area for pavement repair or application.
(7) Commercial and industrial users.
a. Commercial and industrial users of water shall continue to maintain at least a fifteen (15) per cent monthly
reduction of water use compared to use during the same month of the previous year.
Individual allotments may be adjusted by the director based on historical water usage conservation practices of
customer. The other restrictions of Stage 2 still apply to commercial and industrial users.
b. Industrial users may present a conservation plan for approval by the director of water utilities.
c. Golf courses using potable water will reduce consumption by thirty (30) per cent of contracted amount.
(d) Stage 3 water emergency–Implementation criteria: Combined treatment plant pumpage in excess of thirty (30) mgd for three (3)
days and depletion of the Ft. Phantom Reservoir to the elevation 1614.9 (twenty-one (21) ft. below spillway); or major line breaks, or
pump system failure which causes unprecedented loss of capability to provide service, or any unforeseen conditions that may occur that
cause the city manager to recommend implementation to the mayor.
Upon announcement and implementation by the city, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(1) Landscape irrigation. Irrigation of gardens, flowerbeds, trees and shrubs (not lawns) by all commercial, industrial, and
residential customers is permitted at any time on any day only if:
a. A garden hose is used and is held in the hand during the duration of the irrigation event, or
b. A faucet-filled container of five (5) gallons or less is used, or
c. A drip irrigation system such as soaker hose, deep root water system, or bubbler is used. For the purpose of this
section a drip irrigation system is defined as an irrigation device or system designed to emit water at low volumes and
low pressures directly onto soil surface or below soil surface without airborne streams or droplets.
Watering of lawns is prohibited at any time. No new lawns may be installed.
(2) Vehicle washing.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/648
a. It is permissible to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and other types of mobile equipment at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station.
b. If the health, safety and welfare of the public depends upon frequent vehicle cleaning, as determined by the director
of water utilities or his/her designee, then washing of vehicles such as emergency vehicles, aircraft, garbage trucks, and
vehicles used to transport food and perishables will be allowed.
c. Charity car washes are prohibited.
(3) Water may be added to swimming pools to sustain appropriate maintenance levels weekly, on the customer's regularly
designated irrigation day. New construction of swimming pools is prohibited.
(4) Ornamental fountains are allowed if the fountain is equipped with a device for recycling water and water may be added
to sustain appropriate maintenance level only on the customer's regularly designated watering day. New construction of
ornamental fountains is prohibited.
(5) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire-fighting activities or other activities necessary to maintain public
health, safety and welfare. By written approval from the director of water utilities, businesses may purchase and draw water
from fire hydrants for land development and building construction processes.
(6) The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:
a. Allowing water to run off a property through the street, gutter, ditch, alley, or drain for more than seventy-five (75)
feet from the downgrade of the property line;
b. Failure to repair a controllable leak; including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a
leaking faucet;
c. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with:
i. A broken sprinkler head;
ii. A sprinkler head that is spraying over a street or a parking lot because it is out of adjustment; or
iii. A sprinkler head that is misting due to high pressure
d. Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except to alleviate
immediate fire, health or safety hazards, or to prepare an area for pavement repair or application.
(7) Commercial and industrial users.
a. Commercial and industrial users of water shall continue to maintain at least a fifteen (15) per cent monthly
reduction of water use compared to use during the same month of the previous year.
Commercial and industrial users of water shall continue to maintain at least a fifteen (15) per cent monthly reduction
of water use compared to use during the same month of the previous year.
A surcharge rate will be assessed for any water consumption that does not comply with the required reductions. The
surcharge in addition to regular charges is as follows:
First
Occurrence
Subsequent
Occurrence(s)
First 5,000 gallons over allowed amount
per 1,000 gallons
$5.00 $10.00
Next 5,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 10.00 20.00
For higher usage, per 1,000 gallons 20.00 30.00
Additionally, if a customer uses more than the allowed amount more than once at any time during Stage 3, the
customer's water may be turned off and there will be a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) re-connect fee, in addition to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/648
the listed fees.
Individual allotments may be adjusted by the director of water utilities based on historical water usage conservation
practices of customer. The other restrictions of Stage 3 still apply to commercial and industrial users.
b. Industrial users may present a conservation plan for approval by the director of water utilities.
c. Each golf course using potable water will reduce consumption by fifty (50) per cent of contracted amount.
(e) Stage 4 water crisis–Implementation criteria: Loss of capability to provide water service or contamination of supply source, or any
unforeseen/unexpected conditions that may occur that cause the city manager to recommend implementation to the mayor.
Upon announcement and implementation by the city, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(1) All outdoor irrigation of vegetation including lawns, using potable water is prohibited.
(2) Only washing of mobile equipment in the critical interest of the public health or safety shall be allowed.
(3) The filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming and/or wading pools is prohibited. The construction of new
swimming pools is prohibited.
(4) The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is prohibited. The construction of new ornamental
fountains is prohibited.
(5) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and related activities or other activities necessary to
maintain public health, safety and welfare. Water for domestic use only may be purchased from the bulk loading station.
(6) The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:
a. Allowing water to run off a property through the street, gutter, ditch, alley, or drain for more than seventy-five (75)
feet from the downgrade of the property line;
b. Failure to repair a controllable leak; including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a
leaking faucet;
c. Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with:
i. A broken sprinkler head;
ii. A sprinkler head that is spraying over a street or parking lot because it is out of adjustment; or
iii. A sprinkler head that is misting due to high pressure
d. Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except to alleviate
immediate fire, health or safety hazards.
(7) Commercial and industrial users.
a. Commercial and industrial users of water (for other than drinking water and rest rooms) shall continue to maintain
at least a fifteen (15) per cent reduction of water use compared to use during the same month of the previous year.
A surcharge rate will be assessed for any water consumption that does not comply with the required reductions. The
surcharge in addition to regular charges is as follows:
First
Occurrence
Subsequent
Occurrence(s)
First 5,000 gallons over allowed amount
per 1,000 gallons
$10.00 $20.00
Next 5,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 20.00 40.00
For higher usage, per 1,000 gallons 30.00 60.00
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/648
Additionally, if a customer uses more than the allowed amount more than once at any time during Stage 4, then after
each such overuse these surcharges will be added and the customer's water may be turned off and there will be a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) re-connect fee, in addition to the listed fees.
Individual allotments may be adjusted by the director of water utilities based on historical water usage and
conservation practices of the customer. The other restrictions of Stage 4 still apply to commercial and industrial users.
b. Water used for industrial purposes not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare will be
curtailed to the extent necessary to effectuate the needs and purposes of this plan.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-146. Target water use goals.
The following target goals for water usage are established for use during water conservation stages as contained in section 32-145:
(1) Stage 1. Water alert–Target water use goal: Combined treatment plant production less than 49.5 million gallons per day
(MGD) for all Abilene water treatment facilities.
(2) Stage 2. Water warning–Target water use goal: Combined treatment plant production less than 49.5 MGD for all Abilene
water treatment facilities.
(3) Stage 3. Water emergency–Target water use goal: Combined treatment plant production less than 30 MGD for all
Abilene water treatment facilities.
(4) Stage 4. Water crisis–Target water use goal: Combined treatment plant production less than 30 MGD for all Abilene
water treatment facilities.
(Ord. No. 9-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-14-05)
DIVISION 3. WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 32-147. Administrative enforcement.
Violations of this plan are declared to be civil penalties with remedies being fines paid directly to municipal court. Non-payment of fines
will result in surcharges assessed to the customer's water utility bill. Each violation of a particular component of this plan shall constitute
a separate violation, and each day a violation continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcement and
enhancement.
The surcharge will be in addition to the regular water utility bill amount. The water utility office may discontinue water service to the
premises if the surcharge is not paid as required under the plan. Any person whose service is discontinued for failure to pay the surcharge
shall not be restored until payment of a reconnection charge and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service.
The city's authority to seek injunctive or other civil relief available under the law is not limited by this section.
The following procedures shall apply to anyone contesting the penalties for violating the plan. The hearing process shall be a two-phase
hearing process with the final phase being heard before the municipal clerk/administrator or deputy in charge of hearing appeals.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-148. Presumption of ownership and control.
Presumption of ownership/control. Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of city, in apparent control of the
property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's
property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any
such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation.
All notices shall be issued to the person or entity whose name appears on the water bill.
In any case of a violation of any terms or provisions of this plan by any corporation, business, partnership, or entity, the officers and/or
agents actively in charge of the business or entity shall be subject to the penalty provided herein.
If a customer is irrigating during a time period or on a day when irrigation is not permitted for the street address of that customer and a
city worker cannot find any person at that street address to turn off the irrigation system, the city worker may enter the property and turn
off the irrigation system and/or the water source.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/648
Sec. 32-149. Hearing officers.
(a) There shall be designated a hearing officer(s) who shall be appointed by the municipal court clerk/administrator.
(b) Hearing officer(s) shall have the authority to administer oaths and to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents.
(c) An order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-150. Administration of hearings.
(a) The administrative adjudication process for plan violations shall be initiated by the issuance of a notice which may be issued by a
peace officer or other authorized enforcement agent. Authorized enforcement agents shall include any police officer, water utilities
worker, city marshal, or other employee of the city designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this Code in regard to the
plan.
(b) The notice may be issued by affixing it to the front door of the property in question, in a conspicuous place.
(c) The notice shall provide that the person charged with violation of the plan shall have the right of hearing to determine the validity
for the charged offense. Such right to a hearing shall be exercised by mail or by appearing in person before a hearing officer within ten
(10) days from the date of the notice.
(d) The original or any copy of the notice or summons is a record kept in the ordinary course of business in the city and is rebuttable
proof of the facts it contains.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-151. Hearings.
(a) At the hearing before the hearing officer, the violator may admit, admit with explanation, or deny the alleged infraction. It is not a
defense to the offense that the violator did not intend the alleged infraction, there being no culpable mental state required for the
infraction.
(b) The issuing officer shall not be required to attend the hearing.
(c) It is not required that the city's attorney attend the hearing. Provided, however, that if the defendant is represented by legal counsel
at the hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the city attorney who shall have a right to appear on behalf of the city at said hearing.
(d) No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer shall examine the contents of the notice and the evidence
related to ownership of the property in question and shall hear and review the testimony and evidence presented by the violator. If the
hearing officer determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the infraction was committed by the violator, he shall find the
violator responsible and assess a fine.
(e) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether or not the person charged is responsible for
the violation of the plan and the amount of the fine assessed against him. The order shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court.
All such orders shall be kept in a separate index or file by the municipal court clerk using appropriate data processing techniques.
(f) Failure of a person charged with the offense to appear at a hearing within the aforesaid ten-day period shall be considered an
admission of liability for the charged offense.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-152. Appeals.
A person determined by the hearing officer to be in violation of any provision of the Plan may appeal this determination to the municipal
court clerk or a deputy so designated to hear plan appeals.
The appeal must be instituted by filing a written petition, not later than the tenth day after the filing of the hearing officer's order, with the
clerk of the municipal court along with payment of a nonrefundable administrative appeal filing fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00).
After filing a petition for appeal, the municipal clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and place of the
hearing.
The appeal hearing shall be a de novo review. The municipal court clerk shall examine the evidence presented at the appellate hearing and
if the court clerk determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the infraction was committed by the violator, the court clerk shall
find the violator responsible therefore.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/648
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-153. Payment.
(a) Any person alleged to have violated the plan who merely desires to make payment shall provide same to the municipal court clerk
in charge of water violations within ten (10) days after receiving notice of said violation.
(b) Any person alleged to have violated the plan and who fails to appear within the ten (10) days as reflected in 32-149.3(c) above shall
be assessed a surcharge on their next water bill in the amount of the minimum fine.
(c) Any person found to have violated the plan by the hearing officer shall pay the fine within ten (10) days of said hearing or the fee
shall be assessed in a surcharge on the violator's next water bill.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-154. Subsequent violations; increased fees; discontinuation of service; injunctive relief.
Subsequent violations of the plan shall result in increased fine or upon the occurrence of three (3) violations, after notice, the
discontinuation of services. Services discontinued under this provision shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection fee and any
other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service.
Compliance with the plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in district court.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-155. Fines–Minimum and maximum.
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation found to have violated any provision of the plan, shall be assessed a fine in an amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, the amount to be determined by the hearing officer in his reasonable discretion,
subject to review on appeal to the municipal court clerk.
(b) Unless higher amounts are required by state law or a lesser amount is determined by the hearing officer or municipal court clerk or
so designated deputy, the minimum fines for violating the plan shall be as follows:
(1) Violation of year round water use management, first offense . . . $50.00
(2) Violation of year round water use management, second offense . . . 75.00
(3) Violation of year round water use management, subsequent offenses . . . 250.00
(4) Violation of Stage 1, first offense . . . 50.00
(5) Violation of Stage 1, second offense . . . 75.00
(6) Violation Stage 1, subsequent offenses . . . 250.00
(7) Violation of Stage 2, first offense . . . 100.00
(8) Violation of Stage 2, second offense . . . 150.00
(9) Violation of Stage 2, subsequent offenses . . . 500.00
(10) Violation of Stage 3 or 4, first offense . . . 250.00
(11) Violation of Stage 3 or 4, second offense . . . 500.00
(12) Violation of Stage 3 or 4, subsequent offenses . . . 1,000.00
(13) Reconnect fees for failure to pay the surcharge . . . 250.00
(14) Reconnect fees for repeated violations of the plan . . . 500.00
(c) It is an affirmative defense to any violation of this article if the customer proves that the misused wasted water is from an operable
water well serving said property.
(d) Fraudulent misrepresentation of well water use will result in a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/648
Sec. 32-156. Requests for variance.
Requests for variance should be made in writing to the director of water utilities. Requests must include name of customer, location, type
of variance requested, reason for variance request and duration of deviation from this plan. Upon the director's written approval
acknowledged by the entity in question, these entities may follow the requested variance and will be responsible for all other provisions
of this article.
(Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Sec. 32-157. Severability.
If any provision or any section of this plan shall be held to be void or unconstitutional, such holding shall in no way affect the validity of
the remaining provisions or sections of the plan, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 21-2003, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-22-03)
Secs. 32-158, 32-159. Reserved
ARTICLE VII. MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY–STORMWATER PROTECTION*
DIVISION 1. CREATION OF MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY
Sec. 32-160. Adoption of state law and creation of municipal drainage utility.
The provisions of Subchapter C of Chapter 402 of the Local Government Code are hereby adopted by the City of Abilene, and a
municipal drainage utility is hereby created in the City of Abilene. The city shall have the full authority to operate a municipal drainage
utility system pursuant to Section 5 of the Texas Constitution, the Charter of the City of Abilene and State law. The municipal drainage
utility shall be a public utility. The proposed service area shall be the incorporated city limits of the City of Abilene, Texas. The City of
Abilene will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms.
Sec. 32-161. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the municipal stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This
article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal stormwater drainage system in order to
comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article
are to:
(a) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal stormwater drainage system by any person;
(b) Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal stormwater drainage system;
(c) Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal
stormwater drainage system; and,
(d) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary
to ensure compliance with the MS4 permit.
Sec. 32-162. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this
article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of
this article imposes restriction of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall control.
Sec. 32-163. Administration.
The administrator of the stormwater utility division and the administrator's authorized representatives are sanctioned to administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
Secs. 32-164–32-185. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 32-186. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/648
As it relates to the requirements of section 402.053 of the Local Government Code, the issuance of a “certificate of occupancy” for
residential structures in the city shall be defined as the installation of the initial tie-in to water or wastewater service for the residential
parcel.
Accidental discharge: A discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
Administrator: The administrator of the stormwater utility division or the administrator's authorized representatives.
Agricultural stormwater runoff: Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source
agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR. Section 122.23 or discharges
from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR. Section 122.24.
Best management practices (BMP): Schedules of activities, practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the pollution of the municipal stormwater drainage system and waters of the United States. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
CFR: The Code of Federal Regulations.
City: The City of Abilene, Texas.
City limits: The incorporated city limits of the City of Abilene.
Clean Water Act (CWA): The Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972) Pub. L. 92-500, as amended Pub. L. 95-217, Pub. L. 95-576, Pub. L. 6-483 and Pub. L. 97-117, 33
USC. 1251 et seq.
Construction activity: Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that are subject to NPDES/TPDES General
Construction Permits. It does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, and original purpose of a ditch, channel, or other similar storm water conveyance. Additionally, it does not include the routine
grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance
activities.
Construction site: Any construction site required by the Clean Water Act to operate within the limits of an NPDES/TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with construction activity.
Contaminated: Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Contamination: The presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the municipal stormwater drainage system, waters of the
state, or waters of the United States of any substance which may be harmful to the public health and/or the quality of the water.
Construction site notice (CSN): A written submission to the municipal stormwater drainage system operator from an applicant stating that
a small construction activity will be commencing and will operate under the provisions of the TCEQ General Permit TXR150000.
Discharge: Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal stormwater
drainage system or into waters of the United States. This includes, but is not limited to, household hazardous waste, used motor vehicle
fluids, and collected quantities of grass clippings, leaf litter, and animal wastes.
Discharger: Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any
operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said
agency.
Facility: Any facility, industrial facility or construction site, required by the Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial or construction activity.
Harmful quantity: The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of waters of the State, the municipal stormwater drainage
system, or that will present or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons.
Illicit connections: Any man-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer.
Illicit discharge: Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges
pursuant to an NPDES or TPDES permit (other than the NPDES or TPDES permit for certain discharges from the municipal separate
storm sewer), discharges resulting from fire fighting activities, and other allowable non-storm water discharges detailed in subsection 32-
188(a)(1–16) of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/648
Industrial facility: Any facility required by the Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity subject to NPDES/TPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Industrial waste manager: City of Abilene Water Department position currently responsible for assessment of discharges to the publiclyowned
treatment works (POTW). Performs inspection on high-risk industrial facilities and reports stormwater violations to the
stormwater utility division.
MS4 (municipal separate storm sewer system) permit: Stormwater permits started in 1990 for medium (serving between one hundred
thousand (100,000) and two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) people) and large (serving two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) people)
municipalities to regulate stormwater discharges; often issued to a group of co-permittees encompassing an entire metropolitan area.
Municipal stormwater drainage system: The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. Also designated as municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4).
Municipal stormwater drainage system operator: City of Abilene.
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES): The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318, and
405 of the Clean Water Act.
Non-point source: Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a “point source.”
Notice of intent (NOI): The notification that is required by the NPDES stormwater multi-sector general permit, the EPA Region 6 NPDES
stormwater construction general permit, or any similar general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity that is
issued by the EPA or the TCEQ.
NPDES permit: A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated to the state pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) (see TPDES)
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general area-wide basis.
Operate: Drive, conduct, work, run, manage, or control a vehicle or machine.
Operator: The party or parties that either individually or taken together meet the following two (2) criteria: 1) They have operational
control over the site specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and 2) they have the day-to-day
operational control of those activities at the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWPPP requirements and any permit conditions.
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, commission, board or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes
all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pollutant: Includes, but not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter backwash,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, toxic materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
soil, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, recreational, and agricultural waste discharged into water or into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
Pollution: The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or
water of the United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to
the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Premises: Lots, buildings, and appurtenances situated thereon.
Private: Property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by a city, county, state, or federal
government agency.
Public: Property or facilities owned by a city, county, state, or federal government or agency thereof.
Regulated activity: Activity occurring at an industrial facility or construction site, which qualifies the facility or site to acquire a permit to
discharge stormwater under the Clean Water Act.
Release: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing
into the municipal stormwater drainage system, the water of the state, the waters of the United States.
State: The State of Texas.
Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snow melt.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/648
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity: The discharge from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying
stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The
following categories of facilities are considered to be engaging in “industrial activity”:
(i) Facilities subject to stormwater effluent limitations guidelines, new source performance standards, or toxic pollutant
effluent standards under 40 CFR. subchapter N (except facilities with toxic pollutant effluent standards which are exempted
under category (xi) of this definition);
(ii) Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 24 (except 2434), 26 (except 265 and 267), 28 (except 283),
29, 311, 32 (except 323), 33, 3441, 373;
(iii) Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 10 through 14 (mineral industry) including active or inactive
mining operations (except for areas of coal mining operations no longer meeting the definition of a reclamation area under 40
CFR § 434.11(1) because the performance bond issued to the facility by the appropriate federal Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA) authority has been released, or except for areas of non-coal mining operations which have been
released from applicable state or federal reclamation requirements after December 17, 1990 and oil and gas exploration,
production, processing, or treatment operations, or transmission facilities that discharge stormwater contaminated by contact
with or that has come into contact with, any overburden, raw material, intermediate products, finished products, byproducts or
waste products located on the site of such operations;
(iv) Hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facilities, including those that are operating under interim status or a
permit under subtitle C of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA);
(v) Landfills, land application sites, and open dumps that receive or have received any industrial wastes (waste that is
received from any of the facilities described under this subsection) including those that are subject to regulation under subtitle
D of RCRA;
(vi) Facilities involved in the recycling of materials, including metal scrap yards, battery reclaimers, salvage yards, and
automobile junkyards, including but limited to those classified as Standard Industrial Classification 5015 and 5093;
(vii) Steam electric power generating facilities, including coal handling sites;
(viii) Transportation facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 40, 41, 42 (except 4221-25), 43, 44, 45, and
5171 which have vehicle maintenance shops, equipment cleaning operations, or airport deciding operations. Only those
portions of the facility that are either involved in vehicle maintenance, equipment cleaning operations, airport deicing
operations, or which are otherwise identified under paragraphs (i)–(vii) or (ix)–(xi) of this definition are associated with
industrial activity;
(ix) Treatment works treating domestic sewage or any other sewage sludge or wastewater treatment device or system, used
in the storage treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal or domestic sewage, including land dedicated to the disposal
of sewage sludge that are located within the confines of the facility, with a design flow of 1.0 mgd or more, or required to have
an approved pretreatment program under 40 CFR part 403. Not included are farm lands, domestic gardens or lands used for
sludge management where sludge is beneficially reused and which are not physically located in the confines of the facility, or
areas that are in compliance with section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
(x) Construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation activities except: operations that result in the
disturbance of less than one acre of total land area which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale;
(xi) Facilities under Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC Code) 20, 21, 22, 23, 2434, 25, 265, 267, 27, 283, 285, 30, 31
(except 311), 323, 34 (except 3441), 35, 36, 37 (except 373), 38, 39, 4221-25, (and which are not otherwise included within
categories (ii)–(x) of this definition);
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3): A plan required by a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity or construction activity and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the
pollutants in stormwater discharges from industrial facilities and construction sites.
TCEQ: Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or successor. Municipal separate storm sewer system interest delegated to the
TCEQ upon authority of the EPA.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES): The regulatory program delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to
33 USC § 1342(b).
TPDES permit: A permit issued by the TCEQ under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Uncontaminated: Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
United States Code (USC): Federal law regulation the Clean Water Act.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/648
Vehicle: Any form of motorized conveyance that transports people, cargo, or any other objects.
Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Surface water in the state: Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes,
inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state (from the mean high water mark (MHWM) out 10.36 miles into
the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and
including the beds and banks of all water-courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulations, or
permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
Waters of the United States: For the purpose of this article, waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. means:
(a) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(b) All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
(c) All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands,
sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation, or destruction of which would
affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters;
(1) which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes;
(2) from which fish or shellfish are or could be taken or sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or
(3) which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce;
(d) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition;
(e) Tributaries of waters identified in this definition;
(f) The territorial sea; and
(g) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in this definition;
Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than
cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United
States. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water, which neither were originally created in waters of the United
States (such as disposal are in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the
United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an areas' status as prior converted
cropland by any federal agency, for the purpose of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act
jurisdiction remains with the EPA.
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground-water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
DIVISION 3. PROHIBITIONS
Sec. 32-187. Discharge to municipal stormwater drainage system prohibited.
(a) No person may discharge or cause to be discharged any harmful quantity of any substance into the municipal stormwater drainage
system that is not comprised entirely of stormwater.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person discharges or causes to be discharged into the municipal stormwater drainage system any
release of a harmful quantity of any substance that is not comprised entirely of stormwater.
Sec. 32-188. Exceptions.
(a) It may be an exception, subject to (b) below, to any enforcement action for a violation of subsections 32-187 (a) and (b) that the
discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges
from the municipal stormwater drainage system);
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting by the fire department;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/648
(3) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
(4) A discharge or flow from water line flushing or disinfection that contains no harmful quantity of total residual chlorine
(TRC) or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(5) A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation;
(6) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(7) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(8) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR § 35.2005(20)) to the municipal stormwater drainage
system;
(9) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing drain;
(10) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or
draining of a storage tank or other container;
(11) A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions
scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant;
(12) A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing;
(13) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(14) A discharge or flow from cold water (or hot water with prior permission of the Administrator) used in street washing or
cosmetic cleaning that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(15) Drainage from a private residential swimming pool containing no harmful quantities of chlorine or other chemicals; or
(16) A discharge or flow of uncontaminated stormwater pumped from an excavation.
(b) No exception to enforcement shall be available under subsection (a) if:
(1) The discharge or flow in question has been determined to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the
United States or to the municipal stormwater drainage system;
(2) Notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger; and
(3) The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the discharge.
Sec. 32-189. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(a) The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illicit connection to the municipal stormwater
drainage system is prohibited.
(b) Connections that were permissible when originally installed but that are now considered illicit must be brought into compliance
within thirty (30) days of notification.
(c) A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal stormwater drainage system, or allows
such a connection to continue.
(d) Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the industrial waste manager.
(e) The property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within six (6) months following application of
this regulation; provided that, this grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in discharge of hazardous materials or
other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to property,
natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
Sec. 32-190. Unpermitted discharges prohibited.
(a) A person who is the operator and/or responsible party of a facility commits an offense if the person discharges, or causes to be
discharged, stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity without first having obtained an NPDES/TPDES permit
from the EPA/TCEQ to do so.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/648
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with construction site
activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent or construction site notice to the City of Abilene.
(c) The introduction of sediment, concrete, asphalt, or any other construction debris into the municipal stormwater drainage system
from a construction activity is a violation of this article and will be subject to enforcement activities. The administrator will provide the
operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours to remove any pollutants or debris from the municipal
stormwater drainage system conveyances.
Secs. 32-191–32-212. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. SUSPENSION OF UTILITY SERVICE
Sec. 32-213. Emergency suspension of utility service and municipal stormwater drainage system access.
(a) The city may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service, and/or municipal stormwater drainage system
discharge access to a person discharging to the municipal stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or publicly-owned
treatment works when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the
United States.
(b) When the administrator determines that city-provided water and/or sanitary sewer service must be suspended pursuant to subsection
(a), the administrator shall request the director of the department of water utilities to do so.
(c) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or municipal stormwater drainage system discharge access, the
administrator shall notify the violator of the suspension in person and shall order the violator to cease the discharge immediately.
(d) If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (c), the administrator may take such actions, established in
Division 9: Enforcement, as the administrator deems necessary to prevent or minimize harmful distress to the municipal stormwater
drainage system, waters of the United States, or to persons or wildlife.
(e) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or municipal stormwater drainage system access to the violator until:
(1) The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the administrator and director of public works, that the non-complying
discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The violator pays the city for all costs the city incurred in suspending and reinstating water service, sanitary sewer
connection, and/or municipal stormwater drainage system access; and
(3) The violator shall be responsible to the city for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and
disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the municipal stormwater drainage system incurred by the city while
responding to, abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge.
(f) A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected may appeal such enforcement action to the administrator's
attention, in writing, within ten (10) days of notice of the suspension. The director of public works shall render a decision within two (2)
days upon written receipt of the petition. Appeals of the director of public works decision must be submitted for judgment to municipal
court.
(g) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise of this remedy shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(h) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, and or municipal stormwater drainage
system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the administrator or director of public works.
Sec. 32-214. Non-emergency suspension of utility service and municipal stormwater drainage system access.
(a) The city may suspend the city-provided water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or municipal stormwater drainage system
access for any person failing to comply with previous notices to cease discharges to the municipal stormwater drainage system in
violation of this article. Utilities will be subject to suspension if such measures would abate or reduce the discharge.
(b) The administrator will notify a violator of the proposed suspension of its water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or municipal
stormwater drainage system access. The violator may petition the administrator for a reconsideration and hearing before the director of
public works. Further petitions must be submitted for judgment to municipal court.
(c) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or municipal stormwater drainage system access to the discharger until:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/648
(1) The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the administrator and director of public works, that the non-complying
discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The violator pays the city for all costs the city incurred in suspending and reinstating water service, sanitary sewer
connection, and/or municipal stormwater drainage system access.
(3) The violator shall be responsible to the city for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and
disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the municipal stormwater drainage system incurred by the city while
responding to, abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge.
(d) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise of this remedy shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, and or municipal stormwater drainage
system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the administrator or director of public works.
Secs. 32-215–32-240. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. FACILITY INSPECTION FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES
Sec. 32-241. Applicability for industrial and construction activity.
This division applies to all facilities located within the city limits that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or
construction site activity.
State of Texas regulations require that subject facilities apply for and obtain general permits for industrial facilities (TPDES TXR050000)
and construction sites (TXR150000) that have been determined to contribute or have the potential to contribute substantial pollutant loads
to the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the state. The general permits require that the permitee develop, implement, and
maintain a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) and submit a notice of intent notifying the TCEQ and the municipal stormwater
drainage system operator (City of Abilene).
The MS4 permit issued to the City of Abilene by the TCEQ mandates to the City of Abilene to “carry out all inspections, surveillance,
and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance with permit conditions” (Part III (E)(6) and to implement a program that
shall include “Inspection of construction sites and enforcement of control measure requirements” (Part III (A)(9)(b)).
To meet these requirements the City of Abilene must enter onto the premises of industrial and construction sites to inspect, monitor, and
conduct surveillance of requirements mandated by the TCEQ. These requirements include, but are not limited to:
(1) Review of the facilities SWP3 with on-site conditions;
(2) Evaluation of best management practices to effectively prohibit the discharge of non-stormwater to the municipal
stormwater drainage system;
(3) Inspection for illicit connections and illicit discharges;
(4) Self-inspection compliance; and
(5) Compliance with the city's MS4 permit and the facilities subject general permit (TXR150000 or TXR050000).
Sec. 32-242. Access to industrial facilities and construction sites.
(a) The intent of facility inspections shall be to determine compliance with the conditions of the city's TPDES permit, any
NPDES/TPDES general permit the facility is currently obligated to for industrial and construction activities, and this article. Facility
owners and operators shall allow the administrator ready access to applicable sections of public and private premises for the sole purpose
of inspection, surveillance, and monitoring for the presence of illegal discharges to the municipal stormwater drainage system, illicit
connections to the municipal stormwater drainage system, and assessment of any portions of a regulated facility influenced by stormwater
runoff that may adversely affect the municipal stormwater drainage system and/or waters of the United States.
(b) Admittance to the facility shall be requested at a reasonable time during the facilities normal working hours unless it is determined
by the administrator that imminent and substantial danger exists.
(c) The owner or operator shall make all necessary arrangements to allow access to the administrator.
(d) In the event the owner or operator refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to
seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
(e) The administrator retains the authority to collect samples and photographs from stormwater outfalls or other components of the
municipal stormwater drainage system as may be deemed appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/648
(f) The administrator shall have the authority to set up on subject facilities such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
administrator to conduct monitoring of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(g) The administrator or the designated inspector must present appropriate credentials to the facility officials at the time of entry to a
facility.
Sec. 32-243. Review and modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(a) The administrator retains the authority to request for review any documents or plans (Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, spill
prevention control plans, hazardous material plans, waste management documentation, etc.) from a regulated facility that the
administrator deems may affect stormwater discharges to the municipal stormwater drainage system.
(b) The administrator may require an operator of a regulated facility to modify its Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan if, in the best
professional judgment of the administrator, the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan does not comply with the requirements of the
facility's NPDES/TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity.
(c) The deficiencies in a facility's Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan will be communicated in writing, and the administrator will
provide the operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, to make the necessary changes in the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan.
Sec. 32-244. Review and modifications of best management practices.
(a) Any person engaged in activities or operation, or owning facilities or property, which will or may result in pollutants entering the
municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the United States, shall implement best management practices to the extent they are
technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a regulated facility shall prove reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of
the United States. Practices implemented to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or operator's expense.
(b) The City of Abilene will not maintain a list of required or approved best management practices for regulated facilities. However,
the administrator may request facilities to demonstrate the effectiveness of implemented best management practices.
(c) The administrator may require an operator of a regulated facility to modify its best management practices if, in the best professional
judgment of the administrator, the best management practices do not provide effective protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes from entering into the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the United States.
(d) The deficiencies in a facility's best management practices will be communicated in writing, and the administrator will provide the
operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to make the necessary changes in the best management practices.
Sec. 32-245. Compliance with permit.
(a) A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of the subject NPDES/TPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in violation of a requirement of the facility's NPDES/TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity.
Secs. 32-246–32-266. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Sec. 32-267. Applicability.
This division applies to all facilities located within the city limits that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
Sec. 32-268. Industrial and high risk runoff monitoring.
(a) All hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, active municipal landfills, facilities subject to section 313 of title III of the
Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), and any other industrial discharger the city determines is contributing a
substantial pollutant load to the municipal stormwater drainage system shall submit self-monitoring data to the city on an annual basis.
Submittal date of self-monitoring data is to be determined by the administrator or industrial waste manager.
(b) The city's MS4 permit requires that all industrial facilities listed in (a) be subject to site inspections of no less than once per permit
term (five (5) years). However, the administrator retains the authority to inspect these industrial facilities as often as deemed necessary to
assure permit compliance and safety of the municipal stormwater drainage system and waters of the United States.
(c) An unreasonable delay or refusal to submit self-monitoring data to the administrator is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of an industrial facility with an NPDES/TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/648
an offense if the person denies the administrator reasonable access to a facility's self-monitoring data for the purpose of review required
by this article.
(d) An industrial facility may submit a “no exposure” certification to the city in lieu of self-monitoring; however, any facility operating
under a “no exposure” certification is subject to periodic facility inspections (not less than once per permit term (five (5) years) to verify
the facility's “no exposure” exemption. The inspection may be waived for facilities, which participate in the TCEQ's Small Business and
Local Government Assistance Compliance Commitment Program.
(e) The city may waive monitoring requirements for industrial facilities determined to be in compliance with the TPDES Multi-Sector
General Permit Number TXR050000.
(f) The administrator retains the authority to conduct inspections on any industrial facility subject to the TCEQ's TPDES multi-sector
general permit or has been deemed to be, or has potential to be, contributing a substantial pollutant load to the municipal stormwater
drainage system to determine compliance and safety of the municipal stormwater drainage system and waters of the United States.
(g) Industrial facility inspections for stormwater runoff purposes will be conducted as outlined in the City of Abilene Stormwater
Utility Division's “Industrial Facility Inspection Guideline and Procedures”. The guidelines and procedures manual will be made
available on the City of Abilene's Website or can be viewed within the public works department.
Secs. 32-269–32-289. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Sec. 32-290. Applicability.
This division applies to all facilities located within the city limits that have stormwater discharges associated with construction activity.
Sec. 32-291. Submission of notice of intent or construction site notice to municipal stormwater drainage system operator.
(a) The operator of a construction site required to have a NPDES/TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with construction
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the administrator at the same time the operator submits the original notice of
intent to the EPA or the TCEQ, as applicable.
(b) The operator of a construction site, which does not require an NOI, is required to submit, per TCEQ's TPDES general permit for
construction sites, a construction site notice to the operator of the municipal stormwater drainage system.
(c) The copy of the notice of intent or construction site notice may be delivered to the administrator either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
Stormwater Utilities Division
555 Walnut Street, Ste. 210
Abilene, Texas 79604-0060
(d) Construction site inspections for stormwater runoff purposes will be conducted in a way as outlined in the City of Abilene
Stormwater Utility Division's “Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Prevention Inspection Guideline”. The guidelines and procedures
manual will be made available on the City of Abilene's Website or can be viewed within the public works department.
Secs. 32-292–32-312. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 32-313. Spill or release corrective actions, responsibility, and compensation.
(a) Spills or leaks of polluting substances discharged to, or having the potential to be indirectly transported to, the municipal
stormwater drainage system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and removed promptly. All affected areas shall be restored to their
preexisting condition. Any costs of the containment, control, collection, removal, or restoration incurred by the City of Abilene shall be
reimbursed to the city by the person associated with the spill or leak.
(b) Persons associated with the spill or leak shall immediately notify the City of Abilene Fire Chief or his designee of all spills or leaks
of polluting substances. Notification shall not relieve any person of any costs related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other
responsibility which may be incurred as a result of the said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other
responsibility which may be imposed by state, federal, or other law.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/648
(c) Any person operating a vehicle that causes or results in an accidental discharge or release to the municipal stormwater drainage
system shall be responsible for costs of any testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of contamination to the extent
determined by the administrator.
Sec. 32-314. Stockpiling, accumulations, and heaps.
(a) Stockpiles, accumulations, and heaps comprised of soil, sand, mulch, trash, asphalt, aggregate or any other material deemed a
pollutant by local, state, or federal regulations, which are located within the city limits and present a real or perceived potential of
discharging to the municipal stormwater drainage system are subject to control measures to prevent introduction into the municipal
stormwater drainage system, as applicable.
(b) The administrator retains the authority to necessitate the use of control measures as deemed necessary to mitigate the introduction
of pollutants to the municipal stormwater drainage system. Failure to implement control measures as prescribed by the administrator shall
result in enforcement as described in this article.
(c) Stockpiles, accumulations, and heaps discovered to be discharging pollutants to the municipal stormwater drainage system will be
subject to enforcement as described in this article.
Secs. 32-315–32-334. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 32-335. Enforcement responsibility.
The administrator or his designee shall have the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this article. The duties of such
designee shall include not only the issuance of permits as required by this article, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all facilities
conform with this subpart and with any other applicable state and federal laws, requirements and regulations of this Code of Ordinances
or of the City of Abilene. The administrator shall have the authority to adopt policies and procedures not inconsistent with the terms of
this article necessary to implement the provisions of this division.
Sec. 32-336. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who
has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, will be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division or
may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
Sec. 32-337. Nuisances.
(a) An actual or threatened discharge to the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the United States that violates or would
violate this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(b) A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is connected to the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of
the United States is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
Sec. 32-338. Notice of violations.
If the administrator determines that there is an illicit discharge, a failure to maintain a facility in conformance with this article, or any
other violation of this article, notice shall be served upon the property owner or operator of record by registered or certified mail to the
address of the property owner of record, unless an emergency pursuant to section 32-213 of this article. The notice shall specify the
measures, as appropriate, required to come into full compliance with this article and shall specify the time within which such measures
shall be completed. Failure to comply within the time specified shall be deemed to be a violation of this article subject to the penalties
outlined herein.
Sec. 32-339. Voluntary compliance.
The administrator shall retain the authority to instruct an operator of a facility that commits any acts prohibited of this article to achieve
voluntary compliance as determined by the administrator. The administrator will provide a reasonable amount of time, specific to the
occurrence, to remedy the violation.
Sec. 32-340. Stop orders.
(a) The administrator shall retain the authority to issue stop work orders for any facility that commits any acts prohibited by this article.
(b) Stop work orders: If the administrator determines that voluntary compliance is not feasible, that a facility is operating in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, or that conditions exist at a facility that may lead to an illicit discharge, upon written notice of an issuance of
a stop work order, such work or conditions shall be immediately terminated or remedied. Such notice shall be provided to the owner,
operator, or responsible party of the facility and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. However, where an
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/648
emergency exists which may result in discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and
safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat written notice shall not be
required.
Sec. 32-341. Penalties and violations.
(a) Violations of provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with approval of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance with Chapter 1 (section 1-9) of this
Code against the person for each violation. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) The owner or operator of any facility, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
(c) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(d) It is further the intent and declared purpose of this article that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time that the existing ordinance was repealed and such ordinance adopted shall be discharged or
affected by such repeal, but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes
presently in process may be prosecuted in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed.
Sec. 32-342. Appeals, interpretation, and variances.
Any appeals, interpretations or variances of the administrator, except those under division 10 of this article, shall first be to the director of
public works, then to a court of competent jurisdiction, including municipal court.
Secs. 32-343–32-364. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. CREATION OF MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY FEES
Sec. 32-365. Deposit not required.
The City of Abilene shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow into the drainage system.
Sec. 32-366. Billing; delinquent charges.
All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures, including penalties for delinquent payments, shall be as specified in Subchapter C
of Chapter 402, Local Government Code. In addition, such penalties and procedures for collection as are used for other utility billings by
the city, where not in conflict with Subchapter C of Chapter 402, Local Government Code, are hereby adopted for use as rules of the
municipal drainage utility.
Sec. 32-367. Schedule of drainage charges.
The Abilene City Council will set a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the proposed city limits and will provide
drainage for all real property in the proposed city limits on payment of drainage charges, except for any real property required to be
exempt under 402.053 of the Local Government Code. A schedule of charges shall be adopted by resolution of the city council following
a public hearing as required by section 402.045 of the Local Government Code. Said resolution shall be placed on file at the office of the
city secretary following passage and made available upon request to the public. Such charges may be changed, adjusted or readjusted by
city council resolution as required and a current copy of such drainage charges shall be kept available at the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 32-368. Appeals.
Ordinary billing and payment disputes shall be subject to informal hearing and dispute resolution procedures used for other utility billing
disputes by the City of Abilene. Certain other matters may be appealed to the stormwater administrator or his designee as follows:
(1) Residential property billing can be appealed when the owner can offer proof that the property is unimproved and
therefore not subject to the municipal drainage utility fee or may be appealed when proof can be offered that the amount of
imperviousness of the property is inaccurate.
(2) Nonresidential property billing can be appealed when the owner can offer proof that an error was made with regard to
the category of land development, that the land is unimproved, or the amount of imperviousness of the land development.
(3) The director of public works or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within thirty (30) days after
receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner.
Sec. 32-369. Administrative enforcement, injunctive relief.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/648
Violations of this division, including failure to pay, are declared to be civil in nature, which may be enjoined by civil proceedings in state
court, remedied as allowed by Chapter 402, or termination of water services on the account for which this fee is assessed.
Secs. 32-370–32-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. FATS, OILS, AND GREASE
Sec. 32-401. General provisions.
(a) Purpose and objectives. In order to protect public health, the sanitary sewer system, and the environment, this article sets forth
uniform requirements for fats, oils, and grease (FOG) generators and grease trap waste transporters operating in the city and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code S 1251 et seq.). The
objectives of this article are:
(1) To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer overflows resulting from blockages and obstructions due to the accumulation
of fats, oils, and grease;
(2) To promote the proper maintenance of grease traps/interceptors; and
(3) To ensure the proper handling, disposal, transport and tracking of grease trap waste.
(b) Administration. The city manager or his/her designated city official shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article and is authorized to promulgate such policies, guidelines and procedures as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out its
provisions. Any powers granted to or duties imposed in this chapter upon the city manager may be delegated to other city personnel.
(c) Applicability and prohibitions.
(1) This article shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in
subsection (d) of this section.
(2) Grease traps/interceptors shall not be required for residential users or for food service-sales facilities.
(3) Each generator shall install, use, and maintain an appropriate grease trap/interceptor as required in the city FOG
guidelines and procedures.
(4) No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in
such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the
treatment works into the environment, or that would otherwise be removed with a properly sized, installed, operated and
maintained grease trap/interceptor.
(d) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated.
Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
BOD. The value of the 5-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of “standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater.”
City. The city manager of the City of Abilene or his/her duly authorized representative.
City of Abilene FOG Guidelines and Procedures. The detailed document prepared and provided by the city to aid generators, transporters,
and nondomestic users in implementation of the FOG article.
Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste is processed, treated, and/or intentionally placed into or on any
land and at which the waste will remain after site closure.
Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of grease trap waste.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Fats, oils, & grease (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measureable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136,
as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Food preparation-service facility (facility). Any facility generating fats, oils, or grease as a result of food preparation and food service to
include, but not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing,
serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for human consumption. This definition includes any facility in which foods are
prepared utilizing a grill, griddle, deep-fat fryer, commercial range or oven, broiler, rotisserie, charbroiler, smoker, wok/stir-fry, and/or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/648
similar food preparation equipment including, but not limited to, cafeterias, fast food and full service restaurants, pizza preparation, donut
preparation, and wholesale food preparation; and any facility with area(s) subject to flooding type or wet cleaning processes due to the
cutting or grinding of meat or fish including, but not limited to meat and fish markets; and includes any establishment or facility in which
foods are prepared without the use of fryers, grills or other similar grease generating equipment including, but not limited to, sandwich
shops, coffee shops, ice cream parlors, daycares, limited menu concession stands or convenience stores, and bakeries. This does not
include industrial facilities.
Food service-sales facility. Any facility in which foods are provided pre-wrapped such as pre-packaged sandwiches or similar foods,
candies, and containerized beverages.
Generator. Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor at a food preparation-service facility, or whose act or process
produces grease trap waste at a food preparation-service facility.
Grease trap or interceptor. A device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids,
waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect
settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also referred to herein as “grease trap/interceptors.”
Grease trap waste. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a food preparation-service
facility, including the solids resulting from dewatering processes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit.
pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion
concentration.
POTW or publicly owned treatment works. The treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of
the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater
to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the
indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms “sanitary sewer system” and
“POTW” may be used interchangeably.
Sampling device. An access point such as a sampling well or sample port to allow sampling of the wastewater flow downstream of the
grease trap/interceptor which is located, installed and maintained in accordance with the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
Transporter. A person or entity who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge,
domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code §312.142.
TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of “standard methods for the examination of water
and wastewater.”
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution
or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources.
(Ord. No. 29-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 32-402. Guidelines and procedures.
The city FOG guidelines and procedures shall be incorporated by reference into this article, and shall be approved by the city council and
kept on file with the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 29-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 32-403. Installation and maintenance requirements.
(a) Installations.
(1) New facilities. New facilities shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in
accordance with this article and the city FOG guidelines and procedures. Grease trap/interceptors shall be subject to plan
review and approval by the city prior to construction/installation. Grease trap/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior
to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and a food permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/648
(2) Existing facilities.
(A) Existing grease trap/interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with this article and the city FOG
guidelines and procedures.
(B) Existing facilities shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance
with the city FOG guidelines and procedures when any of the following conditions apply:
(i) Renovation or expansion of an existing food preparation-service facility in the following instances: (1) a
grease trap/interceptor is nonexistent, or (2) a grease trap/interceptor is noncompliant with current FOG guidelines
and procedures and has a history of noncompliance.
(ii) Addition of a food preparation-service facility to an existing structure.
(iii) If prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an existing facility has lost its nonconforming use status
due to vacancy, any grease trap/interceptor shall be required to be compliant with current FOG guidelines and
procedures before a new certificate of occupancy can be issued.
Grease trap/interceptors shall be subject to plan review and approval by the city prior to construction/installation.
Grease trap/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and a
food permit.
(C) Notwithstanding subsection (B) above, if an existing facility has a grease trap/interceptor that was compliant at the
time of original construction, is in good working order, the facility is not increasing its footprint by 50% or more, and the
facility does not have a history of noncompliance, a change of ownership or occupancy shall not require the facility to
replace the existing grease trap/interceptor with one compliant with the city's current FOG guidelines and procedures.
(3) Single certificate of occupancy. Grease trap/interceptors shall be installed pursuant to a single certificate of occupancy.
No person or persons shall allow the use of a single grease trap/interceptor by more than one business as defined by a
certificate of occupancy without prior written approval from the city.
(b) Cleaning and maintenance.
(1) Grease traps/interceptors shall be maintained in accordance with this article and the city FOG guidelines and procedures
at all times.
(2) A generator shall have all grease trap waste cleaned from the grease trap/interceptor and picked up by a licensed
transporter, unless the generator participates in the self-cleaning program as described in the city FOG guidelines and
procedures.
(3) All grease trap waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulations.
(4) Each grease trap/interceptor pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on
the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully
evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code 312.143.
(5) Existing grease traps/interceptors (50 gallons or less) may be allowed to participate in the self-cleaning program as
described in the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
(6) Cleaning schedules:
(A) Grease trap/interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do
not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; that the discharge is in compliance with the BOD,
TSS, FOG, and/or pH limits promulgated in the city FOG guidelines and procedures; and, to ensure that no visible
grease is observed in the discharge.
(B) Grease trap/interceptors (more than 50 gallons) shall be completely evacuated at a minimum of every ninety (90)
days, or more frequently when:
(i) Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as measured from the
bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases;
(ii) The discharge exceeds the BOD, TSS, FOG, and/or pH limits as per the city FOG guidelines and procedures;
or
(iii) If there is a history of noncompliance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/648
(C) Grease trap/interceptors (50 gallons or less) shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the city FOG
guidelines and procedures.
(D) Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the city a request in writing for an
exception to the required pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The city may grant an extension for the
required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
(i) The grease trap owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap will produce an effluent with no visible
grease, and based on defensible analytical results, can demonstrate consistent compliance with the BOD, TSS,
FOG, or pH limits listed in the city FOG guidelines and procedures; or
(ii) Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the
device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases.
In addition, the waiver request may include professional comments from the transporter regarding the performance
of the grease trap/interceptor. These comments will provide additional insight to the city when reviewing the
request.
(E) In any event, a grease trap/interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 365
days.
(F) The city may also require grease trap/interceptors to be serviced on a single-event basis or scheduled basis if
deemed necessary for the proper operation of the grease trap/interceptor.
(G) In the event that a generator ceases operation of a food preparation-service facility, the grease trap/interceptor at
the facility shall be properly cleaned within 30 days of the facility being vacated.
(7) Manifest requirements.
(A) Each pump-out of a grease trap/interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for recordkeeping
purposes.
(B) Manifests must be completed and distributed by the transporter as described in the city FOG guidelines and
procedures.
(C) Manifests shall be maintained on file by the generator and transporter per 30 Texas Administrative Code 312.145
and as described in the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
(Ord. No. 29-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 32-404. Administrative authority
(a) The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any generator or transporter during regular business hours to determine
whether the generator or transporter is complying with this article and the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
(b) The generator or transporter shall allow the city ready access to all parts of such premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, and
the performance of any of their duties. The failure or refusal to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for enforcement action.
(1) The city shall have the right to set up on the generator's premises, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or inspection of the generator's operations.
(2) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the generator at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced.
(3) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the generator's premises shall be a violation of this article.
(c) Nuisances.
(1) Any premises upon which grease and/or grease trap waste has accumulated and which is emitting noxious or offensive
odors, or which is creating an unsanitary or unsafe condition, or which is injurious to the public health is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and subject to chapter 19 of the City Code of Ordinances.
(2) A vehicle transporting grease trap waste which is leaking or spilling from such vehicle is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and subject to chapter 19 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 29-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Sec. 32-405. Enforcement and penalties
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/648
(a) The city shall have the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this article. The duties of the city shall include ensuring
that all generators and transporters conform to this article. The city shall have the authority to adopt policies and procedures consistent
with the terms of this article necessary to implement the provisions of this article.
(b) Violations. it shall be unlawful for any generator or transporter to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this article or the city FOG guidelines and procedures. Any generator or transporter who has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this article or the city FOG guidelines and procedures will be subject to the enforcement actions and penalties
outlined herein. Such a generator or transporter is referred to herein as a violator.
(c) Enforcement actions. The city may pursue the following enforcement actions as appropriate and as described in the city FOG
guidelines and procedures.
(1) Voluntary compliance. The city may instruct a violator that commits any acts prohibited by this article to achieve
voluntary compliance as determined by the city. The city may provide a reasonable amount of time, specific to the occurrence,
to remedy the violation.
(2) Notice of violation. If the city determines that a generator or transporter has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a written notice of violation may be provided to the violator, as described in the city FOG guidelines
and procedures.
(3) Stop-work orders. The city shall retain the authority to issue stop-work orders to any violator that commits any acts
prohibited by this article or the city FOG guidelines and procedures. If the city determines that voluntary compliance is not
feasible, and that a facility is operating in a manner that may lead to a sanitary sewer overflow or damage to the POTW, a
written stop-work order may be issued as described in the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
(4) Suspension of service.
(A) The city may suspend the water supply and/or sanitary sewer connection for any violator who continues to violate
a previous notice to cease discharge into the POTW and fails to comply with this article or the city FOG guidelines and
procedures. The violator will be subject to suspension of service if such measures would abate or reduce the discharge.
(B) Emergency suspension of service. The city may, without prior notice, suspend the water service and/or sanitary
sewer service to a generator to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent substantial
danger as described in the city FOG guidelines and procedures.
(d) Schedule of penalties.
(1) If the city determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line, the generator shall owe a
civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for the second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation
within a two-year period. Civil penalties shall be in addition to reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred by the city in
responding to the blockage or overflow. More than three violations within a two-year period shall result in an increase in
penalty by $500.00 for each additional violation and may also result in termination of services.
(2) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or the city FOG guidelines and procedures shall be subject to
voluntary compliance for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the
third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. More than four violations
within a two-year period will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty for each additional violation and may result in
termination of service.
(e) Right to reconsideration and appeal.
(1) Any person subject to a permit revocation, compliance notice, stop-work order, suspension notice, or an emergency
order may petition the city manager to reconsider the basis for the action or order within ten (10) days of the affected person's
receipt of notice of such action or order. Receipt of notice is presumed to occur three (3) days following the date the notice is
mailed, unless notice is actually received earlier.
(2) In its petition for reconsideration, the person must indicate the provisions of the action or order objected to, the reasons
for the objections, any facts that are contested, the facts that support the person's view of the facts, and any alternate terms of
the action or order that the person would accept.
(3) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed a waiver of any further right to
reconsideration or review of the order.
(4) Within ten (10) days of receipt of the petition for reconsideration, the city manager shall, in writing, either grant the
petition and withdraw or modify the action or order accordingly, or deny the petition, and such granting or denial shall be
timely delivered to the petitioner.
(5) The effect of any compliance action or order shall not be stayed pending reconsideration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/648
(6) Following final determination by the city manager on the reconsideration, any adversely affected party may challenge
such determination in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(7) Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any other enforcement action or prevent existing or
further enforcement action from proceeding unless the same is expressly stayed by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 29-2017, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-17)
Secs. 32-406–32-420. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. HAULED LIQUID WASTE
Sec. 32-421. General provisions.
(a) Purpose and objectives. In order to protect public health, wastewater treatment facilities, and the environment, this article sets forth
uniform requirements for liquid waste transporters disposing of septic or portable toilet waste in the city and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.). The objectives of this
article are:
(1) To detail what types of waste are appropriate for disposal at the liquid waste receiving station;
(2) To ensure the proper disposal and tracking of domestic septic tank and portable toilet waste;
(3) To describe who is eligible to dispose of the appropriate liquid wastes at the receiving station.
(b) Administration. The city manager or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article and is
authorized to promulgate such policies, guidelines and procedures as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out its provisions. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed in this article upon the city manager may be delegated to other city personnel.
(c) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated.
Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms and intent of this or related provisions and given formal and official sanction by the
city.
City [manager]. The city manager of the City of Abilene or his/her designee.
Disposal site. The hauled liquid waste receiving station located at the Hamby Water Reclamation Facility.
Domestic waste (or domestic wastewater). Waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office building, factories, and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water, and industrial waste.
Domestic septage. Either liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank, cesspool, portable toilet, type III marine sanitation device,
or similar treatment works that receives only domestic sewage. Domestic septage does not include liquid or solid material removed from
a septic tank, cesspool, or similar treatment works that receives either commercial nondomestic wastewater or industrial nondomestic
wastewater and does not include grease removed from a grease trap.
Domestic sewage. Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations that is discharged to a wastewater collection system or
otherwise enters a treatment works.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Grease trap waste. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a food preparation-service
facility, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes.
Indirect discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids, gaseous substances derived from sources, such as, but not limited to grease traps, grit traps,
chemical/portable toilets or septic tanks.
Nondomestic. Waterborne solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, or food-processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource including oil or gas,
or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater.
Permit. The formal written document issued by the administration of the water utilities department to a business authorizing the disposal
of liquid waste at the disposal site.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/648
Permittee. A person granted a permit under this article.
pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the free hydrogen ion
activity concentration. Approved wastes shall have a pH of greater than 5.5 and less than 11.0.
Portable toilet waste. Domestic waste removed from holding tanks such as chemical/portable toilets, campers, and travel trailers.
POTW or publicly owned treatment works. The treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of
the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater
to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the act, which has jurisdiction over the
indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms “sanitary sewer system” and
“POTW” may be used interchangeably.
Septage. Domestic waste removed from holding tanks such as cesspools or septic tanks.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
Transporter. A person or entity who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge,
domestic septage, portable toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code §312.142.
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution
or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources.
(Ord. No. 42-2017, pt.1(Exh. A), 11-2-17)
Sec. 32-422. Operation requirements.
(a) Types of liquid waste.
(1) Only domestic septage or portable toilet wastes may be disposed of at the disposal site.
(2) All other wastes are incompatible wastes and shall not be mixed in the same container.
(3) A permit holder shall not place compatible liquid waste material in a container used to transport an incompatible waste
material when such container has not been emptied and cleaned of such incompatible waste.
(4) Incompatible wastes shall include, but not be limited to:
* Motor oil.
* Grease.
* Antifreeze.
* Battery acid.
* Any other drainings from an engine or motor.
* Hazardous waste.
* Liquid from boilers.
* Commercial RO waste.
* Grease trap waste.
* Grit trap waste.
(5) No user shall ever in any way attempt to dilute an incompatible waste as a partial or complete substitute for achieving
compliance with any limitations expressly instituted by this article.
(b) Waste disposal permitting.
(1) All entities desiring to dispose of wastes at the disposal site must acquire a permit. The term of a permit is three years. A
person who desires to obtain a permit must make an application by legibly completing a form provided by the city.
(2) No liquid waste shall be disposed of other than in a manner and place described in the permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/648
(3) The city may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under any section of this article.
(4) An application must be received at least 30 days before the first disposal date.
(5) Only transporters whose primary place of business is located within the following counties will be granted a permit:
Callahan, Coke, Coleman, Fisher, Jones, Nolan, Runnels, Shackelford, and Taylor.
(6) The city may suspend a permit for a period of one year or less, if the transporter or an employee of the transporter
violates any applicable provisions of this article.
(7) After suspension under this section has ended, a transporter may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. If the city
determines that the transporter is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent
future violations, and all required fees have been paid, the permit may be reinstated.
(8) Upon expiration of a permit, the permittee shall no longer have access to the disposal site. Permit renewal shall be
required, and the transporter shall regain access with approval of the city.
(9) If the city denies the issuance of or revokes a permit, the city shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may
appeal the decision of the city to the city manager. Any appeal must be filed with the city manager, in writing, within ten days
of sending of the notice of the action taken. The decision of the city manager shall be final and not subject to further appeal.
(10) The information required in each permit application shall be kept current at all times by the permit holder. Failure to
keep such information current shall be cause for suspension of the permit.
(11) Only vehicles listed in the permit application shall be approved for disposal purposes.
(12) A transporter's liquid waste contents shall not cause the wastewater treatment plant to violate the existing Texas
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit. If any damage sustained by the wastewater treatment plant can be shown to
have occurred due to the load contents of an individual or group, the contributing transporter shall be held financially liable for
all damages.
(13) All permits to dispose of liquid wasted issued prior to the effective date of this article shall terminate after 30 days from
the effective date, and those permittees shall be required to obtain a permit under this article.
(c) Sanitary operation and testing.
(1) Permittees who collect and/or transport waste subject to control under this article shall initiate and maintain a record of
each individual collection and deposit. Such record shall be in the form of a five-part manifest trip ticket in compliance with
30 TAC §312.145. Permittees shall maintain a copy of each record for a period of five years. The transporter shall present the
facility operator with the trip ticket upon arrival at the disposal site, and then provide the facility operator with its copy of the
quintuplicate trip ticket after the facility operator accepts the load and signs the trip ticket.
(2) Acceptance samples of tank contents shall be obtained and analyzed for pH and inspected for films and odors. Any
analysis results outside the acceptable analysis limits, materials having significant films or oily sheen, or contents emitting
odors indicative of potentially harmful constituents, at the sole discretion of the city, shall be grounds for rejection of the entire
load.
(3) Investigative samples may be taken at random for more advanced analysis at the discretion of the city.
(4) The city may refuse a load if in the city's judgment there is evidence or other information to suggest a load will
negatively impact the plant's ability to meet TCEQ discharge permit requirements or prevent in any fashion the successful
operation of the wastewater treatment plant. At the time of rejection, a transporter may request that formal written notification
of refusal be delivered, within 10 days, to the place of business listed in the permit.
(5) The permittee shall take all necessary steps and measures to prevent the development or existence of a nuisance or of
any condition hazardous to the health of the public which can arise from his operations, and shall comply with the following:
(A) Every vehicle and all auxiliary equipment used for the transportation or handling of domestic septage or portable
toilet waste shall be liquidtight and gastight, so that no foul material may spill or escape therefrom.
(B) In the event of an inadvertent discharge or spill of liquid waste during on-site transportation or disposal, the
transporter must take all appropriate action to protect human health and the environment. The transporter must
immediately notify the facility operator regarding any spills that take place on facility premises. The transporter is fully
responsible for the removal and cleanup of all of its on-site spills to the satisfaction of the wastewater plant manager.
(C) Upon completion of disposal activities the transporter is responsible for cleanup and proper disposal of any
remaining debris resulting from its disposal activities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/648
(6) The city may inspect the liquid waste handling equipment of any permitted vehicle at the disposal site at any time to
confirm compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 42-2017, pt.1(Exh. A), 11-2-17)
Sec. 32-423. Penalty.
A violation of this article shall constitute a class C criminal offense, punishable pursuant to section 1-9 of this code. (Ord. No. 42-2017,
pt.1(Exh. A), 11-2-17)
Chapter 1: General Provisions*
Effective: June 1, 2010
Article 1 - Authority of Decision-Makers
Division 1 - General Provisions
Section 1.1.1.1 Source of Authority
(a) Authority. Authority under this Land Development Code shall be vested in and delegated to the officials and decision-makers
designated in this Article 1 under the City's charter, the constitution and laws of the state of Texas, and the City Code. This authority shall
be deemed supplemental to any other authority lawfully conferred upon the officials and decision-makers. The omission of a citation in
this Land Development Code to any authority conferred upon the officials and decision-makers under the City's charter, the constitution
or laws of the state of Texas, or the City Code, or the failure to identify in this article authority conferred by other provisions of this Land
Development Code, shall not be construed as limiting the actions of such officials and decision-makers taken in accordance with and in
reliance upon such authority. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.1.2 Implied Authority
(a) Authority. The officials and decision-makers shall have all implied authority necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities
expressly delegated by this Land Development Code to the extent the implied authority is not in conflict with the expressly delegated
authority. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.1.3 Limitation on Authority
(a) City Policy. It is the policy of the City that the standards and procedures applicable to development of property within the City
limits and within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction are as stated in this Land Development Code, notwithstanding any representation
by any City official summarizing, paraphrasing or otherwise interpreting such standards to the contrary, whether generally or as applied to
development of specific property.
(b) Representations Concerning Future Action on Application or Legislative Action. No City official, whether an employee of the City
or a member of an appointed board or commission, or a member of the City Council, shall have the authority to make representations to a
property owner concerning the likelihood of an outcome of that official's decision or the decision of an appointed board or commission or
the City Council, on any application or legislative action that has yet to be filed or is pending before the City for decision. An official
may, however, upon request of a person, convey information concerning that official's position on a pending application in accordance
with procedures established in this Chapter 1. No person is entitled to rely upon any representation made by an official in breach of this
Subsection, and each and every such representation shall be deemed in violation of the policy of the City, and is not binding on the City in
any respect. No subsequent decision of the City shall be deemed a ratification of any representation made in contravention of this
Subsection.
(c) Representations Concerning Future Amendments. No City official, whether an employee of the City or a member of an appointed
board or commission, or a member of the City Council, shall have the authority to make binding representations to any person concerning
the likelihood that a change in any legislative classification or a change in the text of this Land Development Code as applied to a specific
tract of land will be granted, or that an existing legislative classification or text provision will remain in effect, or that any petition for
relief will be granted. No person is entitled to rely upon any representation made by an official in contravention of this Subsection, and
each and every such representation shall be deemed in violation of the policy of the City, and is not binding on the City in any respect. No
subsequent decision of the City shall be deemed a ratification of any representation made in contravention of this Subsection.
(d) Effect of Comprehensive Plan, Ordinance or Development Standard on Liability Claims. The City's approval of an application
under the standards and procedures of this Land Development Code does not guarantee or assure that development of the property in
accordance with the standards will prevent, minimize or mitigate harm to adjoining property. A person who undertakes development
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/648
activities shall not rely on the City's approval of an application as ensuring that the development activities will not result in harm to
adjoining property. The regulations contained in this Land Development Code constitute an exercise of the City's governmental authority,
and approval of an application shall not give rise to any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents and employees, nor will an
approval release the applicant from any liability for harm arising out of development of the property under applicable law.
(e) No Waivers. Except as expressly provided for in this Land Development Code, no official, board, commission of the City, or the
City Council, shall have authority to waive any requirement or standard for an application. Any attempted waiver of a requirement or
standard for an application in contravention of this Subsection shall hereby be deemed null and void, and, upon discovery, shall be
grounds for revocation of a permit or approval, or reconsideration of a legislative decision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.1.4 Conflict in Authority
(a) Internal Inconsistency. Whenever one or more provisions of this Land Development Code are in apparent conflict, the provisions
shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to each. If the conflict is between a general provision and a specific provision, and
the conflict is irreconcilable, the specific provision shall prevail as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is
the later enactment and the manifest intent is that the general provision should prevail.
(b) Incomplete Provisions. Whenever a specific standard or procedure of this Land Development Code is incomplete when applied in
isolation to an application or development activity, such standard shall be supplemented by any general or specific provision of this Code,
the City Code, or the City Charter in order to give effect to the incomplete provision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - City Staff
Section 1.1.2.1 Responsible Official Designated
(a) Responsible Official. The responsible official shall be the Director of a designated City department who is assigned responsibility
under this Land Development Code for taking the following actions with regard to a particular type of application or relief petition
authorized under this Chapter 1:
(1) Accepting the application or petition for filing and processing the application;
(2) Reviewing and making recommendations concerning the application or petition;
(3) Seeking advice of other City departments and coordinating any recommendations from such departments concerning the
application or petition;
(4) Initially deciding the application or petition, where so authorized;
(5) Determining a request for exemption;
(6) Preparing reports to and advising any board, commission or the City Council that has responsibility for making
recommendations on or deciding the application or petition;
(7) Promulgating additional or modified policies, standards and administrative rules for adoption by the City Council that
apply to the application or petition;
(8) Initiating enforcement actions concerning compliance with the standards applicable to the application or petition and the
conditions imposed thereon; and
(9) Taking all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of this Land Development Code with respect to
the application or petition.
(b) Specific Duties. The specific duties of the responsible official shall include those authorized under the universal procedures
applicable to all types of applications pursuant to Article 2 of this Chapter 1, those authorized under the provisions governing procedures
for deciding particular applications under this Article 1 of this Chapter 1, and those authorized under relief procedures pursuant to Article
3 of this Chapter 1.
(c) Delegation. The responsible official may delegate the official's authority under this Code to subordinate officials, who shall
thereupon be deemed the responsible official for purposes of carrying out the delegated duties.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.2 Director of Planning
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/648
(a) Responsible Official. The Director of Planning is the responsible official for the following types of applications and relief petitions:
(1) Petition for amending the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Petition for a zoning map amendment, including a petition for creation of an overlay district, or Planned Development
(PD) district;
(3) Application for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP);
(4) Application for a special exception;
(5) Application for change in status of nonconformity;
(6) Application for a Site Plan;
(7) Application for a Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Minor Plat, Amending Plat and replat;
(8) Application for a sign permit, with joint responsibility with the Building Official;
(9) Appeal of a decision on any application for which the Director is the responsible official;
(10) Variance petition for any application for which the Director is the responsible official;
(11) Vested rights petition for any decision where the Director is the responsible official for the application for which the
vested rights petition is filed;
(12) Application for thoroughfare closure;
(13) Application for street name change;
(14) Application for easement release
(b) Initial Decision-Maker. The Director of Planning is the initial decision-maker for the following types of applications and relief
petitions, subject to appeal as provided in this Chapter 1:
(1) Application for a Minor Plat or qualifying Amending Plat;
(2) Application for a Site Plan;
(3) Application for a sign permit, with joint responsibility with the Building Official;
(4) Vested rights petition for any decision for which the Director is the initial decision-maker.
(c) Simultaneous Submittals and Approvals. A Site Plan and a plat application may be simultaneously submitted if the property being
developed is properly zoned for the proposed use. The Director of Planning may approve a Site Plan and may cause a plat to be acted on
by the Planning & Zoning Commission simultaneously if proper zoning for the development application is in place.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.3 City Engineer
(a) Responsible Official. The City Engineer is the responsible official for the following types of applications and relief petitions (except
as provided):
(1) Application for approval of construction and engineering plans, and all related construction management tasks, including
without limitation, approval of contracts for public improvements;
(2) Application for a Site Preparation Permit;
(3) Application for a Floodway Development Permit;
(4) Application for a Driveway Permit;
(5) Appeal of a decision on any application for which the Director is the responsible official;
(6) Variance petition for any application for which the Director is the responsible official;
(7) Vested rights petition for any decision where the Director is the responsible official for the application for which the
vested rights petition is filed; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/648
(8) Petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement in accordance with Article 3, Division 2 of this Chapter
1.
(b) Initial Decision-Maker. The City Engineer is the initial decision-maker for the following types of applications and relief petitions,
subject to appeal as provided in this Chapter 1:
(1) Application for approval of construction plans, and all related construction management tasks, including without
limitation approval of a contract for public improvements;
(2) Application for a Site Preparation Permit; and
(3) Vested rights petition for any decision for which the Director is the initial decision-maker.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.4 Building Official
(a) Responsible Official and Initial Decision-Maker. The building official is the responsible official for and shall initially decide the
following types of applications:
(1) Application for a Building Permit;
(2) Application for a Certificate of Occupancy; and
(3) Application for a sign permit;
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.5 Parks Director
(a) Responsible Official and Initial Decision-Maker. The Parks Director is the responsible official for and shall initially decide the
following types of applications:
(1) Park fee decision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.6 City Manager
(a) Initial Decision-Maker on Appeals. The City Manager is the initial decision-maker for any appeal for which a City staff person is
the initial decision-maker, subject to further appeal as provided for in this Chapter 1:
(1) Application for a Site Preparation Permit.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.7 Floodplain Administrator
(c) [(a)] Responsible Official and Initial Decision-Maker. The Floodplain Administrator is the responsible official for and shall initially
decide the following types of applications:
(1) Floodway Development Permit;
(2) A Drainage Plan.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.2.8 Other City Officials
(a) The City Manager, City Attorney and any other official delegated responsibilities under this Land Development Code are
authorized to take all actions necessary to carry out their responsibilities in accordance with the requirements and limitations prescribed
herein. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 1.1.3.1 Reference to City Charter
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/648
(a) Reference. A Planning and Zoning Commission shall be organized, and it shall have the powers and duties as provided for in the
Charter of the City of Abilene, Texas and as authorized by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1
(Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.3.2 Structure of Planning and Zoning Commission
(a) General. The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission (also referred to as the Commission) are appointed by the City
Council. In making appointments to the Commission, the City Council shall seek to ensure broad representation and expertise among the
membership.
(b) Organization & Membership. There shall be established a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7)
citizens of the City.
(1) The City Manager, the Planning Director, the City Engineer, and others as the City Council may provide by ordinance or
resolution, shall serve as City staff liaisons. City staff members shall not have the power to vote.
(2) The voting members of said Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for a
term of three (3) years, which term shall be deemed extended until a successor is appointed and qualified to serve on such
Commission. Such appointees shall elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary from among its official members. A vacancy in an
unexpired term shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the remainder of the term.
(c) Removal from Office, Vacancies. Any member of the Commission may be removed from office for just cause and on written
charges by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire City Council, but such member shall be entitled to a public hearing before such vote is
taken.
(1) Failure of any regular member to attend three (3) of any seven (7) consecutive regular meetings without just cause, shall
be considered sufficient reason for the Chair to ask for the resignation of the member from Commission.
(2) When vacancies occur, it shall be the duty of the Chair of the Commission to notify the Mayor promptly of any
vacancies occurring in membership, and the City Council shall fill such vacancies within ninety (90) business days for the
unexpired term of the original appointment.
(d) Rules. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt its own rules of order and procedure to regulate both the actual meetings
of the Commission and the activities directly related thereto. The rules shall deal only with procedural matters and shall be available to
the public and kept on file with the Planning Director. If no rules are adopted, the latest version of Robert's Rules of Order shall be used
until the Commission adopts rules of its own.
(e) Quorum & Voting. A quorum shall consist of no less than four (4) voting members. Affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be
necessary for approval of motions before the Commission. Members must be present to vote at the meeting.
(f) Meetings. All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be open to the public, except that the Commission may hold
closed meetings as permitted under state law. The Commission shall meet not less than once each month in a publicly accessible location.
(g) Records/Minutes. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep a record of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be
filed with the Planning Director and shall be a public record.
(h) Duties of Planning Director. The Planning Director (or designee) shall act as the staff liaison to the Commission and secretary of
the Commission and shall set up and maintain a separate file for each application received. The Director shall record in each file the
names and addresses of all persons to whom notices are mailed, including the date of mailing, and shall keep a record of all notices
published as required in this chapter. All records and files provided for in this Subsection shall be permanent and official files and records
of the City.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.3.3 Powers and Duties
(a) Powers & Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall:
(1) Make recommendations on a Comprehensive Plan or amendments thereto related to the physical development, growth,
improvement, and beautification of the City.
(2) Make recommendations on other types of City plans that are related to the physical development, growth, improvement,
and beautification of the City, including Neighborhood Plans and Corridor Plans.
(3) Recommend to the City Council approval or denial of proposed changes in the zoning districts and/or ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/648
(4) Approve or disapprove the platting or subdividing of land within the corporate limits of the City and within adjacent
areas as permitted by law.
(5) Recommend to the City Council approval or disapproval of requests for street name changes and street closures within
the corporate limits of the City.
(6) Submit annually to the City Manager, not less than ninety (90) business days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a
list of recommended capital improvements, if any, which in the opinion of the Commission, are necessary or desirable during
the forthcoming five (5) year period.
(7) Recommend to the City Council approval or disapproval of plans for housing clearance, public housing, and urban
redevelopment and renewal projects.
(8) Perform such additional duties and exercise such additional powers as may be prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent
with the provisions of the City Charter.
(9) Advise the City Council on applications and petitions for legislative decisions as authorized by this Land Development
Code, such as:
a. Petition for amending the Comprehensive Plan;
b. Petition for a zoning map amendment, including a petition for creation of an overlay district, Conditional Use
Permit (CUP), or Planned Development (PD) district;
c. Amendments to the text of the Land Development Code (LDC) as authorized by City Charter; and
d. Others as assigned by City Council.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.3.4 Authority for Deciding Applications
(a) Final Decision-Maker for Applications. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall finally decide the following types of
applications:
(1) An application for a Preliminary Plat;
(2) An application for a Final Plat;
(3) An application for a replat;
(4) An application for an Amending Plat not approved by the Planning Director;
(5) An application for a Minor Plat; and
(6) An application for a Development Plat.
(b) Timing of Plat Approval. A Preliminary Plat or Final Plat may be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission while a Site
Plan for the same development is being reviewed by the DRC and considered for approval by the Planning Director if the property being
developed is properly zoned for the proposed use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.3.5 Authority for Deciding Appeals and Relief Petitions
(a) Appellate Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall finally decide appeals filed in accordance with Article 3 of this
chapter (Relief Procedures)
(b) Petitions for Relief. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall finally decide the following petitions for relief:
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall finally decide any variance petition on an application for a Preliminary Plat,
Final Plat or replat, except when such variance is for relief from a dedication or construction requirement, in which case
Section 1.1.4.3 shall apply; and
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall initially decide any vested rights petition for any decision for which it is the
initial decision-maker.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/648
Division 4 - City Council
Section 1.1.4.1 Authority for Amendments to the Land Development Code (LDC)
(a) Authority. The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the text of this Land Development
Code on its own initiative or upon petition for a text amendment. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.4.2 Authority for Deciding Legislative Applications
(a) Final Decision on Legislative Actions. The City Council shall finally decide all types of legislative applications, such as zoning
amendments, authorized under this Land Development Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.4.3 Authority for Deciding Appeals and Relief Petitions
(a) Appellate Authority. The City Council shall finally decide appeals on the following applications and relief petitions:
(1) A vested rights petition filed in conjunction with an application for which the City Council is the final decision-maker;
(2) A vested rights petition that has been previously denied by a City official or City board/commission;
(3) A sign permit or an interpretation of sign regulations related to development outside the City limits and within the ETJ
(refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 8);
(4) A Conditional Use Permit appeal following Planning & Zoning Commission denial (refer to Section 1.4.3.7); and,
(5) A waiver of the sidewalk requirements as outlined in Chapter 3, Article 3 [Article 2], Division 13.
(6) A waiver of plat requirements as outlined in Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 4.
(7) Those item's recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(8) A zoning change appeal following P&Z Commission denial.
(b) Petitions for Relief. The City Council shall finally decide the following petitions for relief:
(1) Petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement in accordance with Article 3, Division 2 of this Chapter
1.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 5 - Board of Adjustment (BOA)
Section 1.1.5.1 References
(a) References. The Board of Adjustment shall be organized and have all the powers and authority as set forth in the Charter of the City
of Abilene, Texas, and as authorized by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.5.2 Structure of the Board of Adjustment
(a) Composition and Term. There shall be established a Board of Adjustment which shall consist of five (5) citizens of the City. The
Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of City Council for a term of two (2) years, which term shall be deemed
extended until a successor is appointed and qualified to serve on such board. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall have the
power to appoint by resolution four (4) alternate members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more
regular members when requested to do so by the Planning Director. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same
period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular
members. Such appointees shall serve without compensation and may not hold an elective office of the State of Texas or any political
subdivision thereof. The Board shall elect a Chair from among its official members.
(b) Removal from Office, Vacancies. A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled by the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council, for the remainder of the term.
(1) Unexcused absences from two (2) consecutive meetings without reasonable cause shall constitute just cause for the
removal of an official member, as set forth within this Subsection (b).
(2) Any member or alternate member of the Board may be removed from office for just cause and on written charges by a
two-thirds vote of the entire City Council, but such member shall be entitled to public hearing before such vote is taken.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/648
(3) It shall be the duty of the Chair of the Board to notify the Mayor promptly of any vacancies occurring in membership,
and the City Council shall fill such vacancies within thirty (30) business days for the unexpired term of the original
appointment.
(c) Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules of order and procedure to regulate both the actual meetings of the Board
and the activities directly related thereto. The rules shall deal only with procedural matters and shall be available to the public and kept on
file with the Planning Director. If no rules are adopted, the latest version of Robert's Rules of Order shall be used until the BOA adopts
rules of its own.
(d) Quorum & Voting.
(1) All cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will be heard by a minimum of four (4) members or alternate
members.
(2) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the BOA is necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or
determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the BOA is required
to pass under this Land Development Code, or to authorize a variance from the terms of a provision of this Land Development
Code.
(e) Meetings. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public, except that the BOA may hold closed meetings as
permitted under state law. The Board shall meet not less than once each month or as necessary.
(f) Minutes. The Board [of] Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or
if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep a record of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be
filed with the Planning Director and shall be a public record.
(g) Duties of Planning Director. The Planning Director (or designee) shall act as the staff liaison to the BOA and secretary of the BOA
and shall set up and maintain a separate file for each application received. The Director shall record in each file the names and addresses
of all persons to whom notices are mailed, including the date of mailing, and shall keep a record of all notices published as required in
this chapter. All records and files provided for in this Subsection shall be permanent and official files and records of the City.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.5.3 Authority for Deciding Applications
(a) Authority for Applications. The Board of Adjustment shall finally decide the following types of applications:
(1) An application for a special exception pursuant to Section 1.4.4.1;
(2) An application for a variance pursuant to Section 1.4.4.2;
(3) A sign permit or an interpretation of sign regulations related to development within the City limits (refer to Chapter 4,
Article 1, Division 3, Section 4.1.3.6 or Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 8, respectively); and,
(4) An application for a change in the status of a nonconformity pursuant to Section 1.4.4.3;
(b) Authority for Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall finally decide appeals on the following matters:
(1) An appeal of any official's interpretation of the requirements of Chapters 2 or 4 of this LDC in which the requirement
applies to development within the City limits of Abilene, unless a separate appeals process is otherwise defined within this
LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.5.4 Authority and Decision Timing
(a) Limitation on Authority. The authority delegated to the Board of Adjustment under this Land Development Code shall not be
construed to affect any of the following:
(1) Approval of a petition for a zoning map amendment;
(2) Approval of a Conditional Use Permit;
(3) Authorization of a use not authorized in the zoning district in which the applicant's property is located, except to the
extent necessary to decide a special exception or a petition for a change in status of a nonconformity.
(b) Timing of Decision. The Board of Adjustment shall not render any decision on an application, appeal or relief petition while a
petition for a zoning amendment, application for a Conditional Use Permit, or plat application for the same land is pending and until such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/648
petition or application has been finally decided pursuant to procedures in this Chapter 1.
(c) Notice and Hearing. Any public hearing shall be preceded by posted notice in the manner provided in Article 2, Division 2 of this
Chapter 1. Public hearings shall be conducted in the manner provided in Article 2, Division 3 of this Chapter 1.
(d) Appeals of Board Decisions. Appeals of any decision of the BOA may be taken to a state district court, county court, or county
court-at-law by filing a verified petition stating that the decision of the BOA is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of
the illegality. The petition must be filed within ten (10) business days after the date the decision is made by the BOA.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Development Review Committee (DRC)
Section 1.1.6.1 Structure of the Development Review Committee
(a) General. The City hereby establishes a Development Review Committee. The DRC shall be organized to generally ensure that
certain applications are in compliance with this LDC and other codes of the City, and to coordinate preliminary examination of such
applications to ensure that all City departmental requirements, established by resolution or ordinance, have been met without conflict.
(b) Organization and Structure. The DRC may generally consist of the following members or their duly authorized representatives. All
members may or may not be present at any meeting, and shall attend on an as-needed basis.
(1) The Director of Planning, or designee, who shall serve as the Chair of the DRC;
(2) One additionally authorized Planning representative appointed by the Director of Planning;
(3) The City Engineer;
(4) The Floodplain Administrator;
(5) The Director of Traffic and Transportation;
(6) The Fire Chief;
(7) The Director of Water Utilities;
(8) The Building Official;
(9) Solid Waste Division Manager;
(10) Public Health Engineer;
(11) Representative from telephone utility company.
(12) Representative from cable television company.
(13) Representative from gas utility company.
(14) Representative from electric utility company providing service to specific application(s) under consideration.
(15) Representative from State Department of Highways and Public Transportation.
(16) Representative of 911.
(17) Representative of applicable County.
(18) Representative of the Metropolitan Planning Organization.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.6.2 Procedures of the Development Review Committee
(a) Rules. The DRC shall be empowered to adopt its own rules of order and procedure to regulate both the actual meetings of the DRC
and the activities directly related thereto.
(b) Meetings. All meetings of the DRC shall be open to any applicant who submitted an application that is being considered at that
DRC meeting. The DRC shall meet on a weekly basis, unless no applications have been submitted that need to be considered. The DRC
shall meet within five (5) to thirteen (13) business days after submission of a complete application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/648
(c) Types of Applications Reviewed. The DRC shall review all of the following applications:
(1) An application for a Site Plan;
(2) An application for a Concept Plan and/or Site Development Plan for a Planned Development District;
(3) An application for a Preliminary or Final Plat or Plat Revision;
(4) An application for the abandonment of a thoroughfare or alley (refer to Section 3.2.7.4 in Chapter 3 of this LDC);
(5) An application for a street name change; and
(6) Any other application deemed appropriate for DRC review by the Planning Director.
(d) Procedures for Filing an Application. The applicant shall file with the Planning Director or his designee an appropriate number of
copies of any application which is be reviewed by the DRC, depending on the number of DRC members anticipated to be present at the
review. The applicant shall be notified of the meeting time and place at which his/her application shall be reviewed.
(e) Records. The DRC shall not be required to keep minutes of its proceedings, but shall keep a record showing the meeting time, date,
people present, and the comments made on each application. Such record shall be filed with the Director of Planning and shall be a public
record.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.6.3 Authority for Reviewing Applications
(a) Authority. The DRC shall serve in a review capacity for various types of development applications. The DRC shall make no final
decisions on any type of development applications.
(b) Authority for Recommendations. The DRC shall make recommendations to the Responsible Official, Planning and Zoning
Committee, and/or City Council, as appropriate, on any development applications it reviews.
(c) Timing of Decision.
(1) The DRC shall not render any recommendation on any application while a petition for a zoning amendment or
application for a Conditional Use Permit until such petition or application has been finally decided pursuant to procedures in
this Chapter 1.
(2) The DRC may make a recommendation for approval or denial of a Site Plan prior to or as a plat application is
considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission if the development is properly zoned for the proposed use.
(3) The DRC may request another review of the initial application if deemed insufficient.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 7 - Landmarks Commission
Section 1.1.7.1 Structure of the Landmarks Commission
(a) General. The City hereby establishes a Landmarks Commission. The Landmarks Commission shall administer the provisions of this
LDC appropriate for the protection and preservation of structures and lands deemed by the community to be of unique historical,
architectural, and cultural value. The Landmarks Commission shall have all the powers and duties specifically provided for herein this
Division 7.
(b) Composition and Term.
(1) Regular Members. The seven (7) voting members of the Landmarks Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of City Council for a term of three (3) years. Said term shall be deemed extended until a successor is appointed to
serve on the Landmarks Commission. Appointees shall serve without compensation. The Landmarks Commission shall elect a
chair, a vice-chair, secretary, and sergeant-at-arms from among its official members, who shall consist of the following:
a. Two residents, managers or owners of historic properties
b. A member of the Abilene Preservation League
c. A member of the Taylor County Historical Commission
d. One licensed architect
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/648
e. A representative of the Abilene Board of Realtors
f. A representative of the construction industry
(2) Alternate Members. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall also have the power to appoint two (2) alternate
members at-large to the Landmarks Commission who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when
requested to do so by the Planning Director. The composition of this at-large alternate membership shall be similar to the
composition of the regular Commission membership. They shall be residents of the City of Abilene with interest, background,
or expertise in the area of preservation of significant structures or lands. Each alternate member shall serve for a term of three
(3) years. Any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. The
purpose of alternates is to ensure a quorum of Landmarks Commission membership at official meetings.
(3) Ex-Officio Members. In addition to the members from the community as stated above, the following persons or their
designees shall sit on the Landmarks Commission as ex-officio members. These include the City Manager, the City Attorney,
the Planning Director, the Building Official, and the Director of Economic Development. None of the ex-officio members
shall have voting power, but shall assist the Landmarks Commission in its various functions.
(c) Removal from Office, Vacancies. Members of the Landmarks Commission serve at the pleasure of City Council. The term of each
member and alternate member shall be deemed extended until a successor is appointed to the Landmarks Commission.
(d) Rules. The Landmarks Commission shall adopt its own rules of order and procedure to regulate meetings and activities directly
related thereto. The rules shall deal only with procedural matters and shall be available to the public and kept on file with the Planning
Director. If no rules are adopted, the latest version of Robert's Rules of Order shall be used until the Landmarks Commission adopts rules
of its own.
(e) Quorum & Voting.
(1) A quorum shall consist of no less than four (4) members.
(2) Affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be necessary for approval of motions before the Commission, except as
specifically set forth within Section 2.3.4.4 (Historic Overlay District regulations) concerning designation of a Historic
Overlay District. Members must be present at the meeting to vote.
(f) Meetings. All meetings of the Landmarks Commission shall be open to the public. Regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once
a month, and the Planning Director shall call together the Landmarks Commission to consider official business. Additional meetings may
be held upon the call of the chair or the vice-chair, in the absence of the chair, or upon petition of a simple majority of Landmarks
Commission members.
(g) Records. The Landmarks Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote upon each question. Such minutes
shall be a public record, filed with the Planning Director.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.7.2 Powers and Duties
(a) The Landmarks Commission shall review all completed applications for designation of a Historic Overlay District and forward its
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(b) The Landmarks Commission shall review and approve or deny all completed applications for Certificates of Appropriateness and
District Standards, as provided for in this subsection and Section 2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4] concerning the Historic Overlay District, and
Neighborhood Conservation Districts as provided for in Section 2.4.4.3 [2.3.4.3].
(c) It shall further be the responsibility of the Commission to perform the following duties:
(1) Review and periodically update the Historic Preservation Plan and the comprehensive survey of structures and lands felt
by the community to be of historical, cultural, or architectural significance.
(2) Maintain current and accurate records of all Historic Overlay District designations and other historic properties. As a
part of this recordkeeping, the Landmarks Commission will maintain an Abilene Register of Historic Properties.
a. The Abilene Register of Historic Properties is compiled using official survey data.
b. The Abilene Register of Historic Properties is used to make decisions regarding the approval of Historic Overlay
Districts.
(3) Provide information to owners of historic properties.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/648
(4) Actively pursue and formulate a program for private and public action to promote and encourage the preservation of
historic landmarks.
(5) Appoint a District Standards Committee for each Historic Overlay District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 45-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-18)
Section 1.1.7.3 Authority for Deciding Applications
(a) Initial Authority for Applications. The Landmarks Commission shall initially decide the following types of applications:
(1) An application for District Standards submitted in association with a Historic Overlay District designation application
(refer to Section 2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4] of this LDC), prior to final action on such application by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and if applicable City Council, when action is taken on the Historic Overlay District application.
(b) Final Authority for Applications. The Landmarks Commission shall finally decide the following types of applications:
(1) An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for a Neighborhood Conservation District pursuant to Section 2.4.4.3
[2.3.4.3];
(2) An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for a Historic Overlay District pursuant to Section 2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4].
(c) Specific Procedures. The specific procedures for decisions of the Landmarks Commission are outlined within Section 2.4.4.3
[2.3.4.3] for applications related to Neighborhood Conservation Districts, and within Section 2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4] for applications related to
Historic Overlay Districts.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.1.7.4 District Standards Committee, Subcommittee of the Landmarks Commission
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this subcommittee of the Landmarks Commission is to review all district standards and to preview all
Certificates of Appropriateness in a historic district before they are reviewed and voted upon by the Landmarks Commission.
(b) Composition. The Landmarks Commission chairperson shall appoint a member of the Landmarks Commission to serve as
chairperson of the District Standards Committee. Committee membership shall be as follows:
(1) One member of the Landmarks Commission.
(2) One (1) member of the Abilene Preservation League
(3) Three property owners who own property within the district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 2 - Universal Procedures
Division 1 - Application Processing
Section 1.2.1.1 Initiation of Application
(a) Initiation by Owner. Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Land Development Code, a petition for legislative action affecting
land, other than a petition for a text amendment or a zoning amendment, or an application for a development permit, may be initiated only
by the owner of an interest in the land subject to the application, or the owner's designated agent. If the applicant is a designated agent,
the application shall include a written statement from the property owner authorizing the agent to file the application on the owner's
behalf. The responsible official may establish the type of documents needed to determine ownership or agency.
(b) Initiation by City. An agent of the City acting as a representative of the City can initiate any application authorized under this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.2 Complete Application and Expiration
(a) Applicability. The following procedures shall apply to any application that is required by the City and is submitted in accordance
with this LDC.
(b) Determination of Completeness. Every required application shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the responsible
official for processing the application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/648
(1) No required application shall be accepted by the responsible official for processing unless it is accompanied by all
documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this LDC.
(2) A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of
this LDC.
(3) A determination of completeness shall be made by the responsible official no later than the fifth (5th) business day after
the official filing date that the required application is submitted to the responsible official.
a. The applicant shall be notified in writing within five (5) business days if the submitted application is incomplete.
b. If the required application is determined to be complete, the application shall be processed as prescribed by this
LDC.
c. If the required application is determined to be incomplete, the notification shall specify the documents or other
information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire (see Subsection (d)
below) if the documents or other information are not provided.
d. A required application shall be deemed complete on the sixth (6th) business day after the application has been
received if the applicant has not been notified that the application is incomplete in accordance with this section.
(c) Resubmittal After Notification of Incompleteness. If the required application is resubmitted after a notification of incompleteness
within the time allotted in subsection (d), the application shall be processed upon receipt of the resubmittal. No additional determination
of completeness shall be made thereafter; however, to the extent that the information or documents submitted is not sufficient to enable
the decision-maker to apply the criteria for approval, the application may be denied on such grounds.
(d) Expiration of Application.
(1) The required application shall expire on the forty-fifth (45th) day after the date the application is received if:
a. The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's requirements
relating to the required application;
b. The City provides to the applicant, not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the application is filed,
written notice that specifies the necessary documents or other information, and the date the application will expire if the
documents or other information is not provided; and
c. The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the
notification.
(2) If the required application is not completed by the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is submitted to the
responsible official, the required application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together
with any accompanying applications.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.3 Waiver
(a) Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 1.2.1.2, the responsible official may initially waive the submission of any information
in the application and accompanying materials that is not necessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed activity. (Ord. No. 8-
2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.4 Official Filing Date
(a) The time period established by State law or this Land Development Code for processing or deciding a complete application shall
commence on the official filing date. The official filing date is the date the application is deemed complete by the responsible official in
the manner prescribed by Section 1.2.1.2. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.5 Universal Application Contents
(a) Application Forms Generally. The City is hereby authorized to prepare application forms that include information requirements,
checklists, architectural or engineering drawing sizes, applicant contact information, and any other information necessary to show
compliance with City Codes.
(b) Information for All Applications. All applications shall contain the following information:
(1) Identification of property owner and authorized agent;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/648
(2) Description of the property and the nature of the development that is the subject of the application;
(3) Identification of all zoning classifications (inside the City only) for the property;
(4) Identification of all pending legislative applications for the property;
(5) Identification of decisions on all quasi-judicial or administrative applications for the property that remain in effect;
(6) Identification of all accompanying applications;
(7) Identification of all pending or accompanying requests for relief;
(8) Demonstration of compliance with prior approved permits.
(c) All application forms are available in the City's Planning and Development Services office and on the City's website.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.6 Application Fees
(a) Every application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in the fee schedule prepared and adopted as an appendix to
this Code. The prescribed fee shall not be refundable, except when the City Council waives the application fee for resubmission of an
approval that was denied. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time per procedures established by the City Council. (Ord. No.
8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.7 Modification of Applications
(a) The applicant may modify any complete application following its filing and prior to the expiration of the period during which the
City is required to act on the application.
(1) If the modification is for revisions requested by the City, and the modification is received at least five (5) business days
prior to the time scheduled for decision on the application, the application shall be decided within the period for decision
prescribed by this Land Development Code.
(2) In all other instances (e.g., when the applicant chooses to submit a revised application on his own accord because of a
change in development decisions), submittal of a modified application shall extend the time for deciding the application for a
period equal to the time specified in this Land Development Code to decide the original application, commencing on the date
the modified application is officially filed, unless a waiver of the time for decision is first required (refer to Chapter 3, Section
3.1.1.4 for plat application time waivers), in which case the terms of the approved waiver shall govern the period within which
the City must act on the application.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.8 Action by Responsible Official
(a) Circulate & Compile Comments. Following the determination that an application is complete (Section 1.2.1.2), the responsible
official shall circulate the application to all other administrative officials and departments whose review is required for a decision on the
application and shall compile the comments and recommendations of the officials.
(b) Decision Rendered, If Applicable. The responsible official shall render a decision in the time prescribed for the applicable
application, if the official is the decision-maker for the application.
(c) Forward Application & Provide Notification. In cases where the responsible official is not the decision-maker, the responsible
official shall forward the application for review to any advisory board/commission and the final decision-maker, and shall prepare a report
to such board or commission, or to the City Council, as the case may be, including the compilation of any comments and
recommendations by other administrative officials. The responsible official also shall prepare required notices and schedule the
application for decision within the time and in the manner required by this Land Development Code.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.9 Exemption Determination
(a) For any application for a development permit for which exemptions are listed, an exemption from the requirement to apply for such
permit shall be determined in the following manner:
(1) The application for exemption must be filed on a form supplied by the responsible official, must be accompanied by the
review fee set by the City Council, and must include all of the following information:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/648
a. Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and the applicant.
b. A brief description of the activity or development for which exemption is sought;
c. A scale drawing depicting the boundaries of the site, the location of existing improvements on the site, and the
location of the proposed development activities on the site.
d. Information establishing the basis for the exemption.
(2) The responsible official shall notify the applicant of the decision. If the responsible official denies the application for
exemption, the official shall require that an application for the development permit be prepared in accordance with this Code.
(b) An exemption is a separate and distinct consideration that is differentiated from a special exception (refer to Section 1.4.4.1) and/or
a variance (refer to Section 1.4.4.2).
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.10 Action by Advisory Board/Commission
(a) In the absence of a recommendation from an advisory board/commission by a majority vote on a proposed application, the advisory
board/commission shall be presumed conclusively to have recommended that the application be considered by the City Council with a
recommendation for denial from the advisory board/commission. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.11 Decision
(a) The decision-maker for the application shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application within the time prescribed by
this Land Development Code. Unless otherwise prescribed by law or City Charter, where the decision-maker is a board, commission or
the City Council, the application shall be decided by majority vote of a quorum of the members of the board, commission or the City
Council, provided that a super-majority vote or other decision rule on the application has not been invoked in accordance with the
provisions of law, charter, or this Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.1.12 Conditions
(a) The initial or final decision-maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an application as are reasonably necessary to
assure compliance with applicable requirements of this Land Development Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Notice Requirements
Section 1.2.2.1 Published Notice
(a) Whenever published notice of a public hearing before a board or commission or the City Council is required under state law, the
City Charter, or this Land Development Code, the responsible official shall cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the date set for the required hearing. The notice shall set forth the
date, time, place and purpose of the hearing, and identification of the subject property, where the decision concerns an individual tract or
parcel of land. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.2.2 Personal Notice
(a) Whenever personal notice of a public hearing is required by state law, the City Charter, or this Land Development Code before a
board or commission or the City Council, the responsible official shall cause notice to be sent by regular mail before the tenth (10th)
calendar day before the hearing date to the following:
(1) Each owner of real property located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the property in question,
(2) The applicant and/or property owner, and
(3) If the matter to be considered is an appeal, to the appellant.
(b) The notice shall set forth the name of the applicant, the time, place and purpose of the hearing, identification of the subject property,
and if the matter to be considered is an appeal, the name of the appellant.
(1) Notice shall be sent to each owner indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll for land inside the City
limits, and, when required by state law, on the most recently approved county tax roll for land in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction. For recently annexed land that is not included on the most recently approved municipal or county tax roll, notice
may be given by publication.
(2) Notice may be served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and first class postage prepaid, in the United States
mail.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.2.3 Posting Notice on Property for Zoning Amendments
(a) When any person, firm or corporation requests a zoning change, a sign(s) shall be erected and maintained upon the property for
which a zoning change has been requested. Such sign(s) shall be located as follows:
(1) One (1) sign per street frontage shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the abutting street, or as determined by the
Planning Director or designee.
(2) So as to be clearly visible and readable from the public right-of-way and not obstructed in any manner.
(3) So as not to create a hazard to traffic on the public rights-of-way abutting the property.
(4) On the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing of such zoning change request by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and to remain continuously on the property until final action by the City Council or withdrawal of the
case by the applicant. Removal of the sign by the applicant prior to a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or a final decision by the City Council shall constitute a withdrawal of the request.
(b) The sign shall be installed by the City, and shall advise that a zoning change has been requested and shall list the telephone number
of the Planning Department for more information. The Planning Director is hereby authorized to establish size, type and message
requirements for such signs.
(c) Upon making an application for a zoning change, the City shall place sign(s) as required by this section. The City shall install such
sign(s) in compliance as required by this section.
(d) After the zoning change request is approved by the City Council, denied by the City Council, or withdrawn by the applicant, the
City shall remove the sign from the area of the request within ten (10) days of such event.
(e) It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, destroy, deface or obstruct the view of a sign which gives notice that a zoning change has
been requested.
(f) In the event the City shall fail to erect signs in accordance with this section, then the public hearing before the appropriate body
shall be postponed to a date in the future which would allow time for compliance.
(g) The erection of any sign required by this section shall not require a permit under Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 2 of this LDC.
(h) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to decide whether or not there has been substantial compliance with the
posting requirements in the case of lost, stolen or vandalized signs.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 1.2.2.4 Notification Following Decision
(a) The minutes of the meeting shall be deemed to be the record for notification purposes. Record of this notification shall be filed with
the secretary of the board or commission or City Council on the date of notification. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No.
12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 1.2.2.5 Notification of Appeal or Revocation
(a) Whenever appeal is taken from a final decision on an application following a public hearing, or whenever the City is to consider
revocation of a development permit which was obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the appeal or revocation
proceeding shall be provided to the holder of the permit. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-
10-10)
Division 3 - Public Hearings
Section 1.2.3.1 Setting of the Hearing
(a) When the responsible official determines that an application is complete and that a public hearing is required by this Land
Development Code, the official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance with Article 2, Division 2 of
this Chapter 1. The time set for the hearing shall conform to the time periods required by this Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-
22-10)
Section 1.2.3.2 Conduct of Hearing
(a) Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization.
Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/648
the organization for the record.
(b) The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with State law.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.3.3 Record of Proceedings
(a) The board/commission conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings by any appropriate means. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh.
A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.3.4 Continuance of Proceedings
(a) The board/commission conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, for good cause, continue the
hearing to a fixed date, time and place. No notice shall be required if a hearing is continued. If a public hearing is closed, no further public
testimony shall be taken. When an item is continued to a future meeting, the public hearing is presumed to remain open, unless
specifically closed as part of the motion continuing consideration to the future meeting. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.3.5 Additional Rules
(a) The board/commission conducting the hearing may adopt rules of procedure to limit the number of applications for development
approval which may be considered per meeting and the time for each presentation, and may apply such additional rules to govern the
public hearing which are not inconsistent with this section. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.3.6 Joint Public Hearing
(a) Unless otherwise prescribed in this Land Development Code, whenever a petition for a legislative decision or a development
application must be preceded by a public hearing both before Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, the Commission
and the Council may conduct a joint public hearing (in accordance with Chapter 211.007(d) of the Texas Local Government Code) and
take action on the petition or application in the following manner:
(1) The Council shall establish the date of the joint public hearing by motion at a regular or special meeting;
(2) The Council shall cause notice of the joint public hearing to be provided as required by this Land Development Code, or,
by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, may prescribe a different type of notice for the joint public hearing;
(3) The Commission and the Council shall be convened for the hearing and for any action to be taken on the petition or
application;
(4) The Commission and the Council may take action on the petition or application at the same meeting, provided that the
Council shall not take action until the recommendation of the Commission has been received.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Post-Decision Procedures
Section 1.2.4.1 Zoning Request Reapplication Following Denial
(a) A zoning request which has been denied by the responsible official, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and/or the City Council
may not be resubmitted to the City for one (1) year from the original date of denial, unless the request is substantially different from the
original request. This shall include a zoning change request for a Planned Development District. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-
10)
Section 1.2.4.2 Amendments and Revisions to Approval
(a) Unless another method is expressly provided by this Land Development Code, any request to amend or revise an approved
application shall be considered a new application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original
application and the standards in effect at the time such new application is filed with the City. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 5 - Expiration, Extension, and Reinstatement
Section 1.2.5.1 Time of Expiration
(a) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Land Development Code, an approved application shall automatically expire on the
second (2nd) anniversary (i.e., in two (2) years) of the approval date of the application, and shall become null and void, and all activities
under the permit thereafter shall be deemed in violation of this Code, if:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/648
(1) The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by this Code or as part of the approval of the application or
that was made under the terms of any development agreement, within the time limits established for satisfaction of such
condition or term, or
(2) The applicant fails to submit a subsequent complete application required by this Land Development Code within the
time so required.
(3) If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the application, the time shall be presumed to
be two (2) years from the date the application was approved, except as provided in Section 1.2.5.6.
(b) Except as provided in Section 1.2.5.6 or a different date is determined pursuant to a vested rights petition, an application approved
prior to the effective date of this Land Development Code shall expire in accordance with the terms of the regulations in effect at the time
the application was filed.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.5.2 Effect of Expiration
(a) Upon the expiration of an approved application, all previously approved applications for the same land shall also expire on the
expiration date prescribed in Section 1.2.5.1 above if the filing of an application was required to avoid expiration for the previously
approved application(s), except as provided in Section 1.2.5.6. Thereafter, a new application for each application that has been deemed to
have expired under this section must be approved subject to regulations in effect at the time the new application is filed. (Ord. No. 8-
2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.5.3 Extension Procedures
(a) Unless a different time is expressly provided for a specific procedure by this Land Development Code, the responsible official or
the board, commission or the City Council that finally approves an application may grant an initial extension of the time for expiration of
the application for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of the expiration of the application, provided that a request for
extension is made in writing at least thirty (30) business days before the approved application expires. Every request for extension shall
include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The decision-maker may grant a request for an initial
extension upon demonstration that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have resulted in the permit holder's inability to
perform the tasks necessary to prevent the permit from expiring before the expiration date.
(b) A second (2nd) extension of the expiration date of an officially filed, complete application may be granted for a period not to
exceed one (1) additional year. The extension application must be in writing. Such an extension may be granted only by the City Council.
In determining whether to grant a request, the City Council shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of
the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of
the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed development.
(c) In granting an extension, the official or board/commission deciding the request may impose such conditions as are needed to assure
that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. In granting a subsequent extension request, the
City Council may require that one or more newly adopted development standards be applied to the proposed development.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.5.4 Reinstatement
(a) Unless otherwise provided by this Land Development Code, an applicant may request reinstatement of an expired application by
filing a written request with the responsible official within thirty (30) business days of the date of expiration. The request for
reinstatement shall include a statement of the reasons why the application should be reinstated and extended. A request for reinstatement
shall be processed and decided in the manner provided for an extension of an expiration period for more than one (1) year. The expiration
date shall not be extended for more than two (2) years from the date a complete application was officially filed. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1
(Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.5.5 Effect of Decision on Extension or Reinstatement
(a) The granting of an extension or reinstatement request for a permit also extends or reinstates any other permits otherwise deemed
expired under Section 1.2.5.2. The denial of an extension or reinstatement results in the immediate lapse of the permit and any other
permits deemed expired under Section 1.2.5.2. Thereafter, the applicant shall file a new application for a permit or permits before
undertaking any activity authorized by the lapsed permit. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.5.6 Expiration for Projects Commenced On or After September 1, 2005
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Land Development Code, for any approved application for which no expiration date
was in effect on September 1, 2005, an expiration date two (2) years following the date of approval of the permit shall apply, unless the
holder of the permit files a petition before such date for a vested rights determination pursuant to Article 3, Division 3 of this Chapter 1,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/648
alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project for which the application subject to expiration was filed. If a
vested rights petition is timely filed, the City Council shall determine the expiration date of the permit in deciding the petition.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Land Development Code, once a permit has expired under subsection (a), all previously
approved applications for the same land also shall expire no later than five (5) years from the date of filing of the first application for the
project for which the expired application was filed, unless the holder of such permit(s) files a petition before such date for a vested rights
determination pursuant to Article 3, Division 3 of this Chapter 1, alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project
for which the applications subject to expiration were filed. If a vested rights petition is timely filed, the City Council shall determine the
expiration date of the previously approved permits in deciding the petition.
(c) Progress toward completion of a project shall mean that any of the following events have occurred within relevant time periods:
(1) An application for a final plat or plan has been filed with the city, and remains in effect at the time the vested rights
petition was filed;
(2) A good faith attempt is made to file an application with the City to continue the project;
(3) Costs have been incurred for developing the project, including without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility,
and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the
aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is
located;
(4) Fiscal security is posted with the city to ensure performance of an obligation, and remains in effect at the time the vested
rights petition was filed; or
(5) Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid, but have not been refunded.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Enforcement and Revocation of Permits
Section 1.2.6.1 Enforcement Activities
(a) Employees of the Planning and Development Services Department, Community Enhancement Division (Code Enforcement
Officers), Public Works Department, Water Department, and Fire Department are authorized to issue municipal court citations for
violations of this article. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.2 Right to Enter
(a) The authorized official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections
of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this Land Development Code. Submittal of
any application that authorizes construction of structures or improvements shall be construed as a grant of authority to the responsible
official to enter on land subject to the application for purposes of enforcing the approved permit. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-
10)
Section 1.2.6.3 General Remedies
(a) If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building,
structure, or land is used or developed in violation of this Land Development Code or any application approved thereunder, in addition to
other remedies, the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent or abate such activity. Appropriate action or
proceedings include termination of utility services (water, gas, electric); revocation of permits, licenses, or bonds; and institution of legal
action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.4 Stop Work Orders
(a) Whenever any construction or development activity is being done contrary to any term, condition or requirements of an approved
application or this Land Development Code, the City Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer may order the work stopped by
notice in writing, served on the property owner or authorized agent. Notice shall be given before the order shall be effective, except when
the order should be effective immediately to protect and preserve the public health, safety, or general welfare. Any person thereafter shall
cease and desist from further development or construction material to the alleged noncompliance, until corrected by compliance and
authorized by the City Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer to proceed with the work. This prohibition shall extend throughout
any appeal period.
(b) The owner or authorized agent may appeal the stop work order to the authorized official by giving written notice. The City Building
Official or Code Enforcement Officer shall hear the appeal no later than 5 p.m. the next business day after receiving the notice. A
decision shall be made on the appeal no later than 5 p.m. the next business day following the hearing of the appeal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/648
(c) The appellant may appeal a negative ruling by the City Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer in writing to the City
Manager, or designee, who shall hear the appeal no later than 5 p.m. the next business day after receipt of the notice of appeal. A decision
shall be made on the appeal no later than 5 p.m. the next business day following the hearing of the appeal.
(d) The decision-maker on the appeal may require the placement of temporary erosion control, drainage protection or other measures
by the owner or appellant in order to protect the site and the community resources during the appeal period.
(e) The decision-maker shall decide the appeal and make such order as is necessary to assure compliance with the terms of this Land
Development Code and all approved applications.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.5 Municipal Court Actions
(a) The City Attorney is authorized to prosecute violations of this Land Development Code in the municipal court where jurisdiction
lies for the action.
(b) In prosecutions for violations of this Land Development Code, it shall not be necessary to allege or prove a culpable mental state, as
said requirement is hereby waived.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.6 Civil Court Actions
(a) The City Attorney is authorized to file and prosecute an action at law or in equity, where permitted under the laws of Texas, in a
court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Land Development Code. The initiation of one form of enforcement
action by the City Attorney will not preclude the City Attorney from initiating any other form of enforcement action. (Ord. No. 8-2010,
pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.7 Revocation Proceedings
(a) If an authorized official determines, based on inspection or investigation by the City, that there are reasonable grounds for
revocation of an approved application, the official shall set a hearing before the City Council to which appeal may be taken from such
decision under this Land Development Code. The City Council may refer the proposed revocation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its report and recommendation prior to such hearing. Circumstances that warrant revocation of an approved application
shall include the following:
(1) A material mistake was made in approving the application;
(2) Approval of the application was procured on the basis of material misrepresentations or fraud on the part of the
applicant;
(3) Development activities being undertaken on the land subject to the development permit are not in conformity with terms
of the approved application;
(4) The use authorized by the permit is in violation of a condition of approval of the approved application;
(b) The applicant and any interested parties shall be given notice of the hearing in the manner provided in Chapter 1, Article 2,
Division 2. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures described in Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 3.
(c) In rendering its decision whether to revoke the approved application, the decision-maker shall determine whether the activity
authorized under the original approved application complies with the terms, conditions and requirements of such approval. The decisionmaker
may revoke the application, affirm it, or affirm it with attached conditions that assure that the terms; conditions and requirements
of the application shall be met.
(d) Following revocation and pending any appeal, it shall be unlawful to undertake or perform any activity that was previously
authorized by the approved application without applying for and obtaining approval of a new application for the activity. Appeal from the
decision to revoke the approved application shall be to the City Council, unless the decision to revoke was made by the City Council, in
which case revocation is final.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.6.8 Exemption
(a) This division does not apply to building permits issued under separate ordinance or provision of the City Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010,
pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 7 - Text Amendments
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/648
Section 1.2.7.1 Amendments to the Land Development Code (LDC)
(a) The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change the text of this Land Development Code by a majority vote
of its members, unless a different vote is otherwise required by this Land Development Code, the City Charter, or other law. A request for
an amendment to this Code shall not be considered an application for a permit. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.7.2 Hearing and Notice
(a) The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed text amendment in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 3.
No personal notice for such amendments shall be required. Published notice of the amendment shall be in accordance with Section 1.2.2.1
for amendments to the provisions of this Land Development Code.
(b) The hearing and notice requirements of this section do not apply to an action of the City Council imposing a moratorium on the
acceptance, processing, or issuance of development permits or petitions for legislative actions.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.7.3 Recommendation of Advisory Board/Commission
(a) Where required by this Land Development Code, the City Charter, or other law, the City Council shall first consider the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, together with the recommendations of any other advisory board/commission
prescribed by this Code, concerning the proposed text amendment. Where action is required of the Planning and Zoning Commission or
other advisory board/commission on a proposed text amendment, the Planning and Zoning Commission or other advisory
board/commission also shall conduct a public hearing. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.2.7.4 Initiation of Text Amendments
(a) Unless otherwise limited by this Land Development Code, a petition for amending the text of the Land Development Code may be
initiated by the City Council; the Planning and Zoning Commission; a board, commission or advisory board/commission described in
Chapter 1, Article 1; a responsible official designated in this Code.
(1) Except for amendments initiated by the City Council, the petition to amend the text of this Land Development Code
shall state with particularity the nature of the amendment and the reason for the amendment.
(2) A petition for a text amendment may be submitted in conjunction with an application, approval of which depends on
approval of the amendment, but shall in every such instance be decided prior to any action by the City on the application.
(3) The City Council may establish rules governing times for submission and consideration of text amendments.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 8 - Fines, Penalties, Offenses
Section 1.2.8.1 Fines, Penalties, Offenses
(a) Violations of provisions of this LDC or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of and [any] safeguards
established in connection with approval of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
LDC or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance with Section 1-9 “General
Penalty” of the City Code.
(b) Each calendar day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(c) The owner or occupant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
(d) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(e) It is further the intent and declared purpose of this LDC that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time that the previous regulations were repealed and this LDC adopted shall be discharged or
affected by such repeal, but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes
presently in process may be prosecuted in all respects as if such previous regulations had not been repealed.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 3 - Relief Procedures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/648
Division 1 - Appeals
Section 1.3.1.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an appeal is to contest an initial decision on an application based upon alleged misapplication of the
criteria for approval of the application. An appeal shall not be used as a means of amending, varying or otherwise modifying the
standards of this Code that apply to the application.
(b) Applicability. Unless otherwise provided by this Code, any final administrative decision on an application by a City official,
including a determination by the responsible official that a proposed development is exempt from one or more applications, may be
appealed to the board or commission designated in the regulations establishing the procedure by which the decision was made. For
administrative decisions on applications authorized in Chapter 4, appeal shall be to the Board of Adjustment, except sign permits related
to development outside the City limits within the ETJ, which shall be appealed to the City Council (refer to Chapter 4, Article 1, Division
3, Section 4.1.3.6). Final decisions on an application by a board or commission may be appealed to the City Council only if expressly
provided for in the regulations establishing the procedure by which the decision was made.
(c) Effect. The granting of an appeal supersedes the decision from which appeal was taken, and results in approval, conditional
approval or denial of the application for which approval was sought.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.1.2 Appeal Requirements
(a) Who May Appeal. The applicant or any interested person may appeal a final decision on an application to the appellate authority
designated by this Code, if any.
(b) Form of Appeal. The appeal shall contain a written statement of the reasons why the final decision is erroneous, and shall be
accompanied by the fee established by the City Council. An appeal by an applicant shall be accompanied by a copy of the application on
which the initial decision was rendered. An appeal may include any other documents that support the position of the appellant.
(c) Time for Filing Appeal. A written appeal must be filed with the responsible official within ten (10) business days from the date of
notification of the final decision on the application.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.1.3 Processing of Appeal and Decision
(a) Responsible Official. The responsible official for an appeal is the responsible official designated by this Code for processing of the
application at issue in the appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the responsible official shall compile all documents constituting the
record of the decision on appeal and transmit the record to the appellate authority.
(b) Stay of Proceedings. Receipt of a written appeal of a decision on an application stays all proceedings of the City in furtherance of
the decision from which appeal is taken, including without limitation acceptance, processing or issuance of any applications that are
dependent on the application being appealed, and any development activities authorized by initial approval of the application.
(1) The stay shall be lifted only if the responsible official certifies in writing to the appellate authority that a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property.
(2) Thereafter, the stay may be reinstated only by order of the appellate authority or a court of record, on application, after
notice to the responsible official, for due cause shown.
(c) Hearing and Notice. Notification of the appeal and conduct of the public hearing thereon shall be in accordance with Article 2,
Division 2 and Division 3 of this Chapter 1. The initial public hearing on the appeal shall be held within twenty-five (25) business days
after the filing of the appeal with the responsible official, unless a different time is prescribed by the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Decision on Appeal. The appellate authority shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) business days of the close of the public
hearing. The appellate authority shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision from which the appeal was taken.
(e) Notification of Decision on Appeal. The appellant and the applicant for the development permit shall be notified of the decision on
appeal in the manner provided in Section 1.2.2.4 [1.2.2.5] .
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.1.4 Criteria
(a) In deciding the appeal, the appellate authority shall apply the same criteria that govern the initial decision on the application under
the provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/648
Section 1.3.1.5 Expiration and Extension
(a) For purposes of determining expiration or extension periods under this Code, the date of the appellate authority's granting of relief
on an appeal is the date on which the application is deemed approved. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Proportionality Appeal: Petition for Relief from
Dedication or Construction Requirement
Section 1.3.2.1 Policy Established
(a) Adequate Public Facilities Policy.
(1) Adequate Service for Areas Proposed for Development.
a. Land proposed for development in the City and the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction must be served adequately by
essential public facilities and services, including water, wastewater, roadway, and drainage facilities.
b. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve
the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the
property being developed or off-site.
(2) Responsibilities of the Developer to Provide Adequate Facilities. The developer shall be responsible for the following to
ensure the facilities provided are adequate:
a. Phasing of development or improvements in order to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities;
b. Extensions of public facilities and roadways (including any necessary on-site and off-site facilities) to connect to
existing public facilities or roadways;
c. Providing and/or procuring all necessary property interests, including rights-of-way and easements, for the facilities
(whether on-site or off-site);
d. Providing proof to the City of adequate public facilities;
e. Making provisions for future expansion of the public facilities as needed to serve future developments, subject to
the City's oversize participation regulations (i.e., when the City will provide for the cost of oversizing facilities), if
applicable;
f. Providing for all operations and maintenance of the public facilities, or if the City is not the provider, providing
proof that a separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the facilities;
g. Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the public facilities;
h. Obtaining approvals from any applicable utility providers other than the City; and
i. Complying with all requirements of utility providers, including the City or other applicable providers.
(3) Responsibilities of the Developer to Conform to Adopted Plans. The developer shall ensure that facilities provided are in
conformance with the City's adopted plans.
a. Proposed facilities serving new development shall conform to and be properly related to the public facility elements
of the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, other adopted master plans for public facilities and services, and applicable
capital improvements plans, and shall meet the service levels specified in such plans.
b. The design and construction of all water and wastewater facilities to serve the subdivision shall be in conformance
with the City's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and with the City's technical specifications.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.2.2 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement is to assure that the application of
uniform dedication and construction standards to a proposed plat does not result in a disproportionate burden on the property owner,
taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed plat on the City's public facilities systems relative
to what is normal and reasonable for other similar subdivisions of property. In most instances where a favorable determination is
warranted, a reduction of the requirements would likely be most appropriate, rather than a complete waiver of dedication or construction
requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/648
(b) Applicability. A petition for relief under this section may be filed by a property owner or applicant to contest any requirement to
dedicate land or to construct public improvements for dedication to the public that is imposed under the City's public facilities standards
in any ordinance or regulation to a plat application or to any related development application authorized by the City, whether the
requirement is under uniform standards, or attached as a condition to approval of the petition or permit. A petition under this section shall
not be used to waive standards on grounds applicable to any petition for a waiver as found in other sections of this LDC.
(c) Effect. If the relief requested under the petition is granted in whole or in part by the City Council, the dedication or construction
requirement initially imposed shall be modified accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to initial approval of the
development application shall be thereafter applied in accordance with the relief granted. In the event the original application was denied
by the decision-maker based upon the property owner's failure to incorporate the dedication or construction requirement in the proposed
permit, the application shall be remanded to the original decision-maker for a decision consistent with the relief granted by the Council.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.2.3 Petition Requirements
(a) Who May Apply. A property owner or applicant may petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement when a
dedication or construction requirement has been applied to a plat, or is the basis for denying the plat application.
(b) Form of Petition. The petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement shall allege that application of the standard
relating to the dedication or construction requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the
proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, stormwater, parks, or roadway system, as the case may be, or does not reasonably
benefit the proposed development.
(c) Study Required. The petitioner shall provide a study in support of the petition for relief that includes the following information:
(1) Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, stormwater, parks, or roadway system to be utilized by the proposed
development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to
the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases,
such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed.
(2) Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, stormwater, parks, or roadway system by the proposed
dedication of an interest in land or construction of capital improvements. If the development application is part of a phased
development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of capital
improvements.
(3) Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with
the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of capital
improvements. In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities system(s) from the entire development
shall be considered.
(4) The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the capital improvement to be constructed in accordance
with the City's requirements.
(5) Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed
development and the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City.
(6) This proportionality analysis should not only be based on any immediate plans for the property, but should be based on
the size of the property, existing use of the property, the existing zoning, and what impacts the highest and best use of the
property could have on the City's infrastructure system.
(7) Only costs directly related to the dedication or construction requirement should be included in the analysis. Indirect
costs, such as applications, permits, and fees, shall not be included.
(d) Time for Filing Petition and Study. A petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement shall be filed with the
responsible official within ten (10) business days of the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision to conditionally approve or deny an
application for approval of a Preliminary Plat, or where no Preliminary Plat application has been submitted, an application for approval of
a Final Plat. The study in support of the petition shall be filed within sixty (60) business days of the initial decision, unless the petitioner
seeks an extension in writing. The responsible official may extend the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an
additional thirty (30) business days for good cause shown.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 1.3.2.4 Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
(a) Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and are to be dedicated to a county
under an interlocal agreement under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 242, a petition for relief or study in support of the petition shall not be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/648
accepted as complete for review by the responsible official unless the petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has
been delivered to the county in which the facilities are to be located. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.2.5 Processing of Petitions and Decision
(a) Responsible Official. The Public Works Director is the responsible official for a petition for relief from a dedication or construction
requirement. Where the petition is for relief from dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of a facility in the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction that is to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal agreement under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, the
Public Works Director shall coordinate a recommendation with the county official responsible for reviewing plats in the county.
(b) Evaluation, Recommendation. The Development Review Committee shall make an initial review of the petition and supporting
study and shall provide comments to the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall evaluate the petition, the supporting
study, and the Development Review Committee comments and shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon the
information contained in the study, any comments received from the county and Development Review Committee, and the Director's
analysis.
(c) Decision-Maker. The City Council shall decide the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement.
(d) Public Hearing. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Article 2, Division 3 of this Chapter 1, within
sixty (60) business days after the study supporting the petition is filed with the Public Works Director.
(e) Burden of Proof. The petitioner bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the application of a dedication or construction
requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a disproportionate burden on the petitioner.
(f) Decision. The City Council shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement based upon the
following criteria:
(1) The City Council shall determine whether the application of the standard or condition requiring dedication of an interest
in land for public improvements or construction of capital improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the
impacts created by the proposed development on such City's water, wastewater, stormwater, parks, or roadway system, and
reasonably benefits the development.
(2) In making such determination, the Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the petitioner, the Public Works
Director's report and recommendation and, where the property is located within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, any
recommendations from the county.
(g) Action. Based on the criteria in (e) [(f)] above, the City Council shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Deny the petition for relief, and impose the standard or condition in accordance with the initial decision; or
(2) Deny the petition for relief, upon finding that the proposed dedication or construction requirements are inadequate to
offset the impacts of the development on community City's [sic] water, wastewater, stormwater, parks, or roadway system, and
either deny the development application or require that additional dedications of rights-of-way for or improvements to such
systems be made as a condition of approval of the application; or
(3) Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve
proportionality; or
(4) Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the
capital improvement under standard participation policies.
(h) Notification of Decision on Petition. The petitioner shall be notified of the decision on the petition for relief in the manner provided
in Article 2, Division 2 of Chapter 1, within ten (10) business days of the decision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.2.6 Expiration; Effect of Relief
(a) Expiration or Failure to File Application. Where a plat application or related application was denied based upon the imposition of
the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a capital improvement, the petitioner shall resubmit the application within
ninety (90) business days of the date the petition for relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the City Council's
decision on the petition.
(1) If such resubmittal of the application is not made within the ninety-day (90-day) period, the relief granted by the City
Council on the petition shall expire.
(2) If the application is modified to increase the number of residential units or the intensity of nonresidential uses, the
responsible official may require a new study to validate the relief granted by the City Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/648
(3) If the application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief may be required.
(b) Effect. The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the plat or related approved development application is
in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the plat or related application.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Vested Rights Petition
Section 1.3.3.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one or more standards of this Land Development Code
should not be applied to an application as defined by State law, or whether certain permits are subject to expiration.
(b) Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed for an application, permit, plan or plat authorized under Chapters 2, 3 and/or 4
of this Land Development Code, filed in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute.
(1) A vested rights petition also may be filed prior to expiration of certain permits pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6.
(2) A vested rights petition may not be filed with a petition for a text amendment, a zoning map amendment or any other
request for a legislative decision by the City Council.
(c) Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the responsible official shall process the application and the
decision-maker shall decide the application in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance
requirements or development standards, or extend the permit that would otherwise be subject to application pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.2 Petition Requirements
(a) Who May Petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the
applicant, with any application identified in Chapters 2, 3 and/or 4, or by the holder of a permit subject to expiration pursuant to Section
1.2.5.6.
(b) Form of Petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the
application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code,
Section 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the City to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the
effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents:
(1) A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a vested
right related to a specific standard or to an entire project;
(2) A copy of each approved or pending application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply current
standards to the application which is the subject of the petition;
(3) The date of submittal of the application for the permit, or of a development plan pursuant to which the permit was
subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date.
(4) The date the project for which the application for the permit was submitted was commenced.
(5) Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the application from which relief is sought;
(6) Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the application at issue;
(7) A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree
preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size shown on the application
for which the petition is filed; and
(8) A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land.
(9) Whenever the petitioner alleges that a permit subject to expiration under Section 1.2.5.6 should not be terminated, a
description of the events constituting progress toward completion of the project for which the permit subject to expiration was
approved.
(c) Time for Filing Petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with an application for which a vested right is claimed, except that
the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any permit when filed pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6. Where more than one
application is authorized to be filed by this Land Development Code, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.3 Processing of Petitions and Decision
(a) Responsible Official.
(1) The responsible official for a vested rights petition is the Planning Director for processing the application with which the
petition is associated.
(2) The responsible official shall promptly forward a copy of the vested rights petition to the City Attorney following
acceptance.
(b) Initial Decision. The Planning Director shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition should be granted
in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the official's reasoning and setting forth the decision on the petition,
which shall be delivered to the applicant within ten (10) business days of the date the vested rights petition is accepted for filing.
(c) Appeal of Decision on a Petition. The petitioner may appeal the Planning Director's decision on the vested rights petition within ten
(10) business days of the date of such decision to the City Council in accordance with the procedures in Division 1 of this Article 3. The
City Council shall decide the petition within thirty (30) business days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
(d) Effect on Related Applications. A final decision on the vested rights petition or appeal under this Section is an application
requirement for any related application. No related application shall be deemed complete without such decision having been made.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.4 Action on Petition and Order
(a) Action on the Petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions:
(1) Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the application shall be reviewed and decided under currently
applicable standards;
(2) Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the application be reviewed and decided in accordance with the
standards contained in identified prior regulations; or
(3) Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the application, while
standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or
(4) For petitions filed pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6, specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the
permit(s).
(b) Order on Petition. The responsible official's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be recorded in writing in an
order identifying the following:
(1) The nature of the relief granted, if any;
(2) The approved or filed application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition;
(3) Current standards which shall apply to the application for which relief is sought;
(4) Prior standards which shall apply to the application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards;
(5) The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition;
(6) To the extent feasible, subordinate applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition; and
(7) For petitions filed pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6, the date of expiration of the permit or permits.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.5 Criteria for Approval
(a) Factors. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors:
(1) The nature and extent of prior applications filed for the land subject to the petition;
(2) Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition;
(3) Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/648
(4) Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or
tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the
proposed application;
(5) Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Land Development Code from which the
applicant seeks relief;
(6) Whether any prior approved applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired;
(7) For petitions filed pursuant to Section 1.2.5.6, whether any of the events in Section 1.3.3.8(c)(1) or Section 1.3.3.8(c)(2)
have occurred;
(8) Any other provisions outlined in the Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245 or successor statute.
(b) Conditions. If the claim of vested rights under a petition is based upon a pending application subject to standards that have been
superseded by current standards under this Land Development Code, the decision-maker may condition any relief granted on the petition
on the approval of the application under such prior standards.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.6 Application Following Final Decision on Petition
(a) Following the City's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform to the application for which relief
is sought to such decision.
(b) The decision-maker on the application shall consider any application revised under this Subsection in accordance with the
procedures for deciding the initial application under this Land Development Code and in conformity with the relief granted on the
petition.
(c) If the relief granted on the vested rights petition is consistent with the application on file, no revisions are necessary.
(d) If proceedings have been stayed on the application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the City Council, proceedings on
the application shall resume after the City Council's decision on the vested rights petition.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.7 Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events:
(1) The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised application consistent with the relief granted within
forty-five (45) business days of the final decision on the petition;
(2) The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied; or
(3) The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires.
(b) Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the application for which relief was granted on a vested rights petition shall result
in extension of the relief granted on petition for a like period.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.3.8 Dormant Projects
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section only:
(1) Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under the Abilene Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision
Ordinance, as amended, or any predecessor zoning, subdivision or development-related ordinance that was in effect prior to
the adoption of this LDC, including: site plans, conditional use provisions, sign permits, plats, variances, or any other
application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of
land uses, lots or improvements on a site intended for development
(2) Final permit means a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or final plat approved under the Abilene Zoning
Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance, as amended, or any predecessor zoning, subdivision or development-related ordinance
that was in effect prior to the adoption of this LDC.
(b) Expiration of Permits. Any application for an initial permit that was approved or filed before, but that was not subject to an
expiration date, two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this LDC, and that was under the Abilene Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/648
Ordinance, as amended, or any predecessor zoning, subdivision or development-related ordinance, shall expire on the effective date of
this Land Development Code.
(c) Reinstatement. The owner of the land subject to an initial permit that expires under Subsection (b) above may petition the City
Council to reinstate such permit by filing a written petition within sixty (60) calendar days of the effective date of this Land Development
Code. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one of the following:
(1) As of two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this LDC one of the following events had occurred:
a. A final permit for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit was approved, or was filed and was
subsequently approved;
b. An application for a final permit was submitted for all or part of the land subject to the expired initial permit, but
such application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter
245.005(c)(2));
c. Costs for development of the land subject to the initial permit, including but not limited to costs associated with
roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land
acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value
of the land;
d. Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the
approved initial permit; or
e. Utility connection fees or other fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit were paid.
(2) After two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this LDC but before the expiration date specified in Subsection (b)
above, one of the following events had occurred:
a. A final permit was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved zoning permit, and remained in effect
for such land on such expiration date; or
b. A complete application for approval of a final permit for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit
was pending for decision on such expiration date.
(d) City Council Action on Reinstatement. The City Council may take one of the following actions:
(1) Reinstate the expired initial permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the
criteria listed in Subsection (c)(1) above;
(2) Reinstate the initial permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the
criteria listed in Subsection (c)(2) above, subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that assure that the remaining
land that is not subject to an approved or pending final permit application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting
relief under this provision, the City Council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards
enacted after approval of the initial permit;
(3) Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in Subsection (c); or
(4) Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending final permit application, if it finds that the
petitioner has met the criteria in Subsection (c)(2)(b) and the pending application subsequently was approved, and deny the
petition for the remaining land subject to the expired initial permit.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Petition for Waivers
Section 1.3.4.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a petition for a waiver is to determine whether one or more standards of [sic] applicable to plats within this
Land Development Code should not be applied to an application by operation of State law.
(b) Applicability. The applicant may file a petition for waiver of one or more standards applicable to a Preliminary Plat, or where no
Preliminary Plat application has been submitted for approval, to the standards applicable to a Final Plat in accordance with Chapter 3,
Article 1, Division 4.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.4.2 Application and Decision-Maker
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/648
(a) The waiver petition shall be decided by the City Council after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
conjunction with the application for approval of a Plat or replat. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.4.3 Criteria for Approval
(a) The following criteria shall be applied in deciding a waiver:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions arising from the physical surroundings, shape, topography or other feature
affecting the land such that the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter to the proposed use would create an
unnecessary hardship or inequity upon or for the applicant, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, in developing the
land or deprive the applicant of the reasonable and beneficial use of the land;
(2) The circumstances causing the hardship do not similarly affect all or most properties in the vicinity of the petitioner's
land;
(3) The waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;
(4) Granting the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property within
the area;
(5) Granting the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly use and enjoyment of other land within the area in
accordance with the provisions of this Code, or adversely affect the rights of owners or residents of surrounding property;
(6) The hardship or inequity is not caused wholly or in substantial part by the petitioner;
(7) The request for a waiver is not based exclusively on the petitioner's desire for increased financial gain from the property,
or to reduce an existing financial hardship; and
(8) The degree of variation requested is the minimum amount necessary to meet the needs of petitioner and to satisfy the
standards in this section.
(9) Granting the waiver shall not violate a Council approved master plan.
(10) The requested waiver shall not be considered where an alternative appeal process already exists.
(b) Burden of Proof. The petitioner bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the application of a dedication or construction
requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a disproportionate burden on the petitioner.
(c) Decision. The City Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission, shall consider the waiver petition and,
based upon the criteria set forth in Subsection (a) above, shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in this LDC; or
(2) Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part the standard or requirement as it is stated in this LDC.
(d) Notification of Decision on Petition. The petitioner shall be notified of the decision on the waiver petition in the manner provided in
Section 1.2.2.4 [1.2.2.5].
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.3.4.4 Effect of Approval
(a) Effect. The waiver granted shall remain in effect for the period the plat or related approved application is in effect, and shall expire
upon expiration of the plat or related application. Extension of the plat also shall result in extension of the relief granted on the petition.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 4 - Zoning Procedures
Division 1 - Zoning Map Amendment
Section 1.4.1.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an application for a zoning map amendment is to establish the initial zoning district classification of land,
to authorize a use of land, or in the case of overlay zoning districts, to authorize uses or a set of zoning standards for the land that are not
currently authorized under the regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located.
(b) Applicability. Where a property owner seeks to establish an initial zoning district classification for land, or to establish a use of land
or through an overlay district to apply standards to a proposed use that are not currently authorized by the zoning district regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/648
currently in effect, the property owner must submit a petition for a zoning map amendment before seeking approval of any development
application for such land.
(1) The requirements of this division do not apply to land outside of the City limits.
(2) The requirements of this division do apply to land annexed to the City upon the effective date of the annexation.
(c) Effect. Enactment of an ordinance approving an application for a zoning map amendment results in an initial or a change in zoning
district classification for the property, and the use of the land thereafter is subject to all requirements of the new zoning district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.1.2 Application
(a) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for processing an application for a zoning map
amendment.
(b) Application Requirements. The City shall provide application forms which state any application requirements other than what is
stated within this LDC. Such requirements may include the applicant's name, address and other contact information, submittal
requirements such as drawing size, scale and similar relevant information. Applications shall only be made on forms provided by the City.
(c) Initiation of Zoning Map Amendment. Only the property owner or the owner's authorized agent, the Director, the Landmarks
Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City Council on its own motion, may initiate an application for a zoning map
amendment. If the applicant is not the owner of record (by the appraisal district), a statement from the property owner giving
authorization to the applicant to file the request for rezoning shall be required as part of the rezoning application.
(d) Accompanying Application. An application for a zoning map amendment may be accompanied by an application for amendment of
the City's Comprehensive Plan, upon which the application for the zoning map amendment is dependent, or an application for a
Preliminary Plat.
(1) The Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be adopted in conformance with State law and in a manner consistent with
the way in which the Comprehensive Plan is generally adopted.
(2) The Comprehensive Plan amendment and the zoning map amendment may be processed concurrently as long as the
recommendation and decision on the Comprehensive Plan amendment is made first;
(3) The application for the zoning map amendment shall be decided prior to any accompanying application for any type of
plat (e.g., Preliminary Plat, Final Plat) that is dependent on the map amendment. No plat application shall be accepted by the
City unless the property has been zoned to the appropriate use first. If the property is not zoned properly and a plat application
is submitted, a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action shall be required to accompany the plat application.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.1.3 Processing of Zoning Application and Decision
(a) Published and Personal Notice. The Director shall cause personal notice of public hearings on the zoning map amendment before
the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. These public hearings may be conducted separately by each body, or a single,
joint public hearing may be held. Such personal notice shall be given in accordance with Section 1.2.2.2 of this Land Development Code.
In addition to the requirements in Section 1.2.2.2, the following notice shall also be given for zoning map amendments:
(1) In every instance, at least all property owners adjacent to the property in question, regardless of the two-hundred-foot
(200') distance.
(b) Posted Notice. Posted notice for rezoning requests shall be in conformance with Section 1.2.2.3 of this Chapter.
(c) Special Notice. The City Council, by a two-thirds vote, may prescribe a different form of notice for the joint public hearing on a
zoning amendment, in which case the notice requirements of Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 2 of this LDC shall not apply.
(d) Public Hearing.
(1) The City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission may convene separate public hearings before each body on
the zoning amendment.
(2) The City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission may convene a joint public hearing on the zoning
amendment. In such case, the Mayor shall be the presiding officer.
(3) Information on the time and place designated for the public hearing shall be contained in the notice of public hearing.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/648
(4) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 3.
(e) Action by Commission.
(1) Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
a. Vote to recommend approval or denial of the proposed zoning amendment to the City Council.
b. Vote to recommend approval of rezoning to a more restrictive zoning district than the district proposed by the
zoning amendment application. If a more restrictive district is recommended, such district must provide for land uses
that are similar in nature to the district proposed by the zoning amendment.
c. Table the zoning amendment request for further deliberation at a later date.
(2) If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends approval of the amendment or recommends rezoning to a more
restrictive zoning district, such amendment shall be forwarded to the City Council for a final decision on approval or denial
(see Subsection (g) below).
(3) If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the amendment, such amendment shall not be forwarded
to the City Council unless the recommendation is appealed by the applicant.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate studies to substantiate its recommendation for approval or denial,
and may forward such studies along with its recommendation to the City Council for action.
(f) Appeal of a Commission [Recommendation] for Denial. The applicant or the City Council shall be empowered to file an appeal of a
recommendation for denial (by the Commission) to the City Council, so that the City Council may hear and vote on the proposed zoning
amendment.
(1) In the case of an appeal by the City Council, the City Manager shall be the City Council representative for the appeal
process.
(2) A written appeal to the City Council for further consideration of the zoning amendment shall be filed with the City
Secretary.
(3) Such appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after a recommendation for denial by the Commission. If such an appeal
is not filed within ten (10) days, the recommendation for denial by the Commission shall be considered a final action on the
proposed amendment, and no further action shall be taken by the Commission or the City Council.
(4) When such an appeal is filed, the request for the zoning amendment, the action of the Commission, and the appeal shall
be presented to the City Council.
(g) Action by City Council.
(1) The City Council may direct the Planning and Zoning Commission to formulate recommendations regarding the
amendment, and to make studies and hold public hearings as the Council deems desirable in order to substantiate the
Commission's recommendation for approval or denial of the proposed zoning amendment. In addition, the Planning Director
make such requests at any meeting during which the zoning amendment is considered.
(2) Following the public hearing, the City Council shall consider the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission along
with the application for the zoning amendment.
(3) The City Council shall:
a. Vote to approve or deny the proposed zoning amendment.
b. Vote to approve a rezoning to a more restrictive zoning district than the district proposed by the zoning amendment
application. If a more restrictive district is recommended, such district must provide for land uses that are similar in
nature to the district proposed by the zoning amendment.
c. Table the zoning amendment request for further deliberation at a later date.
(4) The City Council's decision on approval or denial shall be final.
(h) Ordinance. Approval of the Council of the zoning amendment shall be in the form of an ordinance that amends the City's official
Zoning Map. The Planning Director shall identify each zoning map amendment on the Zoning Map in accordance with the change
approved by the Council. Any unauthorized change of the official Zoning Map hereby is deemed to be null and void.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/648
(i) Super-Majority Vote. In each of the following circumstances, a zoning amendment shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council:
(1) When a written protest against the amendment is signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of either the
area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change, or the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered
by the proposed change and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area. In computing the percentage of land area, the
area of streets and alleys shall be included in the computation. For purposes of this subsection, the following shall apply:
a. The written protest of any one (1) owner of land owned by two (2) or more persons shall be presumed to be the
protest of all such owners.
b. The written protest must be submitted to the City Secretary at least five (5) business days before the date of the
meeting at which the proposed change is to be considered.
c. A person who wishes to withdraw a signature from a written protest must submit a signed, written request for the
withdrawal to the City Secretary by the deadline for submitting a written protest. A signature may not be otherwise
withdrawn.
(i) [(i.1)] Joint Public Hearing for Text Amendment. The City Council may convene a joint public hearing with the Planning and
Zoning Commission to consider any zoning text amendment in accordance with the procedures for a zoning map amendment (Section
2.2.1.3(d) [sic]).
(j) Consideration of Previously Denied Amendments. A request to change the zoning district designation for a tract of land, including
an application for rezoning to a Planned Development District, shall not be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the
City Council within one (1) year of the Council's decision to deny the same requested change for all or any portion of the parcel.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.1.4 Criteria for Approval
(a) In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may
consider the following factors:
(1) Whether the proposed zoning map amendment implements the policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, including
the land use classification of the property on the Future Land Use and Development Plan map, as amended;
(2) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district classification and the standards applicable to such
uses will be appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified;
(3) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets,
water supply, sanitary sewers, and other public services and utilities to the area; and
(4) Any other factors which will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Planned Development (PD) District Procedures
Section 1.4.2.1 Development Standards
(a) Steps for Approval: The review process for a PD District application may include the following steps:
(1) Pre-Application conference (refer to Section 1.2.1.5);
(2) Concept Plan (required, refer to Section 1.4.2.3);
(3) Site Development Plan (may be required, refer to Section 1.4.2.7 [sic]);
(4) Construction of project (after City approval of all required plans and plats).
(b) Completeness of Application & Official Filing Date: Refer to Section 1.2.1.2 and Section 1.2.1.4 of Chapter 1.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.2 Application Requirements
(a) Specific Items Required. No application for a PD shall be accepted by the City until the following items have been submitted to the
City by the applicant.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/648
(1) A completed City application form, including all requirements as stated on the application form;
(2) If the applicant is not the owner of record (by the appraisal district), a statement from the property owner giving
authorization to the applicant to file the request for rezoning shall be required as part of the rezoning application;
(3) A legal description of the property under consideration, which also shows that such property includes the minimum
acreage required for a PD.
(4) A Concept Plan, prepared in accordance with Section 1.4.2.3 of this LDC;
(5) A description of any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base zoning district;
(6) A description of how the proposed Planned Development fulfills the ideals, goals, objectives, and/or concepts of the
City's adopted Comprehensive Plan or any other formally adopted City planning document, such as the Parks Plan or public
facility plan.
(7) A description that lists and fully explains the specific modifications of the provisions of the base zoning district which
are desired, as well as the purposes of the modifications (i.e., why they are necessary).
(8) A description of how any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base district fulfill
the items listed in (1) through (7) of Section 1.4.2.5.
(9) A development schedule outlining a timetable for completion of the entire project.
(10) A copy of all agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the
PD and any of its common areas, if applicable.
(11) The required application fee.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.3 Concept Plan
(a) Requirement for Concept Plan. No PD district may be established without approval of a Concept Plan. The Concept Plan shall be a
fully dimensioned map(s) of the land within the proposed PD, and shall be incorporated as a component part of the PD district
regulations, and shall be construed in conjunction with the authorized uses and development standards set forth in such regulations.
(1) Other information may be required by the City for a particular proposed PD to allow the City to make an informed
decision on the proposed PD.
(2) A concept plan shall conform and be in accordance with an application form available at the office of Planning and
Development Services and on the City's website.
(b) Consistency Required. All development applications within the PD district shall be consistent with the incorporated Concept Plan.
Failure of a subsequent development application to conform to the approved Concept Plan for the PD district shall result in denial of the
application, unless the PD district regulations are first amended through incorporation of a Concept Plan with which the development
application is consistent. The degree of conformity required between the Concept Plan and subsequent development applications shall be
set forth in the adopting ordinance. (Also see Section 1.4.2.4 below for Concept Plan modifications.)
(c) A site plan, prepared in accordance with Section 4.1.2 [4.1.2.2] may be submitted in lieu of a concept plan and shall qualify as a
concept plan.
(d) The Planning Director may waive concept plan requirements in cases where the nature of the PD is such that a concept plan is not
appropriate.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.4 Subsequent Development Applications
(a) Development Applications Authorized. The development standards for a PD district shall be applied to the authorized uses through
a plat, Site Development Plan (Section 1.4.2.7 [sic]), general Site Plan, or other development applications as set forth in the adopting
ordinance.
(b) Minor Deviations from Approved Concept Plan. In determining whether development applications are consistent with the Concept
Plan, minor deviations from the Concept Plan may be approved by the Planning Director. Unless otherwise specified in the adopting
ordinance, minor deviations are limited to the following:
(1) Corrections in spelling, distances, and other labeling that does not affect the overall development concept.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/648
(2) Change in building layout, when shown, that is less than a ten percent (10%) increase in size.
(3) Changes in the proposed property lines internal to the PD as long as the originally approved district boundaries are not
altered.
(4) Changes in parking layouts as long as the number of required spaces and general original design is maintained.
(c) Major Deviations from Approved Concept Plan. All major deviations from the Concept Plan shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council for approval as an amendment to the PD district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.5 Approval Criteria for a Planned Development District
(a) Factors. The following criteria will be used by the City in deciding whether to approve, approve with modifications, or deny a
petition for a PD district:
(1) The extent to which the land covered by the proposed PD district fits one or more of the special circumstances in Section
2.4.4.5 [2.3.4.5] (Chapter 2) warranting a PD district classification.
(2) The extent to which the proposed PD district furthers the policies of the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan (as
amended) and other formally adopted City planning documents, such as the Parks Plan.
(3) The extent to which the proposed PD district will result in a superior development than could be achieved through
conventional zoning classifications.
(4) The extent to which the proposed PD district will resolve or mitigate any compatibility issues with surrounding
development.
(5) The extent to which proposed uses and the configuration of uses depicted in the Concept Plan are compatible with
existing and planned adjoining uses;
(6) The extent to which the proposed development is consistent with adopted public facilities plans, including those related
to water, wastewater, transportation, drainage and other public facilities; and
(7) The extent to which the proposed open space and recreational amenities within the development provide a superior
living environment and enhanced recreational opportunities for residents of the district and for the public generally.
(b) Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions to the PD district regulations and Concept Plan as are necessary to
assure that the purpose of the PD district is implemented.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.6 Adopting Ordinance
(a) Items Specific to the Ordinance. The ordinance establishing a PD district shall incorporate the approved Concept Plan as part of the
district regulations and shall set forth the following:
(1) The base zoning district(s) to be overlaid, together with the boundaries of the district(s);
(2) A statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD district established therein;
(3) The permitted, conditional and accessory uses authorized in the district, the location of such uses, the residential
densities or other measurements of development intensity associated with base districts or phases of the development in
conformance with the approved Concept Plan;
(4) The general standards applicable to development within the district, with or without reference to the base district,
including:
a. Density,
b. Lot area,
c. Lot width,
d. Lot depth,
e. Yard depths and widths,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/648
f. Building height,
g. Building elevations,
h. Coverage,
i. Floor area ratio,
j. Parking,
k. Access,
l. Accessory buildings,
m. Signs,
n. Lighting,
o. Usable open space,
p. Adjacency,
q. Hours of operation,
r. Project phasing or scheduling,
s. Management associations,
t. Such other requirements as the City Council may deem necessary in order to implement the Comprehensive Plan,
and the purposes of the PD District, and
u. Sidewalks and bicycle facilities;
(5) Provisions stating that all zoning standards not expressly set forth for the district in the adopting ordinance shall be as
provided in the base zoning district(s), and that any standard in this LDC that has not been expressly varied in the adopting
ordinance shall be applicable to subsequent development permits for land within the PD district;
(6) Design standards applicable to the development;
(7) A specific list of deviations from standards in the base zoning district(s), together with any standards in the ordinance
which are to be varied for development within the PD district;
(8) Required dedications of land or public improvements;
(9) A phasing schedule for the project, where applicable, setting forth the dates for submittal of site development plans and
the timing of performance by the developer for dedications of land or public improvements and satisfaction of any conditions
in relation to the phasing of development, where applicable; and
(10) Identification of the levels of the deviation allowed between the Concept Plan and subsequent development
applications that may be approved by the Planning Director (if any, other than permitted under Section 1.4.2.4);
(11) Specification of whether a Site Development Plan(s) is required to implement the district regulations;
(12) Such additional conditions as are established by the Council to assure that the PD District and Concept Plan are
consistent with the stated purposes of the district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.7 Documentation of PD Districts
(a) Planned Development Ordinances Approved Prior to the Adoption of the LDC. Prior to adoption of this LDC, the City Council
previously established certain Planned Development districts (which may be referred to as Planned Development Districts (PDD)), which
may be continued in full force and effect. The PDD ordinances or parts thereof approved prior to this LDC, specified on the Official
Zoning Map are carried forth in full force and effect. Each prior PDD ordinance shall retain its previously assigned unique identification
number with a PDD prefix (e.g., PDD-1, PDD-2, PDD-3, and so on) as shown on the map and subsequent PD ordinances adopted after
the effective date of this LDC shall be sequentially numbered for identification purposes.
(b) Planned Development Ordinances Approved After Adoption of the LDC. All Planned Development zoning districts approved after
adoption of this LDC, as may be amended, shall be prefixed by a “PD” designation and assigned a unique identification number (e.g.,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/648
PD-1, PD-2, PD-3, and so on), and shall also be shown on the Zoning Map
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.2.8 Reapplication Following Denial
(a) Reapplication Time Period. Following denial of a zoning change request, another zoning change request for a Planned Development
District may be resubmitted within twelve (12) months of the date upon which the previous application was denied. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt.
1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
Section 1.4.3.1 Purpose, Applicability, and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Conditional Use Permit is to allow the establishment of uses which may be suitable only in certain
locations in a zoning district or only when subject to standards and conditions that assure compatibility with adjoining uses.
(1) Conditional uses are those uses which are generally compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district,
but which require individual review of their proposed location, design and configuration, and the imposition of conditions in
order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location within a given zoning district.
(2) Only those uses enumerated as conditional uses in a particular zoning district, or those nonconforming uses which are
damaged or destroyed, and which are permitted to be reestablished under this Land Development Code, shall be authorized as
conditional uses.
(b) Applicability. A Conditional Use Permit is required to use or develop property within the City limits for any use designated as a
conditional use in the Land Use Matrix in Chapter 2, Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Land Development Code for the zoning
district in which the property is located. The Conditional Use Permit application must be accompanied by a Site Plan prepared in
accordance with Chapter 4; such Site Plan shall be approved or denied along with the CUP application in accordance with Section
1.4.3.4.
(c) Effect.
(1) Approval of a Conditional Use Permit authorizes the use or development of the property in accordance with the
conditions of the permit.
(2) Approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which the permit is issued
and shall apply only to the property for which the permit is issued.
(3) No conditionally permitted use shall be enlarged, extended, increased in intensity or relocated unless an application is
made for a new Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
(4) Initiation or development of the use shall not be authorized until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals
required by this Land Development Code.
(d) Characteristic of the Land: A Conditional Use Permit is considered to be a characteristic of the land rather than a characteristic of
the landowner. A CUP itself cannot be bought, sold, or transferred to another property.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.2 Documentation of Conditional Use Permits (CUPs)
(a) Conditional Use Provisions Approved Prior to the Adoption of the LDC. Prior to adoption of this LDC, the City Council previously
established various Conditional Use Provisions, some of which are to be continued in full force and effect. Any and all conditions,
restrictions, regulations and requirements which apply to the respective Conditional Use Provisions shall also remain in full effect after
the adoption of this LDC. Each prior-approved provision may be referred to as a Conditional Use Provision. Any changes to a priorapproved
Conditional Use Provisions shall result in the Conditional Use Provisions becoming a Conditional Use Permit (CUP), which
shall then meet all the requirements of a CUP as outlined within this LDC.
(b) List of Conditional Use Permits (CUPs) Approved After Adoption of the LDC. All Conditional Use Permits (CUPs) approved in
accordance with the provisions of this LDC, as may be amended, shall be sequentially numbered and shall be referenced on a listing
maintained and available in the Planning Department.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.3 Application Requirements
(a) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a Conditional Use Permit.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/648
(b) Site Plan Required.
(1) A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all Conditional Use
Permits. Such Site Plan shall also expire and/or be extended or reinstated in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 5.
Such Site Plan shall be approved or denied along with the CUP application.
(2) The Planning Director may waive individual site plan requirements in cases where the nature of the CUP is such that
those elements are not necessary for the consideration of the CUP. This authority is not intended to alter the requirements of
the Site Plan process in Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2], but only for a site plan required for the CUP process.
(c) Contents. All applications and related contents, including a Site Plan application, shall be submitted consistent with a requirements
checklist supplied by the Planning and Development Services Department.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.4 Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Hearing and Notification.
(1) The Planning Director shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission on the application
for a Conditional Use Permit, and shall cause personal notice to be given in accordance with Section 1.2.2.1.
(2) The Planning Director shall schedule a public hearing before the City Council, if necessary due to an appeal of the
Commission's recommendation for denial.
(b) Decision. The decision on approval or denial of a CUP shall be made in the same manner as a decision on a zoning amendment.
Such procedures are outlined in Section 1.4.1.3.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.5 Criteria for Approval
(a) Factors. When considering an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the
impact of the proposed conditional use on and its compatibility with surrounding properties and residential areas to ensure the
appropriateness of the use at the particular location, and shall consider the extent to which:
(1) The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the policies embodied in the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations;
(3) The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent developments and
neighborhoods, and includes improvements either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development-related
adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual nuisances, drainage or other similar adverse effects to adjacent
development and neighborhoods;
(4) The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be hazardous or conflict with the existing
and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood;
(5) The proposed use incorporates roadway adjustments, traffic-control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to
control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated traffic on neighborhood
streets;
(6) The proposed use incorporates features to minimize adverse effects, including visual impacts, of the proposed
conditional use on adjacent properties; and
(7) The proposed use meets the standards for the zoning district, or to the extent variations from such standards have been
requested, that such variations are necessary to render the use compatible with adjoining development and the neighborhood.
(b) Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may require such modifications in the proposed use and attach
such conditions to the Conditional Use Permit as these bodies deem necessary to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use and to carry
out the spirit and intent of this section. Conditions and modifications may include
(1) Limitation of building size or height,
(2) Increased open space,
(3) Limitations on impervious surfaces,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/648
(4) Enhanced loading and parking requirements,
(5) Additional landscaping,
(6) Curbing,
(7) Sidewalk,
(8) Vehicular access and parking improvements,
(9) Placement or orientation of buildings and entryways,
(10) Buffer yards,
(11) Landscaping and screening,
(12) Signage restrictions and design,
(13) Maintenance of buildings and outdoor areas,
(14) Duration of the permit and hours of operation.
(c) No Variances. The conditions imposed on the application shall not be subject to variances that otherwise could be granted by the
Board of Adjustment, nor may conditions imposed by the City Council subsequently be waived or varied by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.6 Abandonment, Expiration and Revocation
(a) Abandonment. A Conditional Use once established, that remains vacant for a continuous period of eighteen (18) months, shall be
deemed abandoned, and shall not thereafter be re-established except upon approval of a new application for a Conditional Use Permit. In
determining whether a conditional use has been abandoned, the City shall apply the standards applicable to abandonment of a
nonconforming use in Section 2.7.3.6 [2.6.3.6] (Chapter 2) of this Code.
(b) Time of Expiration. A Conditional Use Permit shall expire if:
(1) A building permit, if any, for the use has not been approved within two (2) years of the date of approval of the permit;
(2) The building permit subsequently expires;
(3) The use has been discontinued for a period exceeding eighteen (18) months; or
(4) A termination date attached to the permit has passed.
(c) Revocation. The City Council may revoke any Conditional Use Permit that is in violation of any condition imposed on the use in
accordance with the procedures of Article 2, Division 6 of Chapter 1.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.3.7 Appeals
(a) The applicant or other interested person may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to grant or deny a
Conditional Use Permit to the City Council in accordance with Section 1.4.1.3. The Council shall apply the criteria in Section 1.4.3.5 in
deciding whether the Commission's action should be upheld, modified or reversed. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Board of Adjustment (BOA) Procedures
Section 1.4.4.1 Special Exceptions.
(a) Purpose, Applicability and Effect.
(1) The purpose of a special exception shall be to authorize a modification of zoning standards applicable to particular types
of development within any zoning district, which is consistent with the overall intent of the zoning regulations and for which
express standards are prescribed, but that requires additional review to determine whether the development with the
modification is compatible with adjoining land uses and the character of the neighborhood in which the development is
proposed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/648
(2) An application for a special exception may be filed only for those modifications listed in (d) of this Section 1.4.4.1. The
special exceptions procedure shall be applicable only within the City limits.
(3) Approval of an application for a special exception entitles the property owner to undertake the activity authorized under
the exception notwithstanding any standards in the zoning district regulations to the contrary.
(b) Application Requirements.
(1) The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a special exception.
(2) An application for a special exception shall be accompanied by the following:
a. All information required for a zoning variance;
b. A statement describing in detail how the proposed exception meets the applicable standards.
c. Completed application form and required fees.
(3) The request shall not be accepted by the Planning Director unless the special exception requested is specifically
authorized by this LDC; such authorization is described in Section 1.4.4.1(d). If the proposed use requiring special exception
is also required to comply with conditions specified in Section 1.4.4.1(d), the applicant shall also indicate, by plans or other
documents, that such applicable conditions will be met.
(c) Processing of Application and Decision.
(1) The Planning Director shall schedule the request for hearing by the Board of Adjustment by placing it upon the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the BOA.
(2) The complete application must be delivered to the Planning Director and all fees paid at least twenty-eight (28) days
prior to the public hearing.
(3) The BOA shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Article 2, Division 3 of Chapter 1.
Personal notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 2 of this LDC.
(4) The BOA shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the special exception.
(5) An application for approval of a special exception shall be scheduled on an agenda within sixty (60) days of the official
filing date.
(d) Special Exceptions Outlined. Upon written request of the property owner, the Board of Adjustment (BOA) may grant special
exceptions to the provisions of this article, limited to and in accordance with the following:
(1) To expand a nonconforming use within an existing structure provided that, in the case of a nonconforming residential
use, such expansion does not increase the number of dwelling units to more than the number existing when the use first
became nonconforming.
(2) To expand the gross floor area of a nonconforming structure provided that such expansion meets all current regulations
and does not create any new or additional nonconformities.
(3) To permit the following, but only upon finding that the failure to grant the special exception deprives the property owner
of substantially all use or economic value of the land:
a. A change from one nonconforming use to another,
b. The reconstruction of a nonconforming structure that has been totally destroyed, or
c. The resumption of a nonconforming use previously abandoned.
(4) To alter front, side or rear setbacks, provided that the special exception does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
minimum requirement.
(5) To interpret the provisions of Chapter 2 of this LDC by adjusting zoning districts where the street layout actually on the
ground varies from the street layout as shown on the maps.
(6) To waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in an amount not exceeding thirty-three percent (33%) of the
normal requirement in any zoning district for one or more of the following situations, whenever the character or use of the
building makes unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities or where the regulations would impose an
unreasonable hardship upon the use of the property for the following purposes:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/648
a. Housing specifically designed and intended for use by the elderly, disabled, or other occupants typically having a
lower expectation of automobile ownership;
b. Adaptive reuse or restoration of a historically or architecturally significant structure;
c. Expansion of a nonprofit, public or social service use on an existing site; and
d. Conversion of a nonconforming use to what would otherwise be a conforming use, except for the parking and
loading requirements.
(7) To allow the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged to the extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost.
(8) To allow a change to another nonconforming use. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structure and premises in combination may, as a special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use,
provided the Board of Adjustment finds that the proposed nonconforming use is not more nonconforming in the district than
the previously existing nonconforming use.
(9) To allow the City to issue a building permit for expansion of an existing nonconforming use that is not in compliance
with the Future Land Use and Development Plan map and/or zoning district when the Board of Adjustment determines that
this special exception will not adversely impact water, wastewater, drainage, and street transportation systems, and is in accord
with all City codes and applicable Comprehensive Plan policies, including those pertaining specifically to land use
compatibility.
(10) To allow for the reasonable reduction, to the minimal amount possible, of requirements related to the following
improvements to allow for compliance with the City's adopted requirements for development (and their spirit and intent), but
also to allow for the use and enjoyment of property within Abilene (also see Article 4, Division 3 of Chapter 4 [Article 1,
Division 1 of Chapter 4]).
(11) To allow for a reasonable amount of time for a nonconforming use to be brought to a lesser-nonconforming status or to
a conforming status by allowing an applicant to make improvements to an existing, developed property or building over a
period of time, instead of requiring such improvements to be made immediately, or prior to a Certificate of Occupancy.
(12) To allow a carport in a zoning district wherein a carport would otherwise be prohibited and/or to allow a carport on a
lot upon which required front, side, or rear setbacks would otherwise be violated.
(13) To allow an accessory dwelling larger than what would otherwise be allowed.
(14) Installation of a small wind energy conversion system (SWEC) not qualifying by right in conformance with Section
2.4.7.3.a or installation of a large wind energy conversion system (LWEC).
(e) Criteria for Approval.
(1) In deciding whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a special exception, the Board shall
apply the standards for special exceptions for nonconformities, outlined in Section 1.4.4.1(d), as criteria for general special
exceptions. In addition, the Board shall determine that the requested special exception complies with each of the following:
a. Will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent property, either as filed or subject to
such requirements as the Board finds to be necessary to protect and maintain the stability of adjacent properties.
b. Will place no undue burden on public facilities. Public facilities to be considered shall include, but are not limited to
streets and alleys, water and sewer utilities, schools and parks.
c. That approval of the special exception is clearly in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance
and, furthermore, provides for substantial justice.
(2) In approving any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the term[s] under which the
special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this LDC and punishable under Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 8.
(f) Expiration. The special exception shall expire one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date upon which the Board approves or
conditionally approves the application unless the applicant obtains all necessary construction permits or otherwise performs the tasks
authorized by the approved special exception within such period.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 5-2011, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 2-10-11; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 1.4.4.2 Variances
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/648
(a) Purpose, Applicability and Effect.
(1) The purpose of a variance is to vary one or more zoning standards made applicable to a use authorized under this
Chapter.
a. A variance application shall not be used as a means of amending the text of the City's zoning regulations or of
changing a zoning district classification of the property for which the variance is sought.
b. A variance application cannot be used as a means to contest the applicability of a standard to a development
application, an exemption determination, or a decision on a development application.
(2) A variance application is applicable only within the City limits of Abilene.
(3) The granting of a variance petition in whole or in part authorizes the petitioner to submit a development application that
complies with the standard as varied or modified, and authorizes the decision-maker to evaluate the application using the
varied standard, for the duration of the variance.
(b) Application Requirements.
(1) A variance application shall contain a detailed written statement of the reasons why the standards to be varied should not
be applied to the use identified in the application, and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the City Council. The
application also shall be accompanied by illustrations or other documents showing the effect of the requested variance on the
proposed development.
(2) A variance application shall be filed with the Planning Director for action by the Board of Adjustment. No development
application that is dependent upon approval of the pending variance application shall be acted upon until a final decision has
been reached on the variance application.
(3) An application for a variance to a use in a zoning district for which an application for a zoning amendment is pending
may not be accepted for filing until a final decision has been reached on any zoning amendment.
(4) Application shall be accompanied by a Site Plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1
[Division 2], and which indicates existing and proposed features, drawn to scale, on the property for which the variance is
requested.
(c) Processing of Petitions and Decision.
(1) The Planning Director shall schedule the request for hearing by the Board of Adjustment by placing it upon the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the BOA.
(2) The complete application must be delivered to the Planning Director and all fees paid at least twenty-eight (28) days
prior to the public hearing.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a public hearing on the variance application in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article 2, Division 3. Personal notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 2.
(4) The Board of Adjustment shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the variance application.
(5) A variance application shall be decided within sixty (60) days of the official filing date, unless the application is tabled
or there is a lack of quorum. In either case, the BOA shall then have an additional forty-five (45) days to decide the
application.
(6) The applicant for a variance bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that a variance to the standards applicable to a
particular use should be granted.
(7) The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the variance petition in the manner provided in Section 1.2.2.4
[1.2.2.5] of this LDC.
(d) Criteria for Approval. A variance is used to modify the application of this Ordinance as it applies to a specific piece of property
which, because of peculiar circumstances applicable only to the property, prevent its being used on the same basis as other property in the
same zoning district. In reaching a decision on the variance application, the Board shall determine and make written findings that all of
the following conditions are present:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions arising from the physical surroundings, shape, topography or other feature
affecting the land such that the strict application of the provisions of this Code to the proposed use would create an undue
hardship or inequity (other than financial) upon or for the applicant in developing the land or deprive the applicant of the
reasonable and beneficial use of the land;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/648
(2) That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and will not be injurious to neighboring
properties or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;
(3) Granting the variance is consistent with spirit and intent of this LDC and is in harmony herewith.
(4) The hardship or inequity suffered by petitioner is not caused wholly or in substantial part by the petitioner.
(e) Use Must Be Permitted By Right or CUP. Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted which permits a use not permitted by
right or by Conditional Use Permit in a zoning district by the terms of this LDC.
(f) Conditions and Safeguards. In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
in conformity with this LDC. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this LDC and punishable under Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 8.
(g) Expiration and Extension.
(1) A variance to a standard applicable to a particular use shall expire within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the date
the variance petition is granted, unless the property owner or applicant files a complete application for a building permit with
the City within such period. The Board may extend the time for filing the building permit application for good cause shown,
but in any event, the expiration date for the variance shall not be extended beyond one (1) year from the date the variance was
granted.
(2) If the building permit expires, the variance also shall expire. If the building permit is extended, the variance also shall be
extended.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 1.4.4.3 Appeal of Responsible Official's Decision
(a) Authority for Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall finally decide appeals any official's interpretation of the requirements of
Chapters 2 or 4 of this LDC in which the requirement applies to development within the City limits of Abilene, unless a separate appeals
process is otherwise defined within this LDC.
(b) Application. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice with the Responsible Official for the application, as outlined in Chapter 1,
and with the Board of Adjustment, within no more than fifteen (15) days' time after the decision in question has been rendered by the
Responsible Official or deciding board, as applicable.
(1) Such notice shall be taken on the appropriate application form provided by the Planning Director, specifying grounds for
the appeal.
(2) If an appeal is made from a determination by the Director of Planning that no special exception of the nature requested
is authorized by this LDC, a request for the special exception in question shall be taken and processed concurrently with the
appeal of the proponent.
(c) Application Requirements. The appeal application shall contain all information of the originally submitted application that was
reviewed by the Responsible Official, along with any other information that the applicant deems necessary to meet the burden of proof for
a successful appeal.
(d) Processing of Petitions and Decision.
(1) The Planning Director shall schedule the request for hearing by the Board of Adjustment by placing it upon the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the BOA. The proponent or his agent shall be present at the hearing.
(2) The responsible official shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the records upon which the action or
development application appealed was taken.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal application in accordance with Chapter 1, Article
2, Division 3. Personal notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 2.
(4) At the time of the public hearing, the Planning Director or his duly authorized representative shall present the basis for
the appeal by the proponent by stating the sections of the LDC which sets forth the requirements.
(5) The applicant for an appeal bears the burden of proof to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action on the
appeal by the BOA.
(e) Stay of Proceeding.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/648
(1) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Responsible Official certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him/her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would in his/her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or a court of record on application to the Responsible
Official and on due cause shown.
(2) In the case of a concurrent request for a special exception or variance, where the proponent is already in violation of the
terms of this LDC, proceedings shall be stayed as in the case of an appeal.
(3) In either case set forth in Subsections (1) and (2) above, if the BOA denies the appeal or application, the stay shall
remain in effect for ten (10) days following the decision of the BOA.
(f) Action on the Appeal.
(1) In exercising its powers, the Board may in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas as existing or hereafter
amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the Responsible Official's order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from which the appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination. For
these purposes, the BOA shall have the same authority as the Responsible Official.
(2) If the appeal is a result of a refusal of the Planning Director to accept a request for a special exception or a variance, and
the BOA finds that the request shall have been accepted, the BOA shall then proceed to hear the request along with the appeal,
after the giving of due notice.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Chapter 2: Zoning Regulations
Effective: June 1, 2010
Article 1 - Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan
Division 1 - Applicability and Consistency
Section 2.1.1.1 Rules for Determining Consistency
(a) Comprehensive Plan & Amendments. Development applications shall be consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, as
amended and updated.
(b) Legislative Application Consistency.
(1) A legislative development application is consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan if the application is
consistent with applicable policies in the Comprehensive Plan and applicable Comprehensive Plan maps.
(2) In determining whether a legislative development application is consistent with a Comprehensive Plan map, the City
shall take into consideration the policies that govern interpretation of the map, as well as location or property specific
designations on the map;
(3) The Future Land Use and Development Plan map incorporated into the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan is not a
zoning district map and shall not be construed as defining zoning district boundaries, but will be used as a guide in making
decisions regarding zoning;
(c) Quasi-Judicial or Administrative Application Consistency - A quasi-judicial or administrative development application is consistent
with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan if the application conforms with regulations in this Land Development Code that implement
the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Policies and Maps
Section 2.1.2.1 Rules for Determining Consistency
(a) Policies & Maps. The following Comprehensive Plan elements, adopted City plans and adopted City maps apply to legislative
development applications:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/648
(1) Southwest Area Land Use Plan I (1993)
(2) Southwest Area Land Use Plan II (1994)
(3) Buffalo Gap Road Corridor Study (1994)
(4) Carver Neighborhood Revitalization Plan (1998)
(5) Downtown Streetscape Master Plan (1998)
(6) Sears Neighborhood Plan (2001)
(7) Thoroughfare Plan (2005)
(8) Sidewalk Master Plan (2006)
(9) Annexation Plan (2006)
(10) Safe Routes Abilene Plan (2008)
(11) The Abilene Parks, Recreation & Senior Facilities Master Plan (2008)
(12) Lake Fort Phantom Hill Plan (2009)
(13) Highway 351 Development Plan (2012)
(14) Cobb Park Area Revitalization Plan (2014)
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 13-2012, pt. 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 12-2014, pt. 1, 2-27-14)
Article 2 - Zoning Regulations
Division 1 - Purpose
Section 2.2.1.1 Purpose of Regulations and Districts
(a) Accordance with the Texas Local Government Code (TLGC).
(1) The zoning regulations and districts contained in this Chapter are established in accordance with an adopted
comprehensive plan (and related updates), as authorized by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, for the purpose
of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical,
cultural and/or architectural importance and significance within the City limits.
(2) The zoning regulations and districts contained in this Chapter have been designed to achieve objectives which include
the following:
a. Lessen the congestion in the streets,
b. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers,
c. Ensure adequate light and air,
d. Prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population,
e. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other
public requirements, and
f. Guide and limit the use of areas subject to periodic flooding.
(3) They are established with reasonable consideration for, among other things, the character of each zoning district and its
peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified, conserving the value of buildings and environmentally sensitive features,
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Zoning Map
Section 2.2.2.1 Division of the City into Districts and Related Map
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/648
(a) Division. The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon
the Zoning Map of the City, which is adopted as a part of this Code as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. (Ord. No. 8-
2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.2.2.2 The Official Zoning District Map
(a) Official Map. The Zoning Map shall be maintained as an electronic file in the office of the Planning Director and labeled the
“Official Zoning Map of the City of Abilene, Texas.” In case of any question, this version of the map shall be controlling.
(b) Maintenance of Official Map. The official Zoning Map shall be maintained in the office of the Planning Director. The map shall be
used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by incorporating all subsequent amendments enacted by official action of the City
Council. The Planning Director will use all reasonable means to protect the official Zoning Map from damage, and to ensure the accurate
restoration of the map file if damage or destruction of the original file occurs.
(c) Changes or Amendments Reflected on the Map. Any changes or amendments made to the zoning district boundaries shall be
incorporated into the Zoning Map file promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. The Planning Director shall
maintain a descriptive log of amendments to the map[.] The Planning Director will use all reasonable means to ensure that no changes are
made to the official Zoning Map without authorization by official action of the City Council.
(d) Replacement of the Official Zoning District Map. In the event that the official Zoning Map file becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret for any reason, the City Council may adopt, by ordinance following a public hearing, a new official Zoning Map
which shall replace and supersede the prior Zoning Map, but which shall not, in effect, amend or otherwise change the original official
Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereto.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.2.2.3 Zoning District Boundaries
(a) Rules of Interpretation. The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning Map are usually along streets, alleys, property
lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply:
(1) Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow
the centerlines.
(2) Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following the City limits.
(4) Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located along the centerline of the railroad rightof-
way lines.
(5) Boundaries shown as following shorelines shall be construed to follow the shorelines, and in the event of change in the
shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
(6) Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, creeks, canals, bodies of water, or
drainageways shall be construed to follow the centerlines, and in the event of change in any such centerlines shall be construed
to move with the centerlines. (The centerline shall be interpreted as being midway between the shorelines.)
(7) Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in subsections “1” through “6” above shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Zoning Map.
(8) The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street unless,
as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street.
(9) Boundaries indicated as dividing a lot shall be construed as being located as shown on the Zoning District Map.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Zoning Map.
(10) Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the Zoning Map, or if there arises a
question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of
subsections “1” through “8” above, then the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the zoning district boundaries.
(11) If the zoning of property is invalidated by a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be
considered classified as AO, Agricultural Open Space, in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory.
(b) Zoning changes which are still valid and which were made between the effective date of the previous Zoning Ordinance, adopted
on March 26, 1984, and the effective date of this Code are indicated in approximate locations on the Zoning Map. For exact legal
descriptions, refer to the adopting ordinances for each particular zoning change.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Compliance and Application
Section 2.2.3.1 Compliance and Application of Zoning Regulations
(a) Compliance Hereafter. All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Abilene, Texas which are
occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, or converted after the effective date of this LDC shall be occupied,
used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning
district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided, or such shall be subject to penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article 2, Division 8 of this Code. This shall be deemed to include only the portion of the building, structure or land which is actually
newly occupied, newly used, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered after the effective date of this Code. All of
the standards and regulations prescribed by this Code shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise.
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered:
(1) To have more narrow or smaller front, side or rear yards than those required by this Code;
(2) To exceed the maximum height allowed by this Code;
(3) To occupy a greater percentage of lot area than allowed by this Code; or
(4) To accommodate or house a greater number of families than is specified within this Code for the zoning district in which
such building is located.
(b) Lot Area Deficiency. If a lot was legally platted prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations within this LDC, was held in
separate ownership from any adjacent property at such time, and contains less area, width or depth than is required under these
regulations, such lot may be used for any use lawful within the district, notwithstanding such lot area deficiency, provided, however, such
lot shall be subject to all other district regulations.
(c) Use Conflicting With Other Regulations: No use(s) shall be allowed that is prohibited by State or Federal law or that operates in
excess of State or Federal environmental, pollution or performance standards as determined by any State or Federal agency.
(d) Setbacks, Yards, & Open Spaces: No lot upon which a building has been erected shall later be so reduced in area that the setbacks,
yards and/or open spaces shall be smaller than those required by this Code, nor shall a part of a yard or other open space required by this
Code for any building or lot be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building or lot.
(e) Grades, Open Spaces, Off-Street Parking or Loading Spaces. No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading
space required about or in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with these zoning regulations, shall be
included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or use unless such
inclusion is officially applied for and approved by the City.
(f) Requirements on Same Lot. All the lot area, required yards and other open spaces provided in connection with any structure or use,
in order to comply with these regulations, shall be located on the same lot as such structure or use unless otherwise specifically exempted.
(g) Completion of Buildings. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or use of a
building for which a currently valid building permit has been obtained at the time of passage of this Land Development Code, so long as
the entire building is completed within one (1) year from the effective date of this LDC. The Board of Adjustment, upon application, may
grant a one (1) year extension of the time of completion upon showing of reasonable progress of construction. Any building permit in
effect at the passage of this LDC shall become void if construction is not begun within one hundred eighty (180) days thereof.
(h) Applications in Relation to Zoning: No plat applicable to land that is located within the City limits shall be submitted for approval
until the area contained within the plat has been zoned for the proposed use of the property.
(i) Existing Uses: All existing uses that may be nonconforming after the effective date of this LDC shall comply with Chapter 2,
Article 7 [Article 6] of this LDC.
(j) Characteristic of the Land: Zoning is considered to be a characteristic of the land rather than a characteristic of the landowner.
Zoning itself cannot be bought or sold.
(k) Airport Zoning. The Airport Zoning regulations shall apply to areas inside the City Limits as well as outside the City Limits as
authorized by Chapter 241 of the Local Government Code as amended.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Zoning Upon Annexation
Section 2.2.4.1 Zoning Regulations and Annexation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/648
(a) Establishment of Zoning. As soon as practical following annexation, the Planning Director shall, on the Director's own or upon
application by property owners of the annexed area, initiate proceedings to establish appropriate zoning on the newly annexed territory.
The Planning Director shall commence public notification and other standard procedures for zoning amendments as set forth in Chapter 1
of this Land Development Code.
(b) Timing of Zoning. The proceedings to establish zoning may be undertaken concurrently with annexation procedures (i.e., notices
and public hearings). However, the zoning approval and formal adoption of the ordinance establishing zoning shall occur after annexation
takes effect as a former [formal] action by the City Council, and the zoning approval and formal adoption of the ordinance establishing
zoning shall occur as a separate and distinct action by the City Council.
(c) Initial Zoning. From the time an annexation takes effect until action is completed to zone the land, the initial uses permitted on the
annexed property shall be consistent with uses permitted within the AO, Agricultural Open Space, District.
(d) Proper Notification. The initial zoning of annexed land shall meet the requirements for notification and public hearings as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article 2, Divisions 2 and 3 of this Code and all applicable State laws.
(e) Simultaneous Petition for Annexation & Zoning by a Landowner. The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for
zoning the property simultaneously with submission of a petition for annexation, but an annexation petition may not be conditioned upon
the approval of any particular zoning classification.
(f) Building Permit Required. No person shall erect, excavate, construct, proceed, or continue with the erection or construction of any
building or structure or add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, repair, convert, or demolish any building or structure or cause the same to
be done in any area of the City or in any newly annexed territory to the City without first applying for and obtaining a building permit
therefor from the Enforcing Officer as may be required in applicable City ordinances.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 3 - Zoning Districts
Division 1 - Zoning Districts Established
Section 2.3.1.1 Uniformity
(a) Minimum Regulations. The regulations set by this LDC for each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as may be otherwise provided. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.1.2 Division Into Zoning Districts
(a) Purpose of Each District. Each zoning district herein established is provided a specific purpose, in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, as amended, for the location of various activities throughout the City.
(b) Specific Zoning Districts. The City of Abilene, Taylor County, Texas, is hereby divided into distinct zoning districts, upon which
one or a number of overlay zones may be superimposed. These districts and overlay zones herein established shall be known and cited as
listed in Table 2-1.
TABLE 2-1: ZONING DISTRICT LISTING
Abbreviated
Designation Zoning District Name
Residential Districts
AO Agricultural Open Space District
RR Rural Residential District
RS-12 Residential Single-Family District-12
(minimum 12,000-square-foot lots)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/648
RS-8 Residential Single-Family District-8
(minimum 8,000-square-foot lots)
RS-6 Residential Single-Family District-6
(minimum 6,000-square-foot lots)
PH Residential Single-Family Patio Home
District
(minimum 4,500-square-foot lots)
TH Residential Townhome District
(minimum 2,500-square-foot lots)
MD Residential Medium Density
(maximum 12 units per acre)
MF Residential Multiple-Family-2
(maximum 24 units per gross acre)
MH Manufactured/Mobile Home District
Nonresidential Districts
CU College & University District
NO Neighborhood Office District
O Office District
NR Neighborhood Retail District
GR General Retail District
MU Medical Use District
CB Central Business District
MX Mixed Use District
GC General Commercial District
HC Heavy Commercial District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/648
LI Light Industrial District
HI Heavy Industrial District
Overlay Districts/Special Districts
COR Corridor Overlay District
NCO Neighborhood Conservation Overlay
District
ACO Activity Center Overlay District
H Historic Overlay District
PD Planned Development District
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Residential Zoning Districts
Section 2.3.2.1 Agricultural Open Space (AO) District
(a) Purpose. The Agricultural Open Space (AO) District is composed mainly of unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits of the
City that are vacant or in agricultural use, with some dwellings and some accessory uses (structures). The applicable regulations are
designed to preserve valuable agricultural lands and to preserve, in a more permanent manner, open space located within the corporate
limits of the City. This district is also used as a “holding zone” for land annexed to the City of Abilene, until a request for a more
intensive category of land use is approved.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.2 Rural Residential (RR-1 and RR-5) Districts
(a) Purpose. The RR-1 and RR-5 districts are designed to:
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment for family life by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located
in residential neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Make available a variety of dwelling types and densities to serve a wide range of individual requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/648
(5) RR districts are designed to limit the concentration of development in areas that are not considered suitable for
development at a higher density. RR districts encourage single-family residences on large lots with appropriate accessory
activities to preserve open space and provide opportunities for residential uses that exhibit a rural character within the limits of
the City of Abilene. RR districts are appropriate in areas where extension of facilities may be unfeasible or to provide a buffer
and prevent encroachment in areas identified in the City's Comprehensive Plan. This zoning should not be applied in areas
where future development is expected at urban and suburban densities. In addition to the general purposes applying to all
residential districts, regulations of RR districts are designed to encourage the provision of very low density single-family,
detached residences under two (2) permitted densities.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.3 Residential Single-Family (RS-12) District-12
(a) Purpose. The Residential Single-Family (RS-12) District-12 is intended to permit the low density residential development of
detached single-family dwelling units[,] permitted accessory structures, and appropriate desirable open space on lots of not less than
12,000 square feet in area. As one of the single-family zoning districts provided for development in Abilene, this district is also designed
to achieve the following:
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment for family life by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located
in residential neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Provide an option for low-density lots to serve a range of individual requirements represented by the citizenry of
Abilene.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 4 of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(e) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.4 Residential Single-Family (RS-8) District-8
(a) Purpose. The Residential Single-Family (RS-8) District-8 is intended to permit the residential development of detached singlefamily
dwelling units, permitted accessory structures, and appropriate desirable open space on lots of not less than 8,000 square feet in
area. As one of the single-family zoning districts provided for development in Abilene, this district is also designed to achieve the
following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/648
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment for family life by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located
in residential neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Provide an option for mid-sized lots to serve a range of individual requirements represented by the citizenry of Abilene.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 4 of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(e) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.5 Residential Single-Family (RS-6) District-6
(a) Purpose. The Residential Single-Family (RS-6) District-6 is intended to permit the residential development of detached singlefamily
dwelling units, permitted accessory structures, and appropriate desirable open space on lots of not less than 6,000 square feet in
area. As one of the single-family zoning districts provided for development in Abilene, this district is also designed to achieve the
following:
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment for family life by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located
in residential neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Provide an option for more dense single-family lots than the other single-family zoning districts in order to serve a range
of individual requirements represented by the citizenry of Abilene.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(e) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.6 Residential Single-Family Patio Home (PH) District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/648
(a) Purpose. The Residential Single-Family Patio Home (PH) District is designed to provide for development of detached single-family
residences on compact lots having one side yard reduced to zero feet (i.e., “zero-lot-line”).
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 4 of this Chapter 2.
(c) Project Size. The term project size shall mean the overall sum of acreage to be used for patio home development and shall include
all patio home lots.
(d) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(e) Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of accessory
dwelling units which may otherwise be permitted by this LDC.
(f) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(g) Maintenance Easements, Overhangs: Patio home developments shall be developed as zero-lot-line homes. A minimum five-foot
(5') wide maintenance easement shall be placed on the other side of the property line of the zero-lot-line side yard to enable the property
owner to maintain that portion of his/her house which is on the zero-lot-line. Side yards and maintenance easements shall be shown on the
subdivision plat. A minimum separation between patio homes of ten feet (10') shall be provided. Roof overhangs will be allowed to
project into the maintenance easement a maximum of twenty-four inches (24"), but the maintenance easement shall remain reasonably
accessible to the adjacent homeowner to perform maintenance and repairs to all portions of the exterior of his/her home. No accessory
building, pool (except decking), or stored materials (e.g., firewood, garden or construction materials, etc.) shall be located or stored
within the maintenance easement.
(h) Concept Plan Required. A concept plan is required at the time of any change of zoning to PH.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.7 Residential Townhome (TH) District
(a) Purpose. The Residential Townhome (TH) District is intended to promote stable, quality, attached-occupancy residential
development on individual lots at higher residential densities. This district may be included within certain areas of neighborhoods or,
when in accordance with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan, may provide a medium density “buffer” or transition district between
lower density residential areas and multifamily, nonresidential areas, or major thoroughfares. This district is also intended:
(1) To permit a greater intensity of land use while at the same time providing areas of open space and degrees of privacy
comparable to those qualities inherent in conventional, single-family detached housing.
(2) To make available a variety of dwelling types and densities in a variety of locations to serve a wide range of individual
requirements. Townhouse developments provide for groupings making efficient, economical, comfortable and convenient
arrangements of yards and structures.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Project Size. The term project size shall mean the overall sum of acreage to be used for townhome development and shall include
all townhome lots. The maximum project size shall be twenty (20) acres.
(d) Site Layout and Building Requirements.
(1) All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building requirements outlined in Table 2-2.
(2) The ends of any two adjacent building complexes or rows of buildings shall be at least fifteen feet (15') apart.
(3) Buildings shall each have a separate lot with dimensions meeting regulations for the district.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/648
(4) A contiguous row of attached townhome dwellings shall have a minimum length of three (3) dwelling units and a
maximum length of twelve (12) dwelling units. There shall be no more than six (6) contiguous townhouse units with the same
or approximately the same front building line where such units front onto a minor street or subcollector. More than six (6)
contiguous units shall have variable front building lines as set forth herein this subsection.
(e) Building Lines. The minimum building setback from lot boundaries shall be as set forth in Table 2-2 for all principal buildings
adjacent to streets. Where private streets are installed over lot boundaries, measurement of building lines shall be from the edge of
pavement or face of curb.
(1) Front Building Line. Townhouse units shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of twenty feet (20').
(2) Exterior Side Building Line. Townhouse units that have lot frontage separated from a side street by at least ten feet (10')
of parkway, as defined herein this LDC, shall be set back from the exterior side boundary by at least ten feet (10'). Townhouse
units having lot frontage separated from the side street by less than ten feet (10') of parkway, or where fronting onto a private
street, shall be set back from the exterior side boundary by at least twenty feet (20').
(3) Interior Side Building Line. If not contiguous to another townhouse unit, all townhouse units shall be set back from any
interior side boundary a minimum of five feet (5').
(4) Rear Building Line. The minimum setback line from rear lot boundaries, for all townhouse units, shall be ten feet (10').
(e) [(e.1)] Number of Dwelling Units per Lot. There shall be a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per lot, with each townhouse unit
located on an individual lot.
(f) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, including private streets, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage
and maintain such common land and/or facilities.
(g) Garage Setback. The garage for each townhouse unit shall be set back no less than twenty feet (20') from the most proximate
parallel property line.
(h) Separate Utilities: All utilities shall be provided separately to each lot within the TH district so that each unit is individually
metered.
(i) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this TH District.
(j) Concept Plan Required. A concept plan is required at the time of a zoning change to a TH zoning district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.8 Residential Medium Density (MD) District
(a) Purpose. The Residential Medium Density (MD) District is designed to encourage the provision of conveniently located, centrally
maintained accommodations, with a combination of single-family, two-family (duplex), triplex, quadraplex, and townhouse housing units.
This district provides for a combination of these housing types at a density maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. This district
may provide a medium density “buffer” or transition district between lower density residential areas and multifamily, nonresidential
areas, or major thoroughfares. This district is also designed to achieve the following:
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located in residential
neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Provide an option for housing unit diversity to serve a range of individual requirements represented by the citizenry of
Abilene.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/648
(1) All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building requirements outlined in Table 2-2.
(2) The maximum number of units permitted on any one (1) individual lot shall be four (4).
(d) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(e) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this MD District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.9 Residential Multiple-Family (MF) District
(a) Purpose. The Residential Multiple-Family (MF) District is designed to encourage the provision of conveniently located, centrally
maintained rental accommodations with traditional apartment units. This district provides for a maximum of twenty-four (24) dwelling
units per acre. As one of the multiple-family zoning districts provided for development in Abilene, this district is also designed to achieve
the following:
(1) Protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding most commercial and other incompatible activities,
as appropriate.
(2) Encourage a suitable environment by permitting certain appropriate institutions and facilities to be located in residential
neighborhoods.
(3) Preserve open space and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces, and lot areas.
(4) Provide an option for apartment housing to serve a range of individual requirements represented by the citizenry of
Abilene.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements.
(1) All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building requirements outlined in Table 2-2
of this LDC.
(2) The minimum distance between principal multiple-family structures shall be fifteen feet (15').
(3) The minimum building line on any interior side shall be ten feet (10'), except where a building is erected or altered to
exceed thirty feet (30') in height, excluding architectural exceptions, on a lot adjoining an RS or MD district. In this case, the
adjacent side building line shall be equal to at least twice the total height of the building.
(d) Common Areas - Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the
development, there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such
common land and/or facilities.
(e) Walkways. A four-foot (4') wide paved walkway shall connect the front door of each ground floor unit to a parking area. The
minimum width of any sidewalk adjacent to head-in parking spaces shall be six feet (6') to accommodate a two-foot (2') bumper overhang
for vehicles.
(f) Building Length. Buildings shall not exceed two hundred feet (200') in length.
(g) Oversized Parking Areas. Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas
are provided and are approved by the City. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements and shall not
be visible from a public street.
(h) Signage - Address Numbers. All buildings containing residential units shall provide signage which clearly identifies the numbers
(i.e., addresses) of the units within each building. Signage shall be visible from entrances into the complex and/or from vehicular drive
aisles within the complex such that each individual unit is easy to locate by visitors, delivery persons, and/or emergency personnel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/648
(i) Safety Lighting. All parking areas shall have appropriate lighting and shall be positioned such that no light adversely impacts
adjacent residential areas.
(j) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this MF District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.2.10 Manufactured/Mobile Home (MH) District
(a) Purpose. The Manufactured/Mobile Home (MH) District is intended to regulate those areas now occupied by manufactured/mobile
homes, manufactured/mobile home parks and open areas where manufactured/mobile home development appears desirable. This district
is designed to permit and encourage the development of properly planned and improved manufactured/mobile home parks and
subdivisions at appropriate locations within a residential environment.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-2 of this LDC.
(d) Common Areas. Management & Maintenance. For any land and/or facilities to be used in common by residents of the development,
there shall be provisions made for the establishment of a property owners' association to manage and maintain such common land and/or
facilities.
(e) Anchorage of Manufactured/Mobile Homes. To insure against natural hazards such as tornados, high winds and electrical storms,
anchorage for each manufactured/mobile home shall be provided according to the Building Code and State law.
(f) Skirting.
(1) All manufactured/mobile home units not attached to a permanent foundation shall provide skirting from the top of the
unit's frame to grade. Skirting shall totally enclose and secure from view the unit's axles and all required anchors, footings, and
piers.
(2) All required skirting shall be of an opaque, noncombustible material, and shall be of a color similar to the materials used
in the construction of the manufactured/mobile home unit such that it blends with the overall appearance of the unit.
(g) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this MH District. The establishment of any new manufactured home shall also
require a Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2].
(h) Mobile Home Replacement. A mobile home as defined herein is one that was constructed before July 1st, 1976. A manufactured
home as defined herein is one that has been constructed on or after July 1st, 1976. Any mobile home that is deemed a legal, conforming
use and that is in need of replacement shall only be replaced with a manufactured home constructed on or after July 1st, 1976.
TABLE 2-2: SITE LAYOUT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning
District
Max.
Density of
Dweling
Units Per
Acre
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Building Line Setbacks Max.
Height
(ft)
Max. Lot
Coverage
(% of lot
area)
Single-Family
Standards
Area
(s.f.)
Width
(ft)1
Depth
(ft)
Street Setback (ft) Garage
Setback
(front facing
only, not on
arterials and
expressways)
Rear Yard
(next to
other lot
boundary)
Side
Yard
Subcollector Collector Arterial Express7/
13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/648
or Minor
Street
or
Expressway
with
Frontage
Rd
way
Without
Frontage
Rd
AO n/a 217,800 200 500 25 25 30 40 25 40 25
None
except
add
1 ft
setback
for every
1 ft of
height
over 45 ft
15% n/a
RR-5 n/a 217,800 150 400 25 25 30 40 25 50 30 35 15% n/a
RR-1 n/a 43,560 100 200 25 25 30 40 25 50 25 35 40% n/a
RS-12 n/a 12,000 80 100 25 25 30 40 25 30 10 35 40% n/a
RS-8 n/a 8,000 70 100 15 20 30 40 20 25 7.5 35 50% n/a
RS-6 n/a 6,000 60 100 15 20 30 40 20 20 6 35 50% n/a
PH n/a 4,500 40 100 15 20 30 40 20 20 0* 35 75% n/a
TH n/a 2,500 25 100 10 20 30 40 20 10 5 35 70% RS-6 District
MD 12 6,000 60 100 15 20 30 40 25 20 6 35 70%
MF 24 6,000 60 100 15 20 30 40 25 20 10 40; 3
stories
90%
MH n/a 5,000 50 100 15 20 30 40 20 15 7.5 n/a n/a
n/a - not applicable
1 A minimum width of 100 feet is required along arterial streets (2.6.1.1(e)(3) [2.5.1.1(e)(3)])
* This applies to one side only. A 10-foot separation between homes is required.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Nonresidential Zoning Districts
Section 2.3.3.1 College and University (CU) District
(a) Purpose. The College and University (CU) District is composed of lands which are primarily located within boundaries of the main
campuses of Abilene's colleges or land which has been designated for use by a college or university. The district is designed to promote
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/648
the orderly, interrelated development of college and university related facilities and to prevent the encroachment of incompatible use into
the areas of high building concentration and pedestrian activity. This district also provides a means for advance consideration by the City
of Abilene of any development which might impact parking, additional traffic generation or compatibility with adjacent areas, as well as
any additional demands which may be placed upon the City's administrative or service functions.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4 of this LDC.
(d) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this CU District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.2 Neighborhood Office (NO) District
(a) Purpose. The Neighborhood Office (NO) District is established to create a flexible District for low intensity office and professional
uses. The District can be used as a transition district between more intense uses and residential uses. Permitted uses should be compatible
with adjacent residential areas utilizing buffers and landscape requirements established by Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 2. Buildings in
this District should be compatible and in similar scale with residential uses and adjacent property.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Maximum Building Size. The maximum building coverage of a structure or structures on a single lot shall not exceed 15,000 square
feet. Sites zoned NO may be built in excess of 15,000 square feet if not adjacent to any properties zoned for single-family residential.
(e) Hours of Operation. Except for uses permitted within a residential zoning district, no use shall operate before 6:00 a.m. nor after
11:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
(f) Outside Display and Storage. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside display and outside storage
requirements.
(g) Screening Required. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(h) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this NO District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.3 Office (O) District
(a) Purpose. The Office (O) District is intended to encourage office development of high quality in a generally noncommercial
environment. The selected business and/or professional offices allowed in the O District have relatively low traffic generation
characteristics, handle no products, and require limited identification by signs or other such devices.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/648
(d) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this O District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.4 Neighborhood Retail (NR) District
(a) Purpose. The Neighborhood Retail (NR) District is intended to accommodate a limited range of retail trade, services and office
activities that are needed to serve a neighborhood area. The level of intensity and scale of development permissible within the NR District
are designed for compatibility with nearby residential uses. Many permitted uses within the NR District are, in fact, aimed toward
meeting the day-to-day retail needs of nearby residents for food, pharmaceuticals, personal services, etc. The NR District development
should occur at the intersections of collector streets with more major thoroughfares and other collector streets.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Maximum Building Size. The maximum building coverage of a structure or structures on a single lot shall not exceed 15,000 square
feet.
(e) Hours of Operation. Except for uses permitted within a residential zoning district, no use shall operate before 6:00 a.m. nor after
11:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
(f) Outside Display and Storage. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside display and outside storage
requirements.
(g) Screening Required. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(h) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this NR District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.5 General Retail (GR) District
(a) Purpose. The General Retail (GR) District is intended to accommodate a wide range of retail trade, services and office activities that
are needed to serve the community. Development within this district should provide for efficient retailing opportunities, and facilities
should have an integrated design. It is intended that developments within this district be laid out and developed as a cohesive unit,
according to an approved Site Plan so that the purpose of the district may be accomplished. The GR District development should
generally occur in nodes at the intersections of major thoroughfares.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements.
(1) All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Display and Storage. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside display and outside storage
requirements.
(e) Screening Required. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(f) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this GR District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.6 Medical Use (MU) District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/648
(a) Purpose. The Medical Use (MU) District is intended to provide high quality medical-related development and to ensure
compatibility between medical and adjacent uses through proper planning and design. In addition to listing appropriate uses within the
Land Use Matrix (Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2), regulations of the MU District prescribe standards for access, noise, air, sufficient
developable area, and other external effects that a medical district may produce. Further consideration and flexibility are then given to
development of individual sites to maximize the desirable effects. Furthermore, the purpose of the Medical Use district is to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare by increasing the efficiency of a district designated for medical use while minimizing
detrimental impacts on neighboring properties and the overall environment. The ultimate goal is to provide modern facilities for the
public and to enhance the City as a medical center.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Accessibility. Medical-related facilities exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet in floor area should be easily
accessible to the entire City and to service vehicles, such as fire protection apparatus, through the roadway network. Due to its potential
as a major traffic generator and a regionally significant land use, each such medical-related facility shall therefore be adjacent to at least
one (1) arterial street leading to high-speed, high-volume highway traffic.
(e) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this MU District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.7 Central Business (CB) District
(a) Purpose. The Central Business (CB) District is intended to provide a wide range of retail goods and consumer services to residents
of the metropolitan area and trade area. This district is located in the central City area of Abilene and is intended to provide space and
facilities for financial, administrative, commercial, residential and business services, as well as limited light manufacturing activities, but
is designed to discourage warehousing and manufacturing and other uses which tend to generate heavy traffic or require open storage of
materials. The district regulations are designed to further development of the district for the purposes stated, subject to limitations to
prevent congestion and assure provision of adequate light and air to buildings in the district. This district consists, primarily, of older
business structures which predate modern retailing concepts. Special provisions are made for off-street parking, height and area
regulations in order to accommodate use of existing structures. New development/redevelopment within this district should further the
objective of encouraging a walkable, pedestrian-friendly district. The CB district is also intended to promote multiple types of
development, resulting in a central area of Abilene that will attract a variety and diversity of people.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements.
(1) All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(2) There shall be no minimum building lines, except where lot boundaries lie adjacent to AO or RS districts. See Table 2-4
for building line requirements adjacent to AO and RS districts[.]
(d) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this CB District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.8 Mixed Use (MX) District
(a) Purpose. Regulations pertinent to the Mixed Use (MX) District are designed to permit establishment of integrated nonresidential
and residential activities where appropriate and desirable, under conditions that assure an acceptable level of harmony among land uses.
Application of MX District zoning shall be considered appropriate when in accordance with at least one of the following objectives:
(1) Protect residential neighborhoods from encroachment of incompatible commercial, office, and industrial activities;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/648
(2) Promote development of vacant, bypassed lots in harmony with adjacent land use and the surrounding environment;
(3) Encourage rehabilitation of older residential structures that are no longer economically attractive for single-family
residential use;
(4) Create land use patterns that promote energy and fiscal efficiency, and that increase the accessibility of daily activities;
and,
(5) Create a mechanism for furthering adopted policies within the Comprehensive Plan for various centers of activity.
The MX District allows for more flexible locations for a variety of land use activities. Unlike more traditional zoning districts, compatible
land use patterns in MX zones should generally not be achieved through the separation of different uses, but through more sensitive
building and site design.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Display and Storage. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside display and outside storage
requirements.
(e) Use Integration.
(1) In predominately residential areas (greater than 50%) nonresidential uses shall be developed in a manner that is
compatible with the character and appearance of the residential area.
(2) Screening walls between varying types of uses shall not be required. If visual screening is needed, landscaping elements
and earthen berms shall be used, in order to allow pedestrians to easily access every area of the development.
(f) Off-Street Parking. Provision of off-street parking shall be in conformance with requirements of Article 2, Division 1 of Chapter 4,
except as follows.
(1) Off-street parking areas with more than ten (10) parking spaces shall not be permitted in front of any structure which
faces the major thoroughfare. When such parking is provided, it shall be screened by a perimeter landscaping strip, earthen
berm, or other landscaped plant material, with a minimum width of five feet (5'). All other parking areas shall be located to the
side or rear of the primary on-site buildings.
(2) Shared Parking. A reduction in parking of a maximum of fifty percent (50%) for each use may be permitted provided
that:
(a) It can be established that two or more uses within the Mixed Use District, applying jointly and concurrently for
Site Plan approval, will be sharing a parking area that may be on property that is not under the same ownership as one or
more of the uses to be served by the parking, where the shared parking area has a capacity of at least the minimum
number of spaces for the use having the greatest minimum requirement, where all uses have their primary need for
parking during offsetting periods so that the parking area will be utilized by only one (1) principal use at a time, and
where the arrangement is documented through a long-term lease or other written agreement.
(b) Proper pedestrian access is provided such that pedestrians can access both uses within an acceptable distance and
that such access is provided safely and conveniently to both uses.
(g) Access.
(1) Adequate access from different areas within a development shall be provided such that vehicles are not required to enter
onto a perimeter street to move from one area to another with the same development.
(2) Adequate access between nonresidential uses shall be provided such that vehicles are not required to enter onto a
perimeter street to move from [one] nonresidential use to another; cross-access shall be required.
(h) Landscaping. All unpaved areas and areas not covered by buildings shall be landscaped with grass, plantings, shrubs, or other
natural groundcover. Also refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 2 for other landscaping requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/648
(i) Signage. Signs within one development shall conform to a unified design, where materials, colors, etc. of each sign are similar and
complementary. Signs shall also be unobtrusive to the character of residential areas within or adjacent to the MX District.
(1) Either one of the following type signs shall be permitted for “business” or “identification” purposes:
(a) One wall sign per structure, limited in size to ten percent (10%) of the total area of the wall on which it is located,
but in no instance exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area.
(b) One ground or pole sign, limited in size to six (6) square feet and limited in height to six feet (6').
(2) Classifications of signs for other purposes (e.g. real estate, construction, nameplate) shall be provided according to
standards specified within Chapter 4.
(j) Building Design.
(1) Exterior construction and finishing materials shall be compatible with adjacent structures.
(2) Harmony with adjacent buildings shall further be assured through the architectural design of structures by means of
appropriate scale, materials, and color.
(3) In areas of significant architecture, such as areas deemed to be historically important or representing a unique and
significant architectural style, new construction, expansion, and renovation shall not conflict with surrounding buildings.
(k) Refuse Screening. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(l) Accessory Buildings. Setbacks applicable to unattached accessory buildings for service or retail trade activities within an MX
District shall be as set forth for nonresidential districts in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 4 of this Chapter 2.
(m) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single- and two-family dwellings, within this MX District. In addition to the criteria set forth therein for determining
whether a Site Plan should be approved or denied, the following criteria shall also be used for any Site Plan for development within the
MX District.
(1) The site shall be developed in a manner which protects amenities and natural features. As such, views, vistas, public
spaces, pedestrian ways, and important signs shall be maintained.
(2) The building design in terms of scale, materials, color, and architectural style.
(3) The appropriateness of landscaping in terms of buffering capability, harmony with adjacent uses, and preservation of
existing trees.
(4) Screening mechanisms.
(5) The appropriateness and cohesiveness of the signage, including the design, materials, motion, illumination, and location.
(6) The provision of parking, specifically the layout of parking areas and whether shared parking is being proposed.
(n) Conditional use permit required. Any nonresidential use over 5,000 square feet in floor area, any residential use over four dwelling
units per acre or any use with activity outside an enclosed building shall require a conditional use permit.
(o) All nonresidential uses shall conform to the landscape, outdoor storage and other development standards set forth in the
Neighborhood Retail District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.9 General Commercial (GC) District
(a) Purpose. The General Commercial (GC) District is intended to provide a wide range of retailing activities, personal and business
services, and other commercial activities. Good automobile accessibility to and pedestrian accessibility within this district are essential.
The GC district regulations are designed to permit development of commercial activities which are generally not appropriate within other
commercial districts, such as the NR district and the CB District.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/648
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Display. In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside
display, as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted subject to the following:
(1) Such display shall be confined to a pedestrian walkway (e.g., sidewalk area) immediately adjacent to the building
containing the primary use, shall not extend from such building a distance of more than ten feet (10'), and shall be located
wholly under a permanent part of a main business building such as an overhang. Such display shall not in any case be
permitted within parking areas.
(2) Such display shall not be kept outside after the business closes or for an overnight period.
(3) Adherence to requirements within Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC.
(e) Outside Storage.
(1) In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside storage,
as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted, but shall be screened by an opaque wall or fence, so as to block the outdoor storage
area from view outside the boundaries of the subject property wherever such boundaries abut more restrictive zoning districts
(e.g., Neighborhood Commercial, Mixed Use, etc.).
(2) Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside storage requirements.
(f) Refuse Areas/Containers. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(g) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this GC District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.10 Heavy Commercial (HC) District
(a) Purpose. The Heavy Commercial (HC) District is intended to accommodate the sale, service, display, and storage of certain
commodities which by their nature may not be compatible with many other sales and display operations. Building material yards,
contractor yards, open storage and warehousing are examples of such heavy use.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Display. In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside
display, as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted subject to the following:
(1) Such display shall be confined to a pedestrian walkway (e.g., sidewalk area) immediately adjacent to the building
containing the primary use, shall not extend from such building a distance of more than ten feet (10'), and shall be located
wholly under a permanent part of a main business building such as an overhang. Such display shall not in any case be
permitted within parking areas.
(2) Such display shall not be kept outside after the business closes or for an overnight period.
(3) Adherence to requirements within Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC.
(e) Outside Storage.
(1) In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside storage,
as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted, but shall be screened by an opaque wall or fence, so as to block the outdoor storage
area from view outside the boundaries of the subject property wherever such boundaries abut more restrictive zoning districts
(e.g., General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Mixed Use, etc.).
(2) Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside storage requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/648
(f) Refuse Areas/Containers. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(g) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this HC District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.11 Light Industrial (LI) District
(a) Purpose. The Light Industrial (LI) District is intended to provide areas for a wide range of manufacturing, wholesale and medium
intensity activities, all of a non-nuisance type. The LI District regulations are designed to permit such activities, subject to limitations
intended to protect nearby residential and commercial districts, and to protect the permitted uses from one another. Residential uses are
not compatible with the environment created in the LI District, due to the character and high level of activity characterized by permitted
use.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Storage.
(1) In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside storage,
as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted, but shall be screened by an opaque wall or fence, so as to block the outdoor storage
area from view outside the boundaries of the subject property wherever such boundaries abut more restrictive zoning districts
(e.g., General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Mixed Use, etc.).
(2) Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside storage requirements.
(e) Refuse Areas/Containers. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(f) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this LI District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.3.12 Heavy Industrial (HI) District
(a) Purpose. The Heavy Industrial (HI) District is intended to provide areas mainly for manufacturing and industrial activities whose
generation of nuisance effects is ordinarily greater than that of other industries. The HI district regulations are designed to encourage such
industries, subject to the minimum regulations necessary for mutual protection of permitted uses authorized herein. Residential uses are
not compatible with the environment created in the HI District, due to the character and high level of activity characterized by permitted
use.
(b) Authorized Uses. The following are authorized uses under the regulations established in this chapter:
(1) Permitted and conditional uses as authorized in the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter
2;
(2) Accessory uses as authorized in Article 5, Division 3 [Article 4, Division 4] of this Chapter 2.
(c) Site Layout and Building Requirements. All development within this district shall meet the minimum site layout and building
requirements outlined in Table 2-4.
(d) Outside Storage.
(1) In conjunction with any permitted or conditional use (unless specifically prohibited as part of the CUP), outside storage,
as defined by this LDC, shall be permitted, but shall be screened by an opaque wall or fence, so as to block the outdoor storage
area from view outside the boundaries of the subject property wherever such boundaries abut more restrictive zoning districts
(e.g., General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Mixed Use, etc.).
(2) Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 5 of this LDC for outside storage requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/648
(e) Refuse Areas/Containers. Refer to Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4 of this LDC for screening requirements.
(f) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] shall be required for all
development, except single-family and two-family, within this HI District.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
TABLE 2-4: SITE LAYOUT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning
District
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Building Line Setbacks Max. Height
(ft)
Max. Floor
Area Ratio
(FAR)
Applicable
Single-Family
Standards
Applicable
Multiple-Family
Standards
Width
(ft)1
Depth (ft) Street Setback (ft) Rear Yard
(next to other
lot boundary)
(ft)
Interior Side (ft)2
Collector
or Minor
Street*
Arterial, or
Expressway
With
Frontage Rd*
Expressway
Without
Frontage Rd
CU 60 100 10 0 0 0 none 4:1 RS-8 District
Standards
MF District
Standards
NO 60 100 15 30 40 10; abutting AO or Residential District, 20 35; 2 1/2:1
O 60 100 25 30 40
0; abutting AO or Residential District, 30
none 4:1
NR 60 100 15 30 40 35; 2 stories 1/2:1 RS-6 District
Standards
MD
GR 60 100 25 30 40 40; 2 stories 1:1 MF District
Standards
MU 60 100 25 30 40 20, plus 1 foot
for every foot
of bldg height
over 30'
10, plus 1 foot for every
foot of bldg height over
30'
none 2:1
CB none none none none none 0; abutting AO
or Residential
District, 25
0; abutting AO or
Residential District, 20
none 10:1
* The setback may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') if only landscaping is provided between the building and the property line.
1 A minimum width of 100 feet is required along arterial streets (2.6.1.1(e)(3) [2.5.1.1(e)(3)])
2 Drainage must be mitigated so as not to shed onto adjacent properties
TABLE 2-4: SITE LAYOUT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(Continued)
Zoning Minimum Lot Size Minimum Building Line Setbacks Max. Height Max. Applicable Applicable
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/648
District (ft) Floor Area
Ratio
(FAR)
Single-
Family
Standards
Multiple-Family
Standards
Width (ft)1 Depth (ft) Street Setback (ft) Rear Yard
(next to other
lot boundary)
(ft)
Interior Side
(ft)2
Subcollector or
Minor Street*
Collector,
Arterial, or
Express-way
With Frontage
Rd*
Expressway
Without
Frontage Rd
MX 10 0 0 35' 4:1
RS-6 District
Standards
MD or MF District
Standards
GC 60 100 25 30 40 10; abutting
AO or
Residential, 25
0; abutting AO
or Residential,
25
none 2:1 none none
HC 60 100 25 30 40 25; abutting
AO or
Residential, 50
0; abutting AO
or Residential,
30
none 2:1
LI 60 100 25 30 40
0; abutting AO
or Residential,
50
none 2:1
none
HI 60 100 25 30 40 25; abutting
AO or
Residential, 75
0; abutting AO
or Residential
District, 100
none 2:1
none
* The setback may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') if only landscaping is provided between the building and the property line.
1 A minimum width of 100 feet is required along arterial streets (2.6.1.1(e)(3) [2.5.1.1(e)(3)])
2 Drainage must be mitigated so as not to shed onto adjacent properties
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-1-12)
Division 4 - Overlay Zoning Districts
Section 2.3.4.1 Corridor Overlay (COR) District
(a) Purpose. The City of Abilene recognizes the benefits of attractive and aesthetically pleasing corridors that serve as approach routes
and major thoroughfares of the City. The Corridor Overlay (COR) District is designed to ensure that standards of aesthetics are
guaranteed with any new nonresidential development that occurs along the designated corridor. These standards relate to signage,
landscaping, screening, and driveway separation.
Use of the COR District generally is to be directed toward Abilene's newly developing areas typically at or near the City's periphery. It is
not directed toward the established older parts of the City where development is already in place. The COR District is designed for
corridors with a mix of residential and commercial land uses. It is not designed for corridors of an industrial/ manufacturing character.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/648
The COR District is intended for land uses along appropriate major arterial routes and not the Interstate highway, freeway, or expressway
corridors.
Application of the COR District shall be considered appropriate when in accordance with at least one of the following objectives:
(1) Promote quality development of lots along the major corridor in harmony with adjacent land uses and the surrounding
environment.
(2) Ensure that residential neighborhoods are protected from encroachment of incompatible commercial activities that occur
along the corridor.
(3) Establish that the corridor is developed with special and specific standards and design that provide a pleasing and
positive image.
(b) Applicability. As an overlay zoning district, the COR District is limited to specified areas encompassing land that has already been
assigned conventional zoning district classifications. It supplements the standards of the underlying conventional districts with new or
different standards which are more restrictive. In the event of a conflict between the standards of the COR District and the regulations of
the underlying zoning district, the standards described herein will prevail. Regulations of the underlying zoning district not augmented or
otherwise supplemented by the COR District shall continue to apply.
(c) Length and Width. The Corridor Overlay District shall be at least one (1) mile in length, and shall apply to all lots with frontage
along the designated major thoroughfare.
(d) Landscaping and Screening Requirements. Landscaping and screening shall be required on any nonresidential site requiring a Site
Plan, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Unless otherwise specified landscaping and screening shall be in compliance
with other sections of this LDC and shall include trees, shrubs, grass and other vegetation. Existing trees on-site determined to be in
healthy condition by the City of Abilene Parks Division shall be preserved to the greatest possible extent. All trees, shrubs, and vegetation
shall be of natural material.
(1) Landscaping of the Site.
a. The total landscaping must account for at least ten percent (10%) of the developed site area. There shall be a
minimum of two (2) trees and six (6) shrubs per 500 square feet of required landscape area. The developed site area shall
include the main structure(s), any accessory structure(s), parking lots, equipment lots, and outdoor storage lots.
b. The size of the landscaped section, excluding parking lot islands, shall have an area of at least fifty (50) square feet
and a minimum width of ten feet (10') from the edge of the property line, to provide for the normal growth of planted
landscaping materials.
c. Fifty percent (50%) of the required landscaping must be located along the major thoroughfare.
d. If an exterior side yard exists or the business fronts along a side street, at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
remaining landscaping shall be along the side street. If the business is not adjacent to the major thoroughfare, then fifty
percent (50%) of the landscaping must be in the front yard with at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the remaining
landscaping along the exterior side yard.
e. All site area planted with turf shall be one hundred percent (100%) covered within one (1) year of the issuance of
the Certificate of Occupancy.
f. At no time may landscaping or screening interfere with vision clearance at rights-of-way or at the intersections.
Screening and fencing must be located at least ten feet (10') from the curb or edge of the pavement of all streets or on
private property, whichever is greater.
(2) Landscaping of Parking Lots
a. Off-street parking areas with more than ten (10) parking spaces shall not be permitted in front of any structure
which faces the major thoroughfare, unless such parking areas are partially screened by a perimeter landscaping strip,
earthen berm, or other landscaped plant material, with a minimum width of ten feet (10').
b. The size of any landscaped section within the parking area shall have an area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet
and a minimum width of five feet (5') to provide for normal growth of planted landscaping materials.
c. All landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular traffic by use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or permanently
anchored railroad ties, at least six inches (6") in height.
(3) Screening Adjacent to Residential Areas. All commercial areas must provide a twenty-foot (20') buffer area adjacent to
any residential developments and/or residential zoning with a minimum of the following elements:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/648
a. A solid wall or fence of materials having a natural earth-tone color and a height of between six (6') and seven feet
(7'), and,
b. A landscaped area at least twenty feet (20') in width. The area may be covered entirely with groundcover or turf,
and,
c. The view of all parked vehicles shall be screened from the residential district.
(e) Signage Requirements.
(1) Advertising Side Limitation. No more than two sides of a sign structure may be used for display.
(2) Location. Freestanding signs shall be placed a minimum distance equal to one-fourth the total lot frontage from any side
property line with a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') between any freestanding signs. No sign shall inhibit the view of the
motoring public or obstruct the vision clearance triangle as specified by the City of Abilene Traffic Engineer.
(3) On-Site Signage.
a. All on-site signs shall follow the requirements as specified in Tables 2-10 and 2-11 of this LDC.
b. One wall sign per business shall be permitted with the following restrictions:
1. The wall sign shall have a maximum area of twenty percent (20%) of the area of the wall, and;
2. Illumination is permitted but shall not project light or glare on adjacent property and roadways, and;
3. Motion shall not be permitted, and;
4. All wall signs shall be connected to the wall in a permanent manner, and;
5. No wall sign shall protrude from the surface of the wall at a distance greater than eighteen inches (18").
c. When more than one business is present on a site, grouped signage shall be used with the following requirements:
1. For sites zoned commercial or industrial, with an area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater, the
maximum height of grouped signage shall be forty feet (40').
2. For sites zoned commercial or industrial, with an area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the
maximum height of grouped signage shall be twenty feet (20').
3. When a group sign is used, a maximum area equal to two (2) square feet of signage per lineal foot of street
frontage of the lot shall be permitted. The total group sign shall have an area not in excess of four hundred and fifty
(450) square feet.
4. Only one group sign shall be permitted on a site.
5. No other freestanding advertising signs shall be permitted per business for which grouped signage is used.
d. If the property is a corner lot, the maximum area for all freestanding signs shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet in total area, with the exception of group signs which shall not exceed four hundred and fifty (450) square
feet in area.
TABLE 2-10: BUSINESS AND/OR IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
Zoning
District
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Height
Setback
Required No. of Signs Illum. Motion
MD & MF 25 sq. ft. 8 feet 10 ft from
front or
exterior side
property lines
1/site must front
the major
thoroughfare
No No
RS
NO 50 sq. ft. 8 feet 10 ft from
front or
1/site Yes Yes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/648
exterior side
property lines
NR
O
AO
GR 1-1/2 sq. ft./
lineal foot of
street frontage
10 feet 10 ft from
front or
exterior side
property lines
1 per business
per street
frontage
Yes Yes
GC
All other less
restrictive
districts
TABLE 2-11: INSTRUCTIONAL/PRIVATE SIGNS
Zoning
District
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Height
Setback
Required No. of Signs Illum. Motion
All Districts* 8 sq. ft. 4 feet None As Needed Yes No
* Note - The only signs permitted in RS, MD and MF zoning districts are for commercial properties granted Special Exception or CUP approval. Signs for home
occupations shall comply with Article 5 [Article 4], Division 5 of this Chapter 2.
(4) Prohibited Signs
a. No new portable or wheeled signs or ground anchored banners shall be permitted within the overlay district.
b. No new off-site signs shall be permitted within the boundaries of the overlay district with the exception of:
* off-site group signs;
* digital conversion of an existing billboard.
c. Signs with flashing or blinking lights, regardless of wattage, shall be prohibited within the overlay district.
(5) Maintenance Requirements
a. All signs, or sign structure, including wall signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times.
b. Any sign found to be in disrepair shall be repaired as soon as possible, but no later than forty-five (45) days after
notification.
(6) Electrical Signs. All electrical signs shall comply with the current National Electric Code (N.E.C.).
(f) Driveway Access. Driveways shall conform to access management regulations of the Texas Department of Transportation, the City
of Abilene, or this section, whichever is most restrictive.
(1) Applicability. Driveway access requirements shall pertain to all land uses except for single-family and two-family
residential.
(2) Location & Measurement. Driveways shall be located as set forth below. Measurements shall be made from the edge of
the driveway and from the edge of the pavement or curb of public or private streets.
a. Driveways shall be separated from adjacent driveways by a minimum of fifty feet (50') for driveways on different
parcels and by a minimum of one hundred feet (100') for driveways on the same parcel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/648
b. Driveways shall be located [separated] from interior side and rear property lines by a minimum of twenty-five feet
(25'). The minimum separation requirement from the adjacent property lines does not apply to a shared drive.
c. Driveways shall be separated from adjacent street intersections as follows:
1. For driveways onto an arterial street:
i. One hundred feet (100') from intersecting streets classified as arterial, freeway, frontage road, or
collector.
ii. Fifty feet (50') from all other intersecting streets.
2. The Traffic Engineer may grant exceptions to these location requirements if existing driveways and site
development preclude compliance.
(g) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan shall be required for all development, except single-family and two-family, within this COR
District. In addition to the Site Plan requirements outlined in Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2], a Site Plan for development
within the COR District shall also be in accordance with the following.
(1) A Site Plan shall be required for any change of use from residential to commercial.
(2) The Site Plan shall include the following items:
a. All proposed trees must be labeled.
b. The location, species, and diameter of existing trees having a trunk diameter of two inches (2") or larger, if the tree
is in a healthy condition, must be shown.
c. The barricade and its dimensions, if one is to be included for all existing trees being saved, must be shown.
d. The location, size, height, materials, motion, illumination, and content of each sign shall be indicated.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 04-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-10-13)
Section 2.3.4.2 Pine Street Corridor (Pine-Cor) Overlay Zone
Activities within this overlay district shall be governed by all regulations of the underlying zoning district, including regulations for site
development, landscaping, signs, performance standards, etc., except where modified by the provisions of this Section.
(a) Purpose. The primary purpose of this overlay district is to encourage high quality redevelopment within the district that meets the
goals of the Pine Street Corridor Plan. In general, this district is intended to cover the areas approximately one (1) block on either side if
[of] Pine Street from North 6th Street to Interstate 20.
In general, development and redevelopment within this district should serve as a connection between the downtown to the south, the
hospital/medical uses and university along the corridor, and on the Interstate Corridor on the north. Uses are intended to include retail,
restaurants, services, medical, office, research, educational, and related uses. Development in the area should be of high quality with welldesigned
buildings and attractive landscaping in a pedestrian-friendly setting.
(b) Land Use. Allowable uses within the overlay district shall be per the underlying zoning district, except as modified below.
(1) Auto-related businesses (auto sales, auto repair, truck repair, etc.) are allowed only with a Special Exception, which shall
only be granted for such uses that are compatible with the development goals of the corridor, including incorporating
appropriate conditions to address elements such as building design, landscaping, screening, limitations or prohibitions on
outdoor activities, and the like.
(c) Buildings and Architectural Standards. Standards for building design and materials shall be per the underlying zoning district, in
addition to the following:
(1) Building materials: Building walls visible from Pine Street shall be constructed of masonry material, such as stone or
brick, stucco or stucco-like materials, such as EIFS, textured concrete, split-face block, or similar materials. Standard concrete
block or metal siding is not permitted.
(2) Building articulation: In order to break up the apparent size of large facades, one or more of the flowing design elements
shall be incorporated into the building design:
a. Vertical elements of different materials or colors every fifty (50) feet
b. Changes in building materials[,] design, and/or color to avoid large blank walls
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/648
(d) Setbacks.
(1) Front Building Setback: no setback required. The intent of this setback is to ensure that urban style buildings are allowed
to be built at or near the property line for a consistent urban streetscape for those buildings similar to downtown development
and consistent with the historic development pattern along Pine Street.
(2) Side Setbacks: per underlying zoning.
(3) Rear Setbacks: per underlying zoning, but may be reduced to zero if there are no windows, or open doors, other than
required emergency doors facing the rear property line.
(e) Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping and screening shall be provided, consistent with the City's landscaping standards, except
as modified by this section.
(1) Landscaping along Pine Street Frontage: Required landscaping may occur in the public right-of-way either through a
landscaped parkway with street trees, per the City's landscaping standards, or through an urban-style wide sidewalk from
building to curb with street trees in planters and/or tree wells.
(f) Signage Requirements. The City of Abilene Sign Regulations (See Chapter 4, [Article 2,] Division 8) shall apply within its overlay
district, except as modified below:
(1) Freestanding signs are limited to one per street frontage and shall be a monument style sign with a maximum height of
eight (8) feet and a maximum area of 100 square feet.
(2) Portable signs are prohibited.
(3) No new off-premises advertising signs (billboards) shall be permitted within the boundaries of the overlay district except
to allow for digital conversion of an existing billboard.
(g) Driveway Access. Driveways shall conform to applicable access management regulations of the Texas Department of
Transportation, the City of Abilene, or this section, whichever is most restrictive.
(1) Driveway access requirements shall pertain to all land uses except for single-family and two-family residential.
(2) Measurements shall be made from the edge of the driveway and from the edge of the pavement or curb of public or
private streets.
(3) Driveways shall be separated from adjacent driveways by a minimum of fifty (50) feet for driveways on different
parcels.
(4) Driveways shall be located [separated] from interior side and rear property lines by a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
The minimum separation requirement from the adjacent property lines does not apply to a shared drive.
(5) Driveways shall be separated from adjacent street intersections as follows:
a. Seventy-five (75) feet separation from intersecting streets classified as arterial, freeway, frontage road, or collector.
b. Fifty (50) feet separation from local streets.
(6) The City Engineer may grant exceptions to these location requirements if site limitations preclude compliance.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-11-13)
Section 2.3.4.3 Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) District
(a) Purpose. Although each Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) District will be unique, the general purposes of creating such
districts in older Abilene residential neighborhoods are described in the following:
(1) To protect and strengthen desirable and unique physical features, design characteristics, historic characteristics, and
recognized identity and charm;
(2) To reduce the potential for land use conflicts;
(3) To promote new compatible development;
(4) To stabilize property values;
(5) To provide residents and property owners with a tool for conservation of their neighborhoods;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/648
(6) To promote and retain affordable housing;
(7) To encourage and strengthen civic pride;
(8) To regulate demolition; and
(9) To encourage harmonious and compatible redevelopment that conforms to the size, orientation and setting of the
buildings of the neighborhood.
(b) Criteria. An area suitable for an NCO designation would be one that has a significant number of unique homes or areas that are in
the public interest to preserve, but that do not meet the criteria for the establishment of a Historic Overlay (HO) District (refer to Section
2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4]). To be designated as an NCO District, the area must meet the following criteria:
(1) The area must contain a minimum of one block face, meaning all the lots on one side of a block;
(2) The area must have been platted or developed at least twenty-five (25) years previous; and
(3) The area must possess one or more of the following distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting,
character, or association:
a. Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials;
b. Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks;
c. Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek beds, parks, gardens or street landscaping;
d. Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; or
e. Abuts or links designated historic landmarks.
(4) The area must be predominantly residential in use and character.
(c) Applicability. As an overlay zoning district, the NCO District is limited to specified areas encompassing land that has already been
assigned conventional zoning district classifications. It supplements the standards of the underlying conventional districts with new or
different standards which are more restrictive. In the event of a conflict between the standards of the NCO District and the regulations of
the underlying zoning district, the standards described herein will prevail. Regulations of the underlying zoning district not augmented or
otherwise supplemented by the NCO District shall continue to apply.
(d) Application Procedures.
(1) Who May Initiate. A proposal for designation as an NCO District may be initiated:
a. At the direction of City Council, or
b. By City staff; or
c. At the request of owners representing fifty-one percent (51%) of the land area within the proposed district, or
d. At the request of fifty-one percent (51%) of property owners in a proposed district.
(2) Neighborhood Conservation Plan Required. Following initiation for designation of an NCO District, the Planning
Department shall develop supporting documentation in the form of a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan for the
proposed district that includes:
a. A map(s) indicating the boundaries, age of structures and land use of the proposed district;
b. Graphic and written materials identifying and describing the distinctive neighborhood and building characteristics
of the proposed district, such as identification of recognized historic structures/areas; and
c. Design standards for new construction, additions or alterations to the street facades of existing buildings or
structures within the proposed district.
(3) Neighborhood Participation. All property owners within the proposed district shall be afforded the opportunity to
participate in drafting a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan that will serve as the planning basis for the applicable
NCO; there will be at least one (1) neighborhood meeting for this purpose. A Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan shall
be approved as part of the zoning amendment that creates an NCO District.
(e) Design Standards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/648
(1) Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan as Part of the Ordinance. A Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan shall
be approved as part of the ordinance creating a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District. The Plan shall include design
standards for new construction or placement of any building, structure, foundation, sign, public art or outdoor apparatus or
equipment (including visible utility boxes or mechanical equipment; trucks; playground equipment; or sports equipment), and
any additions, alterations, relocation or rehabilitation to the street facades of existing buildings, structures, foundations, sign,
public art, or outdoor apparatus or equipment.
(2) Ordinary Repair & Maintenance. The Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Plan and requisite design standards shall not
apply to those activities which constitute ordinary repair and maintenance, which shall be defined for the purpose of these
regulations as:
a. The maintenance and/or replacement of materials located on the external portion of a building or structure with
materials that are the same in terms of appearance, quality, design, and color. The replacement of a sign, building, object
or structure in its entirety does not constitute ordinary repair and maintenance.
(3) Design Standards Required. The design standards for the NCO District shall, at a minimum, include the following
elements in order to effectively oversee the physical characteristics and features of all property within the NCO District:
a. Building height, number of stories;
b. Building size, massing (frontage, entrance location/features);
c. Lot size, coverage;
d. Front and side yard setbacks;
e. Off-street parking and loading requirements;
f. Roof line and pitch;
g. Paving.
(4) Design Standards Optional. In addition, the design standards may include the following elements:
a. Building orientation;
b. General site planning (primary, accessory structures);
c. Density;
d. Floor area ratio;
e. Signage;
f. Architectural style and details;
g. Building materials;
h. Garage entrance location;
i. Size and location of windows and/or dormers;
j. Landscaping;
k. Fences and walls;
l. Driveways and sidewalks;
m. Satellite dishes, utility boxes;
n. Street furniture;
o. Demolition (see Subsection (e)(2) [(f)(2)] below).
(f) Design Plan & Certificate of Appropriateness. Following the adoption of an ordinance creating a Neighborhood Conservation
Overlay District, new construction and alterations to buildings within the NCO District shall require approval of a Design Plan and
issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, as described in the following.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/648
(1) No building permit shall be issued for new construction or an alteration or addition to the street facade of an existing
building or structure within a designated Neighborhood Conservation District without the submission and approval of a
Design Plan and the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Landmarks Commission.
(2) No permit shall be issued for the following specific activities within a Neighborhood Conservation District without
issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness:
a. Demolition;
b. Construction of a primary or accessory building, structure or other additions to real estate;
c. The addition of space to an existing primary or accessory building.
(3) If the Landmarks Commission determines that the Design Plan is in conformance with the Neighborhood Conservation
Overlay Plan adopted as part of the related NCO District, the following shall subsequently occur:
a. The Landmarks Commission shall approve the Design Plan;
b. The Landmarks Commission shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness within thirty (30) days, certifying that the
Design Plan is appropriate for completion within the NCO District;
c. The Building Official may issue a building permit.
(4) If the Landmarks Commission determines that the Design Plan is not in conformance with the Neighborhood
Conservation Overlay Plan adopted for the district, the Design Plan shall be denied, and the applicant shall be informed of the
specific design standards that were not adequately met.
(5) The applicant may appeal the Landmark Commission's denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission following the
procedures set forth within the Historic District Overlay for such appeals, specifically within Section 2.4.4.4(i) [2.3.4.4(j)].
(g) Designation: The zoning designation for property located within a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District shall consist of the
overlay district symbol (NCO) as a prefix. NCO Districts shall be numbered sequentially to distinguish among different districts, such as
NCO-1, NCO-2, etc. Each separate NCO District area may also include the neighborhood name in its description for further delineation,
such as NCO-1 Old Town Neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.4.4 Historic Overlay (HO) District
(a) Purpose. The City of Abilene, Texas, recognizes the importance of historically, architecturally and culturally significant sites and
structures to the community. Regulations of the Historic Overlay (HO) District are intended for the enhancement, perpetuation and use of
areas, sites, structures, buildings, properties, and objects which typify the community's past through recognizable characteristics. The City
of Abilene further declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks or districts of
historical and cultural importance and significance is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the
public.
It is recognized that the City of Abilene represents the unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of
citizens, collectively and individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage.
It is further recognized that the unapproved demolition of historic resources could constitute a public nuisance. Regulations applicable to
the Historic overlay zone are designed to achieve the following:
(1) Safeguard the City's heritage as reflected in such districts, areas, sites, structures, buildings, properties, and objects.
(2) Encourage neighborhood conservation.
(3) Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
(4) Promote the use of individual landmarks and districts for the education, enjoyment, and welfare of residents of the
region.
(5) Prevent the deterioration of districts, areas, sites, structures, buildings, properties, and objects found to be of historical,
architectural, or cultural value and, where appropriate, encourage the reuse of such structures and buildings.
(6) Protect and enhance Abilene's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided.
(7) Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the City.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/648
(8) Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property
within the City.
(9) Encourage stabilization, restoration, and improvements of such properties and their values.
(b) Applicability.
(1) As an overlay zoning district, Historic Overlay Districts shall be applicable in all zoning districts, or portions thereof.
(2) Provisions of the HO District apply specifically to exterior alterations, demolition, construction, moving in or removal
of buildings, structures or objects within the boundaries of said overlay zone. Such activity proposed to be undertaken within
an HO District shall be subject to approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness and all conditions set forth therein, except as
otherwise specified in Section 2.3.4.4(f) of this LDC.
(3) Procedures for review and approval of Certificates of Appropriateness, in addition to procedures for establishment of
HO Districts, shall be as set forth within Section 2.3.4.4(f).
(4) Boundaries of an HO District for individual sites shall be aligned with recorded property lines, where feasible.
Boundaries for districts shall be aligned with right-of-way lines, property lines, or other identifiable natural or manmade
divisions.
(5) Permitted use of all property included in an HO District shall continue to be governed by the base zoning district and all
regulations pertaining thereto, except as otherwise noted in this section.
(c) Criteria for Designation. Historic Overlay Districts shall be established only if principal districts, conservation districts, areas, sites,
structures, buildings, properties, or objects within the boundaries of a proposed zone exhibit any one or more of the following
characteristics:
(1) Possesses significance with respect to history, culture, architecture, archeology, paleontology, or as a natural site with a
demonstrable cultural association;
(2) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state, national,
or international history;
(3) Embodies characteristics distinct to a type, period, or method of construction or architecture,
(4) Is associated with the lives of persons significant in local, regional, state, national, or international history;
(5) Represents a distinctive and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or of the city;
(6) Represents the works of a master designer, architect, builder, or craftsman.
A Historic Overlay (HO) District shall constitute a distinct section of the City, united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical
development whose properties and environmental setting meet one or more of the above criteria.
(d) Appointment of Historic Preservation Officer. The Planning Director or a qualified designee shall serve as historic preservation
officer. This officer shall help administer this Section 2.4.4.4 [2.3.4.4] and advise the Landmarks Commission on matters submitted to it.
In addition to serving as representative of the Commission, the officer is responsible for coordinating the City's preservation activities
with those of state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation organizations.
(e) Procedure for Designation of Historic Overlay District. An application for Historic Overlay Zoning shall be initiated by the
owner(s) of the subject property or properties, his or her agent, or the Landmarks Commission.
(1) Application by Owner/Agent:
a. In a district, any one owner may initiate the application. However, at least 50% of the primary buildings, sites,
properties, or structures must be contributing to the district. If not, then the request will be processed as a Neighborhood
Conservation Overlay District.
b. Application shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Director or his representative. All information
prescribed by the form shall be furnished and the form delivered to the Planning Director or his representative.
c. Said application shall be received by the Planning Director or his representative at least twenty (20) days prior to a
public hearing by the Landmarks Commission for individual properties and forty-five (45) days for districts.
d. An applicant for district zoning must attach a map to designate where the Historic Overlay District is proposed.
Contributing and noncontributing properties, as defined in Chapter 5, Definitions, and district boundaries must be shown
on the map.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/648
(2) Initiation by Landmarks Commission: The Landmarks Commission may initiate a Historic Overlay District application
if the Commission, after holding a public hearing and reviewing all available information, makes a finding pursuant to the
criteria for designation contained in Section 2.3.4.4(c) that the structure should be given Historic Overlay District zoning.
a. Should the Planning and Zoning Commission deny the request, the Landmarks Commission may appeal to the City
Council within 45 days.
(3) Fees. Upon filing of an application for Historic Overlay District by the owner(s) of the land, the applicant shall pay the
same filing fee required for a zoning amendment. No additional fees shall be required upon recommendation of approval or
disapproval by the Landmarks Commission. Application fees shall only be returned if the applicant withdraws the request
before public notice has been made.
(4) Report. The Planning Director or his representatives shall prepare a report for Landmarks Commission members
delineating the contents of the application and other materials deemed useful by the Commission in performing its duties.
(5) Notice and Hearing.
a. The Landmarks Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed Historic Overlay District designations.
Notice of said hearing to consider this additional zoning classification shall be in conformance with Chapter 1, Article 2,
Division 2. Said hearing shall not be scheduled until the completed application form is submitted and all fees have been
paid.
(6) Action by the Landmarks Commission.
a. At the public hearing, the Landmarks Commission shall make findings regarding the designation of the Historic
Overlay District. Such findings, conclusions and dedications shall be based on the criteria for designation contained in
Section 2.4.4.3(c) [2.3.4.4(c)].
b. Upon recommendation for approval or disapproval, said recommendation shall be forwarded by the Planning
Director to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration at its next regularly scheduled meeting or a special
meeting called for such purpose. Where application for Historic Overlay District designation is made by the Landmarks
Commission, the chairman of such Commission shall appoint a member thereof to, or shall himself, present that body's
findings and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(7) Action by the District Standards Committee.
a. A District Standards document is to be considered and approved by the District Standards Committee, by a simple
majority vote, and is then to be forwarded to the Landmarks Commission for approval. This document shall, at a
minimum, include any development standards or protections to apply specifically within the district. This document may
be prepared prior to the adoption of the district or after the adoption of the district.
(f) Procedure for Certificate of Appropriateness. No person or entity shall construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove, or
demolish any exterior architectural feature of a site, structure, building, sign, or object included within a Historic Overlay District unless
an application for Certificate of Appropriateness is approved in accordance with requirements included in this subsection or as outlined in
the District Standards for the district. Furthermore, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be issued until a decision regarding the
application is final as stated in Section 2.4.4.3(e)(7) [2.3.4.4(e)(7)]. The work described in each application shall have a deadline of six
(6) months for commencement. If the work has not been started, a new application must be submitted.
(1) Certificate Not Required: A Certificate of Appropriateness is not required in the following instances:
(a) Ordinary repair or maintenance of a building, structure, or site within a Historic overlay zone where no building
permit is required under the City of Abilene Building Code; In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of
ordinary maintenance.
(b) Questions concerning whether or not the work requires a Certificate of Appropriateness may be determined by the
City's Historic Preservation Officer.
(2) Application: The owner of the structure and/or site for which a Certificate of Appropriateness is requested, or his agent,
shall complete the application form provided by the Planning Director or his representative.
(a) The applicant shall submit this form and three (3) copies of all plans, elevations, specifications, and documents
pertinent to changes proposed to the structure(s) or site(s) or districts within a Historic Overlay District.
(b) Historic photographs or copies are requested if available.
(c) If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing is required showing the type of lettering to be used, all
dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination (if any), and a plan showing the
sign's location on the property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/648
(d) Any other information which the Landmarks Commission or the Planning Director may deem necessary in order to
visualize the proposed work should also be submitted upon request.
(e) Said forms and pertinent attachments shall be submitted to the Planning Director or his designee no less than
twenty (20) calendar days prior to public hearing by the Landmarks Commission.
(f) The Planning Director or his representative shall determine when an application and all pertinent forms have been
properly completed, at which time the Planning Director or his representative shall forward all completed forms and
attachments to the Landmarks Commission. Accompanying plans and drawings shall be clearly defined, dimensioned,
and drawn to scale.
(3) Public Hearing: The Landmarks Commission shall hold a public hearing on all pending applications for Certificate of
Appropriateness.
(4) Failure of the Landmarks Commission to Take Any Action on a Completed Certificate of Appropriateness: If no action
is taken by the Landmarks Commission within sixty (60) days of a public hearing at which a complete application is
considered, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed issued by the Landmarks Commission.
(5) Action by the Landmarks Commission on a Certificate of Appropriateness:
a. The Landmarks Commission shall determine, from the data submitted and other pertinent information made
available at the public hearing, the appropriateness of all undertakings for which a Certificate of Appropriateness is
required. The Landmarks Commission shall have the power to approve or deny an application for Certificate of
Appropriateness, or to approve a request with such conditions as the Landmarks Commission deems necessary to carry
out the purposes of the Historic Overlay District.
b. In considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Landmarks Commission shall be guided by,
the Secretary of the Interior's “Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings,” as well as District Standards, and
any adopted design guidelines. A copy of the District Standards, any adopted design guidelines, and the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards shall be made available to the property owner(s) of historic landmarks or within an Historic Overlay
District upon request.
c. Building Demolition or Removal
1. In reviewing a Certificate of Appropriateness application regarding building demolition or removal, the
Landmarks Commission shall consider the state of repair of the building, the cost of restoration or repair, the
existing or potential usefulness, the purpose behind preserving the landmark, the character of the neighborhood,
and all other factors it finds appropriate. If the Landmarks Commission determines that the interest of preserving
historical, architectural or cultural values will not be adversely affected by demolition or removal, it shall approve
the Certificate of Appropriateness.
2. If the Landmarks Commission determines that the interest of preserving historical, architectural or cultural
values will be adversely affected by such demolition or removal, it shall deny the Certificate of Appropriateness.
(6) Issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness: The Planning Director shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness upon
approval of the Landmarks Commission. The Landmarks Commission shall return the application and all pertinent documents,
together with a written list of conditions for approval, to the Planning Director. The applicant shall record with the Planning
Director one (1) copy of all required documents with all conditions and modifications shown thereon. Before the certificate is
issued, the Planning Director shall review these documents to ensure compliance with all conditions and modifications
approved by the Landmarks Commission. One (1) copy of the application and all accompanying documents shall then be
dated and approved for recording by both the Planning Director and the Building Official.
(g) Minimum Maintenance Standards.
(1) No owner or person with an interest in real property on the Abilene Register of Historic Properties or a property located
within an Historic Overlay District shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
significant deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, create a detrimental effect upon the historic
character of the landmark or district.
(2) Serious disrepair or significant deterioration shall include but is not limited to the following:
a. Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical support that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing,
or buckling.
b. Deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling.
c. Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster finishes, surfaces or mortars.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/648
d. Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors.
e. Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, including lack of paint, or
weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering.
f. Rotting, holes, and other forms of material decay.
g. Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings,
and architectural details that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling.
h. Deterioration that has a detrimental effect upon the special character of the district as a whole or the unique
attributes and character of the contributing structure.
i. Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions to
life, health, or other property.
(h) No Building, Sign, or Demolition Permit Shall Be Issued Pending Consideration of Historic Overlay District Designation.
(1) No sign, building, or demolition permit, shall be issued where:
a. A property or district has been placed on an agenda of the Landmarks Commission, Planning and Zoning
Commission, or City Council to consider whether same should be included within a Historic Overlay District, or
b. An area, district, site, structure, building, property, or object is listed in an official survey or register of historical
sites, or listed on the Abilene Register of Historic Properties, until a final decision regarding inclusion within a Historic
Overlay District has been made.
c. The Landmarks Commission has the authority to apply a sixty (60) day stay on the demolition of buildings that are
listed on the Abilene Register of Historic Properties.
(i) Compliance. It shall be incumbent upon the Planning Director, Building Official and/or their respective representatives to make all
inspections and certifications necessary to ensure that all construction, additions, exterior alterations, and changes to a designated area,
district, site, structure, building, or object are made in accordance with the Certificate of Appropriateness as approved by the Landmarks
Commission. Construction, additions, exterior alterations, and changes completed in a manner not authorized by an approved Certificate
of Appropriateness shall be considered a public nuisance and a violation of this LDC and be subject to penalties specified in Chapter 1,
Article 2, Division 8 of this LDC.
(j) Appeals: Final Decision.
(1) Appeals from any decision of the Landmarks Commission on an application for Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
made to the Planning & Zoning Commission upon a written request. Such request shall be filed with the Planning Director or
his duly authorized representative within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the Landmarks Commission from which appeal is
taken. If such an appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) days, the denial by the Landmarks Commission shall be final.
(2) All applications for a Historic Overlay District zoning designation, whether approved or disapproved, shall be forwarded
to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 2.4.4.4(e)(7) [2.3.4.4(e)(6)]. If the Planning and Zoning
Commission approves the designation, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council. If the Planning and Zoning
Commission denies the designation, the application may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 2.2.1.3(f)
[sic] of this Chapter 2.
(k) Reapplication by Proponent. When an application for Certificate of Appropriateness has been denied by the Landmarks
Commission and such denial has become final, a similar application shall not be considered by the Landmarks Commission for a period
of twelve (12) months from the date of decision by the Landmarks Commission denying said application. The decision as to similarity of
applications shall be made by the Planning Director, whose decision can be appealed to the Landmarks Commission at the time of the
proposed public hearing for consideration of said application.
(l) Removal of Historic Overlay District Zoning Designation. Any removal of Historic Overlay District zoning designation is
considered a zoning change and can only be removed by the public hearing process as set forth in Section 2.2.1.3 [sic].
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 45-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-18; Ord. No. 17-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-14-19)
Section 2.3.4.5 Planned Development (PD) District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an overlay planned development zoning district (“PD District”) is to provide for the development of land
as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a PD Concept Plan that may include uses, regulations and other
requirements that vary from the provisions of other zoning districts.
(1) PD Districts are intended to implement generally the goals and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/648
(2) PD Districts are also intended to encourage flexible and creative planning, to ensure the compatibility of land uses,
incorporate new planning techniques (such as New Urbanism or vertical mixed use) into a development, to allow for the
adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the community, and to result in a higher quality development for
the community than would result from the use of conventional zoning districts.
(b) Applicability. A PD district may only be established in one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) The land is located in close proximity to established residential neighborhoods where conventional zoning
classifications may not adequately address neighborhood concerns regarding the quality or compatibility of the adjacent
development, and where it may be desirable to the neighborhood, the developer or the City to develop and implement
mutually-agreed, enforceable development standards;
(2) The land, or adjacent property that would be impacted by the development of the land, has sensitive or unique
environmental features requiring a more flexible approach to zoning and clustering of uses, or special design standards, in
order to afford the best possible protection of the unique qualities of the site or the adjacent property;
(3) The land is proposed for development as a mixed-use development or a traditional neighborhood development requiring
more flexible and innovative design standards;
(4) The land consists of older sections of Abilene that are proposed for redevelopment or infill development, and special
design considerations are deemed desirable;
(5) The land serves as transition between different and seemingly incompatible land uses;
(6) The land is proposed for development as a major office, retail, commercial or industrial employment center, and special
design standards may be warranted;
(7) The land is of such a character that it is in the community's best interest to encourage high-quality development through
flexible development standards to further the goals and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan;
(8) The land consists of unusually configured parcels that cannot be developed efficiently under the base district standards.
(c) Approval Procedures. Approval procedures for a PD District are within Chapter 1, Article 4, Division 2 of this LDC.
(d) Nature of the District. Each PD District shall be established as an overlay zoning district that combines with one or more base
zoning districts. Development in a PD district must be consistent with a Concept Plan that is incorporated as part of the district by the
adopting ordinance for the PD, except as provided in Section 2.2.2.7 [1.4.2.3].
(e) Base Zoning District Uses. Any use permitted by right or conditionally in the base district shall be permitted in the PD district,
unless the use is prohibited or otherwise conditioned in the regulations adopted for the PD district. Uses designated as conditional uses in
the Land Use Matrix in Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2, Chapter 2 of this Code may be authorized in the PD district only if designated on
the Concept Plan adopted as part of the PD district, in which case the use does not require a separate Conditional Use Permit under
Article 2, Division 3, of this Chapter 2 [sic].
(f) Overlay Zoning District Uses.
(1) The PD district may provide for uses not allowed in the base zoning district, provided that the uses are compatible with
the stated purposes of the district and do not conflict with policies in the Comprehensive Plan, considering the arrangement,
combination and design features of the uses within the PD district, as depicted on the Concept Plan.
(2) Uses that are not allowed in the base zoning district but are permitted within any specific PD shall be reflected in the PD
application, approved as part of the Concept Plan, and enumerated in the Ordinance establishing the district.
(g) Location and Arrangement of Uses. The location and arrangement of all authorized uses in the PD district shall be consistent with
the Concept Plan approved with the district.
(h) Deviations from the Concept Plan. Refer to Section 2.2.2.7 [1.4.2.4] for regulations related to deviations from the Concept Plan.
(i) Base District and Supplemental Standards. In a PD district, uses shall conform to the standards in the base zoning district governing
area, building and height requirements in this LDC, and any applicable supplemental standards, unless specifically excepted in the
ordinance establishing the PD district.
(j) Overlay Zoning District Standards.
(1) In a PD district, standards otherwise applicable to authorized uses in the base zoning district or pursuant to this LDC
may be varied, and thereafter shall be applied to the uses established in the PD district, only if approved in the ordinance
establishing the PD district.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/648
(2) Standards that may be varied include but not limited to the following:
a. Residential density,
b. Lot area,
c. Lot width,
d. Lot depth,
e. Yard depths and widths,
f. Building height and size,
g. Building exterior construction,
h. Lot coverage,
i. Floor area ratio,
j. Parking,
k. Access,
l. Screening,
m. Landscaping,
n. Accessory buildings,
o. Signage,
p. Sidewalks,
q. Hours of operation,
r. Lighting, and
s. Outdoor storage and display.
(3) Varied standards may increase or decrease the requirements otherwise applicable to particular uses.
(4) Any graphic depictions used to illustrate such standards, unless otherwise provided in the PD district regulations, shall
be considered standards that apply to subsequent development applications.
(k) Public Facilities.
(1) All facilities or improvements within public rights-of-way shall be provided in accordance with design standards set
forth within City of Abilene Subdivision Regulations.
(2) All facilities or improvements within private rights-of-way or easements must meet City material standards and
construction specifications.
(3) Rights-of-way or easements for private streets shall comply with classification standards as set forth within the City of
Abilene Subdivision Regulations. Paving and curb and gutter shall be provided according to the standards as set forth within
the Subdivision Regulations.
(4) In order to justify variations from public facilities standards pertaining to provision of roadway and drainage facilities
and to demonstrate compliance with the adequate public facilities policies in this LDC, a traffic impact study, drainage study,
or other type of applicable engineering study may be required as a prerequisite for approving a petition for a PD district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.3.4.6 Ambler Avenue Corridor (AMB-COR) Overlay Zone
Activities within this overlay district shall be governed by all regulations of the underlying zoning district, including regulations for site
development, landscaping, signs, performance standards, etc., except where modified by the provisions of this Section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/648
(a) Purpose. The primary purpose of this overlay district is to encourage high quality development and redevelopment within the
district. In general, this district is intended to cover the areas adjacent to Ambler Avenue from Grape Street to Interstate 20.
In general, development and redevelopment within this district should serve as a corridor of high quality attractive development
representing the first impression of Abilene for visitors to Abilene Christian University, Hardin-Simmons University, and Hendrick
Medical Center, and other destinations within the corridor. Uses are intended to include retail, restaurants, services, medical, office,
research, educational, and related uses. Development in the area should be of high quality with well-designed buildings and attractive
landscaping in a pedestrian friendly setting.
(b) Land Use. Allowable uses within the overlay district shall be per the underlying zoning district, except as modified below.
(1) Auto related businesses (auto sales, auto repair, truck repair, etc.) are allowed only with a Special Exception, which shall
only be granted for such uses that are compatible with the development goals of the corridor, including incorporating
appropriate conditions to address elements such as building design, landscaping, screening, limitations or prohibitions on
outdoor activities, and the like.
(2) Outdoor storage on a property within the district, where allowed by the underlying zoning district, shall require a Special
Exception by the Board of Adjustment and shall be based on the following criteria:
a. The Board may deny a Special Exception for any proposed outdoor storage use that is deemed incompatible with
the use characteristics and aesthetic goals of the overlay district.
b. The storage is accessory to a permitted use and is not the primary use of the property.
c. The storage is limited to the most appropriate locations on the site, which would typically be behind or to the side of
a principal building. Only in exceptional circumstances should outdoor storage be allowed within a front yard and/or
between a principal building and a street.
d. The area of the site devoted to outdoor storage should be limited to only that which is necessary for the use and in
no case shall exceed 50% of the lot.
e. Appropriate screening is provided based on the materials being stored. Such required screening may include an
opaque wall or fence, landscape screening such as hedges, shrubs, trees or a combination, or any other screening
approved by the Board that meets the aesthetic intent of the overlay district.
f. Appropriate buffering from adjacent uses. In addition to any required buffering, the Board may require additional
buffering when the proposed use is adjacent to a less intensive zoning district.
g. The Board may place limits on the surface of the storage area (concrete, asphalt, etc.) and may limit the amount or
types of items stored.
h. Any other criteria deemed by the Board to be relevant to achieving the land use and aesthetic goals of the overlay
district.
(c) Buildings and Architectural Standards. Standards for building design and materials shall be per the underlying zoning district, in
addition to the following:
(1) Building materials: Building walls visible from Ambler Avenue shall be constructed of masonry material, such as stone
or brick, stucco or stucco-like materials, such as EIFS, textured concrete, split-face block, or similar materials. Standard
concrete block or metal siding is not permitted.
(2) Building articulation: In order to break up the apparent size of large facades, one or more of the flowing design elements
shall be incorporated into the building design:
a. Vertical elements of different materials or colors every fifty (50) feet
b. Changes in building materials design, and/or color to avoid large blank walls
(3) Single-family and duplex residential uses shall be exempt from these requirements.
(d) Setbacks. The setbacks of the underlying zoning district shall apply within this district, except as modified below:
(1) Front Building Setback. Front building setbacks may be reduced to the required 10-foot landscaping strip where no
parking, driving aisles, or other pavement is located between the building and the property line, with the exception of
sidewalks and perpendicular access drives connecting to parking to the side or rear of the building.
(2) Side Setbacks: per underlying zoning.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/648
(3) Rear Setbacks: per underlying zoning.
(e) Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping and screening shall be provided, consistent with the City's landscaping standards, except
as modified by this section.
(1) Where a parking lot is located between a principal building and the street, such parking lot shall include additional
landscaping or screening between the parking lot and the street in the form of a decorative masonry wall, evergreen hedge, or
other comparable evergreen plantings, providing a screen of 30 to 42 inches in height. The required wall or screening shall be
designed to allow for free access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians.
(f) Signage Requirements. The City of Abilene Sign Regulations (See Chapter 4, [Article 2], Division 8) shall apply within its overlay
district, except as modified below for signs oriented to Ambler Avenue:
(1) Properties located between Grape Street and Treadaway Boulevard: Freestanding signs are limited to one per 100 feet of
frontage per street frontage and shall be a monument style sign with a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a maximum area
of 100 square feet.
(2) Properties located between Treadaway Boulevard and Interstate 20: Freestanding signs are subject to the requirements of
the underlying zoning district.
(3) Off-site advertising signs are prohibited, except signs permitted on and oriented to Interstate 20.
(4) Size exception for institutional signs. Institutional monument signs for College/University and Hospital uses may not
exceed a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a maximum area of 400 square feet. In order to qualify for this provision, such
sign shall be constructed of brick, masonry, or other similar materials.
(Ord. No. 10-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-11-13)
Division 5 - Airport Zoning
Section 2.3.5.1 Airport Zoning
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to protect health, safety, and general welfare of the public, where it is recognized that
obstructions, aircraft accidents, and excessive noise have the potential for endangering or harming the lives and/or property of users or
occupants of land in the vicinity of Abilene Regional Airport and Dyess Air Force Base. It is further the purpose of this Section to
regulate airport zoning hazard areas and compatible land uses surrounding airports in the City of Abilene, pursuant to Chapter 241 of the
Texas Local [Government] Code, as amended.
(b) Applicability. All airport zoning regulations shall be in accordance with Local Government Code § 241.001, et seq., as amended,
and shall apply within the corporate limits and unincorporated areas within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Abilene, as well
as the Airport Hazard Areas in and surrounding Abilene Regional Airport and Dyess Air Force Base. The use of all land and any Natural
Growth, structures, or any other obstructions upon the land, and the height, construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or
relocation of any Natural Growth, structures, or any other obstructions upon the land, shall conform to all regulations contained in and
applicable to this Section. No land, Natural Growth, structure, or other obstruction shall be erected, constructed, used, replaced, altered,
and/or maintained for any purpose or in any manner other than permitted by this section.
(c) Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Section, shall be defined as follows:
(1) “Accident Potential Zone” (“APZ”) means a land use control area beyond the clear zones of a military runway that
possesses a significant potential for accidents;
(2) “Airport” means the Abilene Regional Airport and/or Dyess Air Force Base;
(3) “Airport Elevation” means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area;
(4) “Airport Hazard” means any Natural Growth, structure, any other potential obstruction, or use of land which obstructs
the airspace required for, or is otherwise potentially hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or
that interferes with visual, radar, radio, or other systems for tracking, acquiring data relating to, monitoring, or controlling
aircraft;
(5) “Airport Hazard Area” means an area of land or water on which an airport hazard could exist;
(6) “Airport Zoning Board” means the City of Abilene Planning and Zoning Commission, as created by the Charter of the
City of Abilene and defined in the Code of the City of Abilene and by state law;
(7) “Board of Adjustment” means the City of Abilene Board of Adjustment, as created and defined in this Code of the City
of Abilene and by State law;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/648
(8) “Centerline” means a line extending through the midpoint of each end of a runway;
(9) “Compatible Land Use” means a use of land adjacent to or in the vicinity of an airport that does not endanger the health,
safety, or welfare of the owners, occupants, or users of the land because of levels of noise or vibrations or the risk of personal
injury or property damage created by the operations of the airport including the taking off and landing of aircraft;
(10) “Day Night Average Noise Level” (“DNL”) means a 24-hour time-averaged sound exposure level, adjusted for
average-day sound source operations. In the case of aircraft noise, a single operation is equivalent to a single aircraft
departure, approach;
(11) “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration;
(12) “Hazard to Air Navigation” means an obstruction determined to have an adverse effect on the safe and efficient
utilization of the navigable airspace;
(13) “Height” is determined by mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified;
(14) “Imaginary Surfaces Map” refers to the current map for the Abilene Regional Airport, as amended, created pursuant to
14 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R) Part 77, a true and correct copy of which is maintained at the Abilene Regional
Airport Administrative Office and the City of Abilene Planning Department;
(15) “Instrument Runway” means a runway equipped or to be equipped with electronic or visual air navigation aids
adequate to permit the landing of aircraft under restricted visibility conditions. It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned, as so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other airport planning document or map;
(16) “Landing Area” means the area of the airport used for the landing, take off, or taxiing of aircraft;
(17) “Landing Zone” (“LZ”) means a landing zone consisting of a runway, a runway and taxiway, or other aircraft
operational surfaces (e.g., aprons, turnarounds). An LZ is a prepared or semi-prepared (unpaved) airfield used to conduct
military operations in an airfield environment similar to forward operating locations. LZ runways are typically shorter and
narrower than standard runways;
(18) “Larger than Utility Runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven
aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
(19) “Mean Sea Level (MSL)” means the average height of water in the sea used as the datum plane to measure land
elevation;
(20) “Military Imaginary Surfaces Map” refers to the most recent map indicating zones in and surrounding Dyess Air Force
Base, a true and correct copy of which is maintained in the City of Abilene Planning Department;
(21) “Natural Growth” means any tree, shrub, grass, or other item found in nature that is flora;
(22) “Noise Contour” means a geographical representation of DNL noise levels;
(23) “Noise Contours Map” refers to the most recent map and attachments, as amended, developed by the FAA pursuant to
14 C.F.R. Part 150, indicating estimated noise levels and compatible land uses for zones surrounding the Abilene Regional
Airport, a true and correct copy of which is maintained at the Abilene Regional Airport Administrative Office and the City of
Abilene Planning Department;
(24) “Noise Level Reduction” means the incorporation of sound attenuation measures (outdoor to indoor) into the design
and construction of a Structure;
(25) “Nonconforming Structure” means any Structure, existing on land which does not conform to the regulations, relative
to its size, height, or location, within the district in which it is located. Nonconforming Structures may not be improved or
enlarged, except as provided for in this Section, or pursuant to a Variance or Special Exception granted by the Board of
Adjustment;
(26) “Nonconforming Use” means any activity or use of land which was lawful prior to the enactment of this Section, but
does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located pursuant to this Section. Any nonconforming use
existing at the time of the enactment of this Section may be continued, except as provided in this Chapter;
(27) “Planning Department” means the City of Abilene department responsible for the City's planning and zoning activities,
currently referred to as the Planning and Development Services Department.
(28) “Planning Director” means the City of Abilene Director of Planning and Development Services or designee;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/648
(29) “Precision Instrument Runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an
Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document;
(30) “Primary Surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared
hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway
has no specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary
surfaces for Abilene Regional Airport and Dyess Air Force Base are more particularly described in subsection (d);
(31) “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length;
(32) “Structure” means any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including without limitation,
any building, physical improvement, tower, smokestack, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines;
(33) “Utility Runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and less;
(34) “Visual Runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures;
(d) Surfaces; Zones; Height Limitations; and Noise Zones.
(1) Abilene Regional Airport.
a. Surfaces. There are hereby established and designated certain surfaces, as shown on the Imaginary Surfaces Map.
The surfaces are more particularly described and defined as follows:
1. “Approach Surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending
outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope, as described in this Section. The perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of
the approach zone;
2. “Conical Surface” means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet;
3. “Horizontal Surface” means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter
of which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway of the airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. For all visual runways
designated as utility or visual, the radius of each arc is 5,000 feet; for all other runways, the radius of each arc is
10,000 feet. The radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That
value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway. When a 5,000-foot arc is encompassed by
tangents connecting two adjacent 10,000-foot arcs, the 5,000-foot arc shall be disregarded on the construction of
the perimeter of the horizontal surface.
4. “Transitional Surfaces” means the surfaces extending outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline
and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7 feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces, for
those portions of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surfaces, extend a distance of 5,000 feet, measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-
degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
b. Height Limitations; Zones. There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to
Abilene Regional Airport. Such zones are shown on the Imaginary Surfaces Map, and more particularly described as
follows. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction shall be erected,
altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone contained in this Section to a height level above the applicable
surfaces on the outer or upper edge of the below-described zones. An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.
1. Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway.
2. Runway Larger than Utility With a Visibility Minimum as Low as 3/4 Mile Non-Precision Instrument
Approach Zone: the inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/648
3. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width
of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000
feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
runway.
4. Transitional Zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces.
5. Horizontal Zone: A horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways
designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each
runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not
include the approach and transitional zones.
6. Conical Zone: A Conical Zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the
Horizontal Zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The Conical Zone does not
include the Approach Zones and Horizontal Zones.
c. Noise Zones. For the purpose of regulating the development areas which possess a noise hazard for certain land
uses, so as to promote compatibility between the airport and the surrounding land uses, protect the airport from
incompatible encroachment, and promote and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of property users, noise
zones are hereby established within and surrounding the areas of the Abilene Regional Airport, as follows:
1. Zone Boundaries. The boundaries of said zones are established as shown on the most recent Noise Contours
Map, as amended.
2. Compatible Land Uses. Compatible land uses within the noise zones are established as shown on the most
recent Noise Contours Map, as amended.
3. A copy of the most recent Noise Contours Map, as amended, is on file in the Administrative Office of the
Abilene Regional Airport and the City of Abilene Planning Department.
(2) Dyess Air Force Base
a. Surfaces. There are hereby established and designated certain surfaces, as shown on the Military Imaginary
Surfaces Map. The surfaces are described as follows:
1. “Approach Clearance Surface” means an inclined plane, symmetrical about the runway centerline extended,
beginning 200 feet beyond each end of the primary surface at the centerline elevation of the runway end and
extending for 50,000 feet. The slope of the Approach Clearance Surface is 50 to 1 along the runway centerline
extended until it reaches an elevation of 500 feet above the established airport elevation, which is 1789 feet above
mean sea level for Dyess AFB. It then continues horizontally at this elevation to a point 50,000 feet from the point
of beginning. The width of this surface at the runway end is the same as the primary surface, it flares uniformly,
and the width at 50,000 feet is 16,000 feet.
2. “Conical Surface” means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the inner horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 7,000 feet to a height of 500 feet above the established
airfield elevation.
3. “Inner Horizontal Surface” means a plane that is oval in shape at a height of 150 feet above the established
airfield elevation. The plane is constructed by scribing an arc with a radius of 7,500 feet about the centerline at the
end of each runway and interconnecting these arcs with tangents.
4. “LZ Approach-Departure Clearance Surface” means an imaginary surface that is an inclined plane arranged
symmetrically about the runway centerline extended, beginning at the end of the clear zone, 500 feet beyond each
end of the runway threshold, and extending 10,500 feet. The slope of the surface is 35 to 1 along the runway
centerline extended until it reaches an elevation of 300 feet above the runway end elevation. The width of this
surface at the clear zone end is 500 feet flaring uniformly until it reaches a width of 2,500 feet at 10,500 feet.
5. “Outer Horizontal Surface” means a plane, located 500 feet above the established airfield elevation, extending
outward from the outer periphery of the conical surface for a horizontal distance of 30,000 feet.
6. “Primary Surface” means a surface located on the ground or water longitudinally centered on each runway
with the same length as the runway. The width of the primary surface for runways is 2,000 feet.
7. “Transitional Surfaces” means the surfaces that connect the primary surfaces, the first 200 feet of the clear
zone surfaces, and the approach clearance surfaces to the inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal
surface or other transitional surfaces. The slope of the transitional surface is 7 to 1 outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/648
b. Height Limitations: Zones. There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Dyess
AFB. Such zones are shown on the Military Imaginary Surfaces Map, and more particularly described as follows. Except
as otherwise provided in this Section, no structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction shall be erected, altered, allowed
to grow, or maintained in any zone contained in this Section to a height level above the surfaces established and
described in subsection (1) above. An area located in more than one of these zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation.
c. Clear Zones. Clear Zones are areas on the ground, located at the end of each runway. They possess a high potential
for accidents and their use is restricted to be compatible with aircraft operations in accordance with Table 1 below. Clear
Zones are 3,000 feet long measured along the extended runway centerline beginning at the runway end. They are 3,000
feet wide centered on and measured at right angles to the extended runway centerline.
d. Accident Potential Zones (APZs). APZs are areas on the ground located beyond the Clear Zone of each runway.
They possess a potential for accidents and their use is restricted in accordance with Table 1 below.
1. APZ I. APZ I begins at the end of the Clear Zone, and is centered and measured on the extended centerline. It
is 3,000 feet wide and 5,000 feet long.
2. APZ II. APZ II begins at the end of APZ I, and is centered and measured on the extended runway centerline.
It is 3,000 feet wide and 7,000 feet long.
3. LZ APZs. LZ APZs begin at the end of the LZ Clear Zone, and are centered and measured on the extended
runway centerline. They are 500 feet wide and 2,500 feet long.
e. Land Use Restrictions.
1. An individual single-family residential structure, including manufactured housing, shall be permitted on a lot
of 1 acre or larger, except within the Clear Zone associated with Dyess AFB. This does not eliminate the need for
an Airport Zone Development Permit.
2. An individual single-family residential structure, including manufactured housing, shall be permitted on an
existing legally platted lot, or a lot subdivided prior to 1984, even if the area of the lot is less than 1 acre, except
within the Clear Zone associated with Dyess AFB. This does not eliminate the need for an Airport Zone
Development Permit.
3. An individual single-family residential structure, including manufactured housing, shall not exceed a height
greater than thirty-five (35) feet if the structure penetrates an established Military Imaginary Surface. This does not
eliminate the need for an Airport Zone Development Permit.
4. Allowable land uses within each zone are designated in the following table:
Table 1
Land Use Clear Zone APZ I APZ II
Agricultural Yes Yes Yes
Residential > 1 acre No Yes Yes
Residential < 1 acre No No1 No1
Govt, Health, Safety, and Welfare No No No
Educational & Religious No No No
Office No No SE4
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/648
Trade - Retail No No SE4
Services (other than office type) Type 1 No No SE4
Services (other than office type) Type 2 No SE3,4 Yes
Heavy Commercial No SE2,4 Yes
Manufacturing No SE3,4 Yes
Wholesale No SE4 Yes
Transportation, Communication, and Utilities No SE4,5 Yes5
Resource Production/Extraction No SE4 Yes
Cultural No No No
Entertainment No No No
Recreational No Yes6 Yes6
1 Existing lots of less than 1 acre that were legally platted, or that were subdivided prior to 1984, are allowed one residence
2 Non-retail
3 Except chemical, precision equipment, or other hazardous uses
4 A Special Exception approved by the Board of Adjustment after being reviewed by Dyess AFB is required
5 No passenger terminals and no major above-ground transmission lines
6 No clubhouse facility and no areas for gatherings of people
Type 1 Services include all other uses not included in Type 2 Services.
Type 2 Services include: Cabinet Making; Carpentry and Wood Flooring Services, Drilling-Rig Repair (sand and water blasting);
Electrical Motor Repair; Exterminating and Fumigating Services; Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning Services; House Wrecking and
Demolition; Landscaping Services; Machine Shops; Masonry, Stonework, Tile Setting, and Plastering Services; Oilfield Service; Oil Well
Drilling Contractors; Pipe Cleaning and Testing (sand and water blasting); Plumbing Services; Refrigerated Warehousing; Roofing and
Sheet Metal Services; Scales; Storage and Warehousing (general); Water Well Drilling Services; Welding Service; and other similar uses.
In addition to the above listed restrictions, no use shall have hazardous materials stored on-site other than minimal, incidental storage of
small quantities[.]
(e) Use Restrictions; Interference.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this
Section in such manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the
airports and aircraft, and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in
the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airports, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in
any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/648
(2) No structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction shall be placed, erected, or allowed to grow to a height that would
penetrate a 100-to-one slope from any point on a runway to the outer limits of the extraterritorial jurisdiction and/or Airport
Hazard Area, without a determination as to the impact of such use. The City, and Dyess Air Force Base shall be responsible
for evaluating the impacts of the structure, Natural Growth or other obstruction, and findings shall be reported to the Planning
Director for evaluation and determination of the potential impact. The Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for approving,
conditionally approving, or denying the placement of a structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction exceeding this slope.
(f) Nonconforming Uses and Structures; Abandonment; Replacement.
(1) Regulation not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this Section shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this Section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any Structure, if the
construction, alteration, or use began prior to the effective date of this Section and is diligently prosecuted or completed.
(2) Nonconforming Use. Any nonconforming use under this Section is subject to the conditions and procedures set forth in
this Code.
(3) Replacement of Nonconforming Objects of Natural Growth. A person may not replace a nonconforming object of
Natural Growth that has been removed or destroyed.
(4) A person may repair, renovate, or maintain a nonconforming Structure. The portion of a structure that is repaired,
renovated, or maintained must comply with the noise regulations contained herein, where applicable.
(5) A renovated or repaired Structure, other than a single-family residential structure, must not exceed the parameters or
external measurements of the original nonconforming Structure.
(6) Replacement/Expansion of Nonconforming Single-Family Residential Structure. An existing nonconforming singlefamily
residential structure, including manufactured housing, may be replaced and/or enlarged even if not otherwise allowed.
There shall be no size restrictions other than required by zoning, where applicable.
(7) Replacement of a Structure on the Site of a Nonconforming Nonresidential Use. An existing structure on the site of a
nonconforming nonresidential use that has been damaged or destroyed may be replaced or restored even if not otherwise
allowed. However, the replaced or restored structure shall not exceed the size of the damaged or destroyed structure and shall
not exceed any height limitations imposed by this ordinance. In addition, no such structure shall be permitted if deemed a
hazard by the FAA. This provision does not waive the requirement for obtaining an Airport Zone Development Permit, where
applicable.
(8) Any legal, nonconforming industrial uses in the APZ I area of Dyess AFB may be expanded to the limits of their
property as of the effective date of this ordinance, with no limitation on number of employees, but maintaining restrictions on
manufacturing or storage of chemical and hazardous materials.
(9) Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions in this Section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Planning Director to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Abilene.
(g) Permits.
(1) In General.
a. Airport Zone Development Permit. Any development, construction, modification, repairs, remodeling, or change in
use within an area regulated by this Section shall require an Airport Zone Development Permit, with the following
exception associated with Dyess AFB:
Any allowable home or other primary structure, addition to an existing home or other primary structure,
allowable accessory structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction less than 50 feet in height in the APZ I
and less than 150 feet in height in the APZ II and beyond shall be exempt from obtaining an Airport Zone
Development Permit. This exception does not apply within the Clear Zone associated with Dyess AFB[.]
b. This section shall not be interpreted to allow any permit that would:
1. establish an airport hazard
2. establish a nonconforming use
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/648
3. allow a nonconforming structure, object of Natural Growth, or other obstruction to become higher than it was
on the date this Section was adopted;
4. allow a nonconforming structure, object of Natural Growth, other obstruction, or use to become a greater
hazard to air navigation than it was on the date this Section was adopted.
c. No permit shall be granted to construct, modify, reconstruct, remodel, or repair any Structure or other obstruction to
a height of 150 feet or greater, unless an FAA Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation has been obtained and
provided to the Planning Director. Construction must comply with all applicable limitations and/or requirements
contained herein and FAA guidelines.
d. A permit issued for a particular land use on a site is intended to allow multiple and recurring activities identified in
the permit without the need for a separate permit for each.
e. There shall be no separate permit fee for an Airport Zone Development Permit.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (A) [(1)] above, an application for permit shall be granted.
(3) New Construction. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure, Natural Growth, or other
obstruction, unless exempted above, shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created,
unless an Airport Zone Development Permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit
shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particularity to permit a determination as to whether
the resulting use, structure, Natural Growth, or other obstruction, would conform to the regulations herein prescribed.
(4) New Use. No material change shall be made in the use of a structure or property, unless an Airport Zone Development
Permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired with sufficient particularity to permit a determination as to whether the resulting use would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed.
(5) Noise. Noise regulations are hereby established for new construction and rehabilitation, rebuilding, remodeling, or repair
of existing construction, as follows:
a. Abilene Regional Airport. In the area within 65 DNL or greater noise contour, as shown in the latest Noise Contours
Map for the Abilene Regional Airport, as amended, a permit shall be required for any use or structure as identified by the
FAA as requiring Noise Level Reduction (NLR). Such permits shall be issued when the Planning Director has approved
noise attenuation measures consistent with FAA requirements and approval is obtained from the FAA.
b. Certificate of Occupancy or Final Building Approval. For those properties identified by the Noise Contours Map as
requiring NLR measures within the incorporated city limits of the City of Abilene, no Certificate of Occupancy or Final
Building Approval shall be issued, until the appropriate general contractor or subcontractor of a property provides a copy
of the FAA requirements for NLR and verifies that such noise attenuation measures have been properly taken with
regard to the property.
c. Airport Zone Development Permit. For those properties identified by the Noise Contours Map, as amended, as
requiring NLR measures within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Abilene, an Airport Zone Development
Permit is required prior to the construction of a structure. No Airport Zone Development Permit shall be issued until the
appropriate general [contractor] or subcontractor of a property provides a copy of the FAA requirements for NLR and
verifies that such noise attenuation measures will be taken with regard to the property.
e. Routine maintenance of a nonconforming structure does not invoke the requirements of this subsection.
(6) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Planning Director determines that a nonconforming
structure or Natural Growth has been abandoned or more than 50 percent torn down, damaged, destroyed, physically
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or Natural Growth to exceed the height
limit for that zone or otherwise deviate from the regulations contained in this Section or this Chapter.
(7) Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any Natural
Growth or use his property in any manner inconsistent with the regulations prescribed in this Section may apply to the Board
of Adjustment for a variance from such regulation(s). Procedural rules regarding variances contained in Code of the City of
Abilene apply to this Section.
For all zones established in this Section, the application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation
facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances may be allowed. In reaching its decision
to grant a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall determine that all of the following conditions are present: a
literal application or enforcement of the regulations in this Section will result in unnecessary hardship, and relief, if
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/648
granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial
justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this Section.
In addition, no application for a variance to the requirements of this Section may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Airport Development Board (regarding
Abilene Regional Airport Zones) or the Dyess Base Civil Engineer (regarding Dyess Air Force Base Zones) for a
recommendation as to the aeronautical effects of the requested variance, as more particularly set forth in subsection
(i).
(8) Special Exceptions. Any person desiring to erect, rebuild, repair, or remodel any structure within a noise zone may apply
to the Board of Adjustment for a Special Exception, for a determination as to what noise abatement measures must be included
in such construction or remodeling. Procedural rules and standards for granting or denying Special Exceptions contained in
this Code of the City of Abilene apply to this Section. In addition, no application for a special exception to the requirements of
this Section may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Airport
Development Board (regarding Abilene Regional Airport Zones) or the Dyess Base Civil Engineer (regarding Dyess Air Force
Base Zones) for a recommendation as to the aeronautical or sound effects of the requested variance.
(9) Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the
purpose of this Section and be reasonable under the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure,
Natural Growth, or other obstruction in question, at his own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon, such markers
and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of a potential airport hazard.
(10) Other Conditions. The Board of Adjustment may place reasonable conditions upon the granting of any variance or
special exception.
(h) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications
for permits and variances shall be made to the Planning Director upon a form furnished by the Planning Department. Applications
required by this Section to be submitted to the Planning Director shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by said Planning
Director. Applications for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the Planning Director.
(i) Board of Adjustment.
1. The Board of Adjustment is hereby granted the authority, in addition to its other duties and powers, to have and exercise
the following powers:
a. to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning Director,
in the enforcement of this Section;
b. to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Section;
c. to hear and decide requests for variances of the requirements of this Section.
2. Decisions made by the Board of Adjustment, appeals, and judicial review related to this Section shall be in accordance
with this Code.
3. Recommendation to the Board.
a. Abilene Regional Airport.
The Abilene Regional Airport Development Board may make a recommendation, in writing or by
representative, to the Board of Adjustment, regarding any matter before the Board that may have an effect on
the Abilene Regional Airport. The Planning Director shall promptly forward any application for a variance or
special exception, including any relevant material, to the Airport Development Board for consideration at its
next available regular meeting. The Airport Development Board shall thereafter notify the Planning Director
of its determination regarding the matter, at any time after the regular meeting, and no later than the date
necessary to include the matter on the agenda for the next available regular Board of Adjustment meeting.
b. Dyess Air Force Base.
The Dyess Base Civil Engineer may make a recommendation, in writing or by representative, to the Board of
Adjustment, regarding any matter before the Board that may have an effect on Dyess Air Force Base. The
Planning Director shall promptly forward any application for a variance or special exception, including any
relevant material, to the Dyess Base Civil Engineer for consideration. A representative of the Dyess Base
Civil Engineer shall thereafter promptly notify the Planning Director of its determination regarding the
matter, at any time after receiving the application from the City of Abilene, and not later than 15 days after
receipt. Promptly and within a reasonable time after the 15 days has elapsed or a response has been received
from the Dyess Base Civil Engineer (whichever is earlier), the Planning Director shall include the matter on
the agenda for the next available regular Board of Adjustment meeting.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/648
(J) [(j)] Violations and Penalties.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated under this Section.
2. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as set forth
in Sec. 1-9 of the Code of the City of Abilene.
(k) Civil Remedies.
1. The City Attorney may enforce this Section by injunction, declaratory relief, or other action at law or in equity.
2. Any structure erected or used, or any work done, contrary to any of the provisions of this Section or to any of the details
contained in the final site plan or Airport Development Zone permit approved by the City is hereby declared to be unlawful
and shall constitute a violation of this Section. The Council may direct the City Attorney to initiate injunction, mandamus,
abatement, or any other action available in law or equity to prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or remove the unlawful structure,
use or work.
3. In addition to any other remedies which may be available at law or in equity, the City may sue in the appropriate district
court for an injunction to prohibit the violation of, or to enforce compliance with, any regulation contained in this Section.
(l) Amendments
1. Prior to approval of an amendment to this Section, a committee of residents and/or property owners, whose residence or
property is located within an area affected by the Section, shall be appointed by the County Commissioners Court and shall
have not less than 60 days to review and comment on any proposed revisions.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Article 4 - Use Regulations
Division 1 - Interpretive Rules
Section 2.4.1.1 Use and Organization
(a) Use of Land and/or Buildings. The use of land and/or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the Land Use Matrix,
Section 2.4.2.1. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than
for those uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. The legend for interpreting the permitted uses in the Land Use Matrix
(Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of this Chapter 2) is as follows:
P
The land use is permitted by right in the zoning district indicated.
The land use is prohibited in the zoning district indicated.
C
The land use may be approved with a conditional use permit (CUP) in the zoning
district indicated.
TP
The land use may be approved with a temporary permit (TP) in the zoning district
indicated. The process for obtaining such a permit is prescribed within Section 107
in the local amendments to the 2003 International Building Code.
(1) Many of the land uses have been defined within Chapter 5 of this LDC.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/648
(2) For any definition not listed in Chapter 5 of this LDC, the definition found within the latest edition of Webster's
Dictionary shall be used.
(b) Unlisted Use. If a use is not listed (or blank) in the Land Use Matrix, it is not allowed in any zoning district (see subsection (d)
below).
(c) Land Use Categories. The following use categories are listed in the Land Use Matrix:
(1) Residential Uses
(2) Accessory & Incidental Uses
(3) Cultural & Recreation Uses
(4) Government, Health, Safety, and Welfare Uses
(5) Educational & Religious Uses
(6) Office-Type Uses
(7) Service
(8) Trade - Retail Uses
(9) Trade - Wholesale Uses
(10) Transportation, Communication, & Utilities
(11) Resource Production & Extraction
(12) Manufacturing Uses
(d) Classification of New & Unlisted Uses. It is recognized that new types of land use will arise in the future, and forms of land use not
presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Abilene. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as
to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the Land Use Matrix (Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2, Section
2.4.2.1 of this Chapter 2) shall be made as follows.
(1) A new and unlisted use may be interpreted by the Planning Director as similar to a listed use.
a. The unlisted use shall be deemed to possess a majority of characteristics of the listed use, and therefore shall be
deemed substantially similar to the listed use, based on the following:
1. The nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling activity, sales, services, or processing;
2. The type of product sold or produced under the use;
3. Whether the use has enclosed or open storage and the amount and nature of the storage;
4. Anticipated employment typical in relation to the use;
5. Transportation requirements, including approximate mileage, turning radius, or driving time of the expected
client or patron base;
6. The nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises;
7. The off-street parking and loading requirements;
8. The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic materials and vibration likely to be generated;
9. The requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and water and any special public services that may
be required; and
10. Impervious surface coverage or anticipated size of building.
b. If the unlisted use is deemed similar to a listed use, no amendment of the Land Use Matrix is required.
c. If the use is not found to be substantially similar to a listed use, it must be considered unlisted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/648
d. If the use is not found by the Planning Director to be substantially similar to a listed use, such decision may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Land Use Matrix
Section 2.4.2.1 The Land Use Matrix
(a) The Land Use Matrix begins on the following page.
LEGEND: P - Permitted, Blank - Not Permitted, C - Conditional Use Permit, TP - Requires a Temporary Permit, * - Conditions Apply See Ch. 2 Art. 5 Div. 3
PERMITTED
USES
AO RR RS PH TH MD MF MH CU NO O NR GR MU CB MX GC HC LI HI PARKING
REQUIREMENT
(also refer to
Chapter 4, article
2, Division 1)
Residential
Uses
Bed & Breakfast* C C C C C C C
P P P P P
P P
1/guest room +1
Dwelling - Duplex
C
P P
P P P P
P P
3/2 dwelling units
Dwelling -
Industrialized
Housing Unit
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2/dwelling unit
Dwelling -
Institutional*
C P
P P P P P P P P
2/3 guest rooms and
1/employee
Dwelling -
Manufactured
Home (HUD-Code)
P
2/dwelling unit
Dwelling - Mobile
Home
P
2/dwelling unit
Dwelling -
Multiple-Family*
P P
P P P P P P P P
3/2 dwelling units
Dwelling - Patio
Home
P
C
2/dwelling unit
Dwelling - Single-
Family Detached
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2/dwelling unit
Dwelling -
Townhome
P
C
2/dwelling unit
Group Home*
C
C C
C
1/4 beds
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/648
Hotel/Motel
C
C P P P C P C
1/unit
Vacation Travel
Trailer Park*
C
C
1/trailer space +1
Accessory & Incidental Uses
Accessory Structure
(Also see Division
4 of this article)*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Animal Lot* P P
P
Antenna,
Noncommercial/
Amateur*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
ATMs, Self-Serve
Kiosks, and Similar
Facilities*
P P P P P P P P P P P P
Day-Care Operation
- Home-Based*
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
Dwelling -
Accessory*
P P P
1/dwelling
Drive-Through
Facility*
C P
C C P P P
Field Office or
Construction
Office* (temporary)
TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP 1/employee
Freight Container* P
C
C P P P
Fuel Sales*
C P
C C P P P
Garage Sale* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Home Occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
None
Itinerant Business
TP
TP
TP TP TP
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/648
Manufacturing
(incidental)*
P P P P P P
Mobile Home
(permanent security
residence)*
C
C C C C 2/dwelling
Mobile Home
(temporary security
residence)
C C C
C C C TP C C C TP TP TP C TP TP TP TP
Mobile Home or
Temporary Building
(office for sales and
service)*
C
C P P
Recreation
Building,
Multipurpose*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P P
Recreation
Equipment, Mobile
(storage and
parking)*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Recycling
Collection Point
P
C P
C P P P P
Subdivision Sales
Office (temporary)*
TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP TP P P P P P P P
2/employee
Swimming Pool,
Private (accessory
to residential use)*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Tennis Court,
Private (accessory
to residential use)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Travel Trailers
(accessory to
hospitals)
C
P C
C C
Wind Energy
Conversion
Systems*
P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE P/SE
Cultural & Recreation Uses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/648
Adult
Entertainment
Enterprise (Also see
Section 2.4.3.4 of
this LDC)*
C P P Per primary activity
(i.e. retail; theater,
liquor store: onpremise)
Civic, Social, and
Fraternal
Organization
P C C
C C C
P P P P P P P P P
1/500 SF
Cultural Facilities
C C C P P P C P P C
1/4 seating capacity
+1/500 SF other
Drive-in Theater
P P P
1/speaker
Fairgrounds/Rodeo P
Per Planning
Director (case-bycase
basis)
Motorized Racing* C
C C C 1/4 seating capacity
Recreation -
Outdoors (active)*
C C C C C C C C P
C C
C P P
1/8 seating capacity
Recreation -
Outdoors (passive)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Recreation and
Commercial
Entertainment -
Indoor
C P
P C P P
1/4 seating capacity
Zoo P
Government, Health, Safety, and Welfare Uses
Ambulance Service
C P P
P P P
1/500 SF + 1/2
ambulances
Community Home* P P P P P P P P
C
1/4 beds
Correction,
Detention, or Penal
Facilities*
C
C P
1/4 beds
Fire/Police Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 1/500 SF
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/648
Homeless/
Emergency Shelter
C C C C C C P P P 1/4 beds
Hospital
P
P P
P P
1/3 beds and 1/2
staff doctors
Medical/Dental
Laboratory
C C C P P P C P P P
1/500 SF
Military and Armed
Forces Reserve
Center
C
P P
Military Base and
Reservation
Personal Care
Facility
C
1/3 beds
Post Office
P P P P P P P P P P P P 1/500 SF
Rehabilitation
Facility
C C
P C
C P
1/4 beds
Sanitary Landfill* C
C C P
Social Service
Facility
C
C C
C C P P C P P
1/4 beds
Educational & Religious Uses
Arts School
P C C P P
P P P P
1/classroom + 1/5
students
Cemetery,
Crematorium, and
Mausoleum*
C
C C C
Church or Place of
Worship*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 1/5 seating capacity
of sanctuary
Day-Care Operation
-
Center-Based*
C C
P C C P P P P P P
1/500 SF
Educational and
Scientific Research
P P P C P P P P 1/500 SF
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/648
School:
Public/Private
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 1/classroom & 1/5
seats of assembly
Trade/Business
School
P
C C P C P P P
1/classroom & 1/5
students
University/College*
P
P C P
P
1/classroom + 1/5
students
Service
Automobile Wash
C P/C
C P/C P/C P/C
Contractor Services
C P P P 1/500 SF
Funeral Home/
Mortuary/Morgue*
C P P
P P P
1/5 seats in largest
chapel
Kennel (With
Outdoor Pens)
C
C P P
1/500 SF
Kennel (Without
Outdoor Pens)
P
P
P P P
1/500 SF
Laundry, Dry
Cleaning, Dyeing,
and Linen Service
(no retail
customers)
P P P
1/1,000 SF
Laundry/Dry
Cleaning Services
& Facilities
P P
P P P P P
1/500 SF
Office (general,
professional,
financial)*
P P P P P P P P P P
1/500 SF
Personal Services*
P P P P P P P P
1/500 SF
Printing, Copying,
Reproduction,
Publishing*
C C C C
P C P P P
1/500 SF
Recycling
Collection and
C P P P 1/1,100 SF
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/648
Processing Center*
Repair and
Maintenance
Services -
Automobile/Small
Truck (major)
P P P
1/500 SF + 2/day
service
Repair and
Maintenance
Services -
Automobile/Small
Truck (minor)
P
C
P P P
1/500 SF + 2/day
service
Repair and
Maintenance
Services (indoor)
P P
P P P P P
1/500 SF
Repair and
Maintenance
Services (outdoors)
C P P
1/500 SF + 1/2,000
SF area outdoor
storage or display
Repair and
Maintenance
Services (truck and
other large vehicles)
P P
1/500 SF +
2/service bay
Scales (public)
P P P 1/1,000 SF
Storage -
Self-Service Units*
C C P P P
1/500 SF office +
1/3,000 SF
warehouse
Tattoo Parlor*
C C
C
P P P
1/500 SF
Taxidermist
P P P
1/500 SF
Veterinary Service
(all size animals)*
P
P P
1/500 SF
Veterinary Service
(small animals)*
P P
P P P P P
1/500 SF
Wrecker/Towing
P P P 1/500 SF + 1/4,000
SF area of outdoor
storage
Trade - Retail Uses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/648
Aircraft and
Accessories
C P P
ATMs, Self-Serve
Kiosks, and Similar
Facilities
P P P P P P P P P P
Fuel Sales*
C P
C P P P
Head Shop*
P P P 1/500 SF
Liquor Store
(Off-Premises
Consumption)
(Defined under
Liquor Store)*
P P
P C P P P
1/500 SF
Liquor Store
(On-Premises
Consumption)
(Defined under
Liquor Store)*
C
P
P
P P P
1/5 persons at max.
occupancy
Restaurant,
Brewpub
C P
P C P P
Restaurant, Fast
Food*
P/C P/C P/C C P P/C P C P P
1/125 SF; 10
minimum
Restaurant,
Standard*
P/C P/C P/C P P P/C P P P P
1/125 SF
Retail Sales/Rental
(automobile/small
truck)
P P P
1/500 SF + 1/2,000
SF area of outdoor
sales
Retail Sales/Rental
(indoor)
P P
P P P P P
1/500 SF
Retail Sales/Rental
(outdoors, nonvehicle)
C
C
P P P
1/500 SF + 1/2,000
SF area of outdoor
sales
Retail Sales/Rental
(trucks and other
large vehicles and
equipment)
C P P
1/500 SF + 1/2,000
SF area of outdoor
sales
Scrap and Waste
C
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/648
Material*
Trade - Wholesale Uses
Liquor, Wholesale/
Distribution*
P P
1/500 SF office +
1/2,000 SF area of
warehouse
Livestock -
Wholesale or
Auction
C C 1/500 SF office &
indoor storage + 1/4
seating capacity of
auction
Wholesaling and
Storage (indoor)*
C
C P P P 1/500 SF office +
1/2,000 SF area of
warehouse
Wholesaling and
Storage (outdoors)
C P P 1/500 SF office +
1/5,000 SF area of
outdoor storage
Transportation, Communication, & Utilities
Airport, Heliport
and Flying Field
Terminals -
Commercial
(passenger and
freight)*
C
P P P
Antenna Tower -
Commercial*
C
C
C C
C C P P
Automobile Parking
Lot or Structure -
Commercial
P P P
P P P C P P P P
Broadcast Studio
C C C P P P C P P P
1/500 SF
Passenger Ground
Transportation
Terminal
P
P P P
Pressure Control
Station
P P P P
Public Utility
Facility*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/648
Railroad Switching
and Marshalling
Yard
P P
Utility Generation,
Production,
Treatment
C
C
C P P
Resource Production & Extraction
Farming, Ranching
& Livestock,
Hatchery*
P
Feedlot,
Commercial
The City Council finds that the existence of commercial feedlots within City limits is a public nuisance. Therefore, commercial feedlots will be
excluded from the City limits.
Mining* C
C P
Petroleum or Gas
Well*
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Liquor*
P P 1/1,000 SF
Manufacturing
(light)
C P P 1/1,000 SF +
1/5,000 SF area of
outdoor storage
Manufacturing
(heavy)
P 1/1,000 SF +
1/5,000 SF area of
outdoor storage
Urban Garden* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 24-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 9-9-10; Ord. No.
33-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-10; Ord. No. 29-2011, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-25-11; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12; Ord. No. 49-2012,
pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-11-12; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-1-12; Ord. No. 02-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-10-13; Ord. No. 03-2013, pt. 1
(Exh. A), 1-10-13; Ord. No. 23-2013, pt. 1 (Ex. A), 6-13-13; Ord. No. 25-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14; Ord. No. 62-2018, pt. 3, 10-9-18;
Ord. No. 22-2019, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-11-19)
Division 3 - Requirements Applicable to Specific Land Uses
Section 2.4.3.1 Industrialized Housing
(a) Requirements for Industrialized Housing. Industrialized homes in any residential zoning district shall meet all of the requirements
of the district in which the industrialized home is located, and shall:
(1) Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within five
hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located as determined by the most recent
certified tax appraisal roll for Taylor County or Jones County, as appropriate;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/648
(2) Have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with any single-family
dwelling located within five hundred feet (500') of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
(3) Comply with aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision standards, architectural
landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings in the zoning district in which
the industrialized home is located; and
(4) Be securely affixed to a permanent foundation.
(b) The Meaning of “Value”. For the purposes of subsection (a) above, “value” means the taxable value of the industrialized home and
the lot after the installation of the industrialized home.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 2.4.3.2 Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
(a) Nonresidential Use Regulations Within Residential Zoning Districts. Standards for nonresidential uses located within residential
districts are set forth to minimize conflicts between land uses within residential areas. Any nonresidential use located within a residential
zoning district and/or permitted by the Land Use Matrix to locate within a residential zoning district shall comply with the regulations
prescribed for the Neighborhood Retail (NR) District, unless otherwise specified within this LDC. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-
10)
Section 2.4.3.3 All Other Uses With Specific Requirements
(a) Specific Requirements. The City has established standards for certain land uses that shall apply to such uses regardless of the
zoning district in which they are developed, unless otherwise stated within the standards.
(1) ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See Division 4 of this Article 5 [Article 4].
(2) ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISE: See Section 2.4.3.4.
(3) AIRPORT, HELIPORT AND FLYING FIELD TERMINALS - COMMERCIAL (passenger and freight):
a. Location. Airports, aircraft landing strips, or heliports shall be located no nearer than six hundred feet (600') to any
property in a residential district.
b. Measures To Be Taken. Proponent shall also show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent offensive dust,
noise, vibration, and bright lights; and that the field in question meets the standards of the Federal Aviation Agency
(FAA) for the particular class of field in use or proposed to be developed.
c. Any other applicable regulations, such as airport zoning or other FAA regulations, shall also apply.
(4) ANIMAL LOT:
a. Site Size. The site shall contain a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre for each animal quartered.
b. Setback. If the site contains a building in which the animals are sheltered and/or fed, the building must be set back
from all adjacent property lines at least one hundred (100) feet.
c. Drainage. Standings under roofed stables shall be made of a material which provides for proper drainage so as not
to create offensive odors, fly breeding or other nuisances.
d. Manure Collection. Manure shall be collected at least once a day and placed in concrete or metal fly-proof
containers, and shall be removed from the premises at least once a week.
e. Fences. Fences for pens, corral fences, or similar enclosures must be of sufficient height and strength to retain
animals.
(5) ANTENNA, NONCOMMERCIAL/AMATEUR: See Division 6 of this Article 5 [Article 4].
(6) ANTENNA TOWER - COMMERCIAL (radio, television, microwave, or cellular): See Division 6 of this Article 5
[Article 4].
(7) ATM, SELF-SERVE KIOSK AND SIMILAR FACILITIES: When such facilities are accessible from an automobile,
they shall be considered “Drive-through Facilities” as regulated by this Code.
(8) AUTOMOBILE WASH IN A GR, GC, HC OR LI DISTRICT: If within 200 feet of property zoned for single-family
residential, a Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/648
(9) BED & BREAKFAST: When permitted in residential district, allowable signage for bed-and-breakfast establishments
shall be limited to non-illuminated signs with a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet.
(10) CEMETERY, CREMATORIUM, AND MAUSOLEUM:
a. Access. Such use shall have the principal entrance or entrances on an arterial street.
b. Screening. Such use shall provide screening on all property lines abutting any residential district or residential
street.
(11) CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP: Churches or other places of worship shall meet the zoning district standards for
the district in which they are located. Any such use in a residential zoning district shall meet the standards of the Office (O)
zoning district. Any accessory use, such as a day-care, school, or recreation center, shall meet all the requirements, such as
parking, ingress and egress, etc., of this Code.
(12) CORRECTION, DETENTION OR PENAL FACILITIES:
a. Minimum Lot Size. Such uses shall have a minimum lot size (area) of five (5) acres.
b. Minimum Setbacks. Such uses shall have a minimum setback of forty feet (40') for each side yard and forty feet
(40') for the rear yard.
c. Access. Such uses shall have the primary ingress and egress on a major thoroughfare.
(13) DAY-CARE OPERATION - CENTER-BASED: Child day-care operations for more than six (6) children shall adhere
to the following requirements:
a. Recreation. Any outside recreation or play area shall be surrounded by a wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Openings shall not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) sphere.
b. Location in MD and MF Zoning Districts. Located on a collector or arterial street.
c. Minimum Lot Size in MD and MF Zoning Districts. Minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet.
d. State Standards. All such uses meet State minimum standards for day-care centers.
(14) DAY-CARE OPERATION - HOME-BASED: Child day-care operations that are accessory and incidental to a
residence shall be allowed as home occupations, so long as care for no more than 6 children (other than the caregiver's own
children) is provided at such residence.
Child day-care operations for more than 6 children (other than the caregiver's own children) may be conducted as an
accessory to a residence, but only with approval of a Conditional Use Permit according to procedures outlined in
Division 3 of Article 4 (Zoning Procedures) in Chapter 1 (General Provisions) of Abilene's Land Development Code. In
no circumstance, however, shall child day-care operations permitted as accessory to a residence exceed limitations of
required registration or licensing with the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services or other applicable state
agency, including restrictions on the number and age of children for whom care is provided. Such day-care operations
permitted as accessory to a residence shall furthermore be subject to: (a) all other standards relevant to required
registration or licensing by the State of Texas, as well as (b) all limitations applicable to home occupations and stipulated
in Section 2.4.5.2 of Abilene's Land Development Code.
(15) DRIVE-IN THEATER: This use must be located at least two hundred feet (200') from a residential district and shall be
screened by an opaque wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(16) DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: In any zoning district, the use shall adhere to the following requirements.
a. Queuing.
1. There shall be no less than six (6) queuing (stacking) spaces provided for each drive-through window. Said
spaces shall be located entirely on the development site and shall in no way encroach into public right-of-way nor
shall said spaces block any designated principal access aisle. The dimensions of a stacking space shall be no less
than ten feet (10') wide by twenty feet (20') long.
2. The queuing (stacking) aisle shall be clearly marked with standard pavement markings and, where necessary,
physical barriers for the aisle shall be provided. Determination of the requirement for physical barriers shall be
made by the Director of Traffic and Transportation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/648
b. Access. No proposed drive entrance on a designated arterial or collector street shall be allowed closer than one
hundred feet (100') from any intersecting arterial or collector street. Furthermore, where possible, an existing drive
entrance shall be used.
c. Site Plan. In addition to the specifications of this ordinance requiring a Site Plan, a new Site Plan shall be submitted
for review by the Development Review Committee under one or both of the following conditions:
1. An increase of the occupant load of the structure by ten percent (10%) or more as defined by the Building
Code adopted by the City of Abilene.
2. Any change of occupancy as defined by the Building Code adopted by the City of Abilene.
(17) DWELLING - ACCESSORY: See Division 4 of this Article 5 [Article 4].
(18) DWELLING - INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING UNIT: See Section 2.5.3.1 [2.4.3.1] of this Division 3.
(19) DWELLING - INSTITUTIONAL: In all zoning districts where such use is permitted by right, the following criteria
shall be met:
a. A license, if required, must be obtained from the appropriate Federal, State, or other governmental agency.
b. Professional staff must be in residence at all times. (Professional staff is defined as an individual who has, either by
experience or training, knowledge in the appropriate rehabilitative field.)
(20) DWELLING - PATIO HOME: Any such use permitted in any zoning district shall meet all the requirements of the
Residential Single-Family Patio Home (PH) District.
(21) DWELLING - TOWNHOME: Any such use permitted in any zoning district shall meet all the requirements of the
Residential Townhome (TH) District.
(22) FAIRGROUNDS/RODEO:
a. Location.
1. The pens, corral fences, stables, or similar enclosures shall be located no nearer than two hundred feet (200')
to a residential district and no closer than one hundred feet (100') to adjacent lot lines.
2. Rodeo grounds shall be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any residential district and shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet (6') high.
3. The width of alleys, streets rights-of-way, or other public rights-of-way may be used in establishing the one
hundred feet (100') distance to adjacent lot lines.
b. Drainage. Provisions shall be made in stables to provide for proper drainage so as not to create offensive odors, fly
breeding, or other nuisances.
c. Fences and Screening.
1. Fences for pens, corral fences, or similar enclosures must be of sufficient height and strength to retain animals.
2. Such use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet (6') in height.
d. Ingress and Egress. Ingress and egress shall be from an arterial street.
(23) FARMING, RANCHING & LIVESTOCK, HATCHERY:
a. Odors and Hazards. Such use shall be designed and operated in such a manner as to minimize offensive odors and
hazards to health, and in compliance with any State or Federal related standards and with the performance regulations as
set forth in Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 9 of this LDC.
(24) FIELD OFFICE OR CONSTRUCTION OFFICE (temporary):
a. Permit. A temporary permit may be granted by the Planning Director for one or more mobile homes or temporary
facilities to be located on any tract of land, to be used as a construction office for a period of one (1) year with extensions
of six (6) months if the builder maintains active, continuous construction within the tract where the facilities are located.
However, in no case shall more than two (2) such extensions be granted.
b. No Living Quarters. Issuance of a permit under this provision prohibits the use of a mobile home for living quarters.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/648
(25) FREIGHT CONTAINER:
a. Screening.
1. Freight Containers in Agricultural Open Space districts and Commercial districts shall be screened from
public right-of-way, except alleys.
2. Freight containers in any district shall be screened from adjacent properties with zoning designations other
than HI, LI, HC, and GC.
3. Screening, as required in subsections “a” and “b” above, shall be accomplished through the use of landscaping
as indicated below:
i. A continuous hedge with a mature height of at least five feet achieved within one year, and
ii. Trees with a mature height of at least ten feet spaced at twenty-foot intervals.
iii. Alternative screening of a minimum seven feet height of an opaque material consisting of wood fencing
and/or masonry walls may be approved by the Development Review Committee (DRC) where landscaping
would not be practical or appropriate.
b. Location and Appearance in Certain Zoning Districts. In HC or GC districts, freight containers shall be located in
the rear of the main structure and shall be a solid color to match the dominant color of the principal structure. In AO
districts, freight containers shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from property lines.
c. Signage. Freight containers shall not have signs, logos, or other markings, other than small, incidental labeling,
visible from the right-of-way or visible from adjacent properties with zoning designations other than HI, LI, HC, and
GC.
d. Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be obtained for each container and each shall meet all building
and development regulations, with the exception that building separation requirements shall apply to separation from
freight containers to other structures, not between multiple freight containers.
e. Storage Freight Containers. Freight containers used only for storage shall meet the building requirements as a
“temporary structure,” regardless of the length of time it is in use on the property, with the exception that any ventilation
requirements that would apply to a permanent structure also apply to a permanently placed freight container.
f. Stacking Prohibited. Freight containers shall not be stacked.
g. Number of Freight Containers and Distance to Property Lines in AO Zoning. Only 1 freight container is permitted
by right in the AO zoning district. A Conditional Use Permit is required if more than 1 freight container is proposed or if
a freight container is proposed to be less than 200 feet from a property line.
(26) FUEL SALES: In any zoning district, this use (as a principal or accessory use) shall adhere to the following
requirements:
a. Location - Gas Pump Islands. Gas pump islands shall be located or set back at least fifteen feet (15') from any
property line.
1. Gasoline service station pump islands (and their canopy structures) that are parallel [to] a public street shall be
located a minimum of eighteen feet (18') from the property line adjacent to a public street.
2. For pump islands (and canopies) that are perpendicular or diagonal to a public street, the setback shall be
thirty feet (30') (in order to prevent vehicles stacking into the street).
b. Location - Attached Overhangs. Attached overhangs covering said pumps and all appurtenances thereof shall meet
the primary structure setback requirements within this LDC (refer to Table 2-2 and 2-4).
c. Location - Detached Overhangs. Detached overhangs covering said pumps and all appurtenances thereof shall be
located at least ten feet from any property line. When the adjacent property is of the same or less restrictive zoning
district classification, a minimum of one foot (1') setback for detached canopies shall apply for interior sides only.
(27) GARAGE SALE: Garage sales shall be permitted in residential districts, subject to the following conditions:
a. Personal Property Only. It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, at a garage sale, property
other than personal property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/648
b. Number Permitted and Timeframe. No more than one (1) garage sale shall be allowed on the same lot during any
three (3) month period. The duration of the garage sale shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of
three (3) consecutive days.
c. Display Location. Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in an accessory building
and/or in a rear yard or in a driveway, but only in such areas. No personal property shall be displayed in any public rightof-
way.
d. Maintenance of Order. The individual(s) holding a garage sale and the owner or tenant of the premises on which
such sale or activity is conducted, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous
conduct on said premises or permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such individuals shall obey the orders of any member of the Police or Fire Department of the City, in order
to maintain public health, safety and welfare.
e. No Outside Storage. There shall be no continuous outdoor storage, as defined by this LDC, or storage of supplies,
equipment, or stock-in-trade on the premises.
f. Signage. Erection of signs for identification of garage sales is permitted in any zoning district, provided they do not
exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. There shall be no more than one (1) per street frontage, and they shall be
located only on the property on which the garage sale is being conducted. Garage sale signs shall be temporary only.
(28) HEAD SHOP:
(a) All structures housing a head shop (as defined in Chapter 5 of this LDC) shall be located as follows:
(1) At least six hundred feet (600') from the property boundary line of any lot in a College University zoning
district;
(2) At least six hundred feet (600') from the property boundary line of any residentially zoned lot or any lot used
for church, park, or hospital purposes;
(3) At least one thousand feet (1,000') of another structure housing a head shop; and
(4) At least two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from any lot used for school purposes.
Measurements are to be in a straight line in all directions from the structure housing the head shop to the nearest
property line on any lot in the College-University zoning district, any residentially zoned district, any lot used for
church, school, or hospital purposes, any park, or any structure housing a head shop.
(b) The measurements for a structure shall be taken from the furthest point that a structure extends in any direction,
including overhanging roofs and all other projections or portions of said structure.
(c) Should a head shop be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where the head shop is clearly
separated from other portions of the structure, (for example, a head shop store in a shopping center) the head shop's
measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space in which the store is housed or confined (not the entire
shopping center, motel, or structure).
(d) Should a head shop be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where the store is situated above
the ground level of a multi-story structure and is clearly separate from other activities within the structure (for example,
an head shop store on an upper level of an office tower or hotel), the head shop's measurements shall be taken from the
entry to that portion of the structure housing the store, thence to the nearest point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence to
the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line to the nearest point on any lot in a residential district or a College
University district, or any lot or tract used for church, school, hospital or park purposes, and any structure housing a head
shop.
(e) Each applicant for a head shop must submit a Site Plan setting out the dimension and locations for such store. The
applicant shall sign a certified and notarized statement attached to the Site Plan that the proposed head shop store
complies with the requirements set forth herein above. It shall be the duty of the applicant to prepare the Site Plan and to
assure compliance with the distance requirements.
(f) Amortization: A head shop in operation prior to the effective date of this ordinance which does not conform to the
regulations pertaining to head shops shall be considered to be a nonconforming use that may continue for four (4)
months from the effective date of this ordinance.
(29) HOME OCCUPATION: See Division 5 of this Article 5 [Article 4].
(30) ITINERANT BUSINESS: Any itinerant business must meet all of the following conditions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/648
a. Location. The itinerant business must be located on property that is zoned to allow the activity as identified in the
Land Use Matrix (Section 2.5.2.1 [2.4.2.1]) of this LDC.
b. Permission. The itinerant business must have the written permission of the property owner.
c. Permit, Number, and Timeframe. A Temporary Permit issued by the Building Official must be obtained, with
exceptions listed in (4) [d.] below. No more than one (1) itinerant business may be on a property at one time. No parcel
may have an itinerant business on-site for more than thirty-six (36) days in a calendar year. The thirty-six (36) days may
be used at one time or may be divided in any way. A permit for an itinerant business does not take the place of other
approvals or permits that may be required by other City departments or governmental agencies, e.g. Fire Department,
Health Department, etc. The permit must include all of the following information:
1. Written proof of the property owner's permission
2. Address of the property where the activity will take place
3. Dates and hours of operation
4. Complete description of the business activity
5. Responsible party's name, address and telephone number
6. Parkway width
7. Health Department approval if applicable
8. Applicable fee: The fees and charges for services furnished by the City shall be determined from time to time
and placed on file in the Office of the City Secretary.
d. Exemption. A permit is not required for nonprofit entities that possess a current City of Abilene Solicitation Permit.
e. Permit Available for Inspection. The approved permit must be available for inspection at the business premises at all
times that the business is operating.
f. Setback. Any tent, trailer or other structure housing the itinerant business must be set back a minimum of ten feet
(10') from all property lines.
g. Limitations on Area. Nothing related to the itinerant business (including but not limited to signs, inventory, parking,
storage, tents) may occur in or be placed in any of the following areas:
1. The vision clearance triangle
2. Fire lane
3. Drainage easement
4. Any area deemed a hazard to the general public health, safety, or welfare by any official of the City of Abilene
or any other governmental agency.
h. Businesses Prohibited. The following businesses shall be prohibited from obtaining an itinerant business permit:
1. Sales of knives, firearms or other weapons
2. Sales of live animals
3. Sales of alcoholic beverages
4. Adult Entertainment as defined by this LDC or any other City ordinance
i. Businesses with Food Items. Businesses with food items must have written approval of the Health Department. This
approval shall appear on the Itinerant Business permit.
(31) KENNEL (with outdoor pens):
a. Location. Kennels shall be located no closer to a residential district than three hundred feet (300').
b. Refuse. No incineration of animal refuse shall be permitted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/648
(32) LIQUOR STORE (off-premises consumption): All structures housing a liquor store off-premise consumption use shall
meet all of the requirements prescribed for a liquor store on-premise consumption use, except that it need not be separated
from a lot in a residential district or a lot used primarily for hospital purposes. Further, liquor stores for off-premises
consumption (beer and wine only) need not be separated from lots in a College-University district.
(33) LIQUOR STORE (on-premises consumption):
a. Distances Required. All structures housing a liquor store on-premises consumption use must be located at least
three hundred feet (300') from any lot in a residential district or in a College-University district, or any lot used primarily
for church, school, or hospital purposes. Except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (e) of this Subsection (33), said
distance between the liquor store and:
(i) a residential district or a College-University district shall be measured in a straight line in all directions from
the structure housing the liquor store to the nearest point of any lot described above, and measurements shall be
taken from the furthest point that a structure extends in any direction, including overhanging roofs and all other
projections for portions of said structure; and
(ii) a church or public hospital shall be measured along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door
to front door, and in direct lines across intersections; and
(iii) a public or private school shall be measured in a direct line from the property line of the public or private
school to the property line of the liquor store, and in a direct line across intersections.
b. Located in Conjunction With Other Buildings, Clearly Separated. Should the liquor store be located in conjunction
with other buildings in a manner where said liquor store is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for
example, a liquor store in a shopping center or motel) the measurement shall be taken from the boundaries of the space
in which the liquor store is housed or confined (not the entire shopping center, motel, or structure).
c. Located in Conjunction With Other Buildings, Above the Ground Level. Should the liquor store be located in
conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said liquor store is situated above the ground level of a multi-story
structure and is clearly separate from other activities within the structure (for example, a liquor store on an upper level of
an office tower or hotel), the measurement shall be taken from the nearest entry of the liquor store, thence to the nearest
point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence to the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line to the nearest point of
any lot described above.
d. Site Plan. Each applicant for a liquor store must submit a Site Plan setting out the dimensions and locations for such
liquor store. The applicant shall sign a certified and notarized statement attached to the Site Plan that the proposed liquor
store complies with the requirements set forth hereinabove. It shall be the duty of the applicant to prepare the Site Plan
and to assure compliance with the distance requirements.
e. Use in Conjunction with a Standard or Brewpub Restaurant. A liquor store on-premises consumption use that, but
for the sale of alcohol, may be classified as a standard restaurant or a brewpub restaurant shall not be subject to
separation requirements ordinarily required thereof and pertaining to residential or College-University districts,
churches, or hospitals, if such restaurant meets the following requirements:
1. Valid Food and Beverage Certificate. The restaurant shall hold a valid Food and Beverage Certificate from the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and said certificate is prominently displayed. If a requirement for obtaining
said certificate shall differ from any other condition of this subsection e, then the more restrictive requirement or
condition shall apply.
2. Alcohol Sales Percentage. Alcohol sales constitute no more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross receipts of
the premises.
3. Kitchen and Entrees. The restaurant shall include a full-service kitchen offering a minimum of eight entrees.
4. Entrees and Alcohol for Sale. The restaurant shall offer the entrees for sale at all times that alcohol is offered
for sale.
5. Performance Standards. The restaurant shall meet the performance standards enumerated in Chapter 4, Article
2, Division 9; and
6. Other Provisions. The restaurant meets all other provisions of this LDC.
f. A liquor store shall be allowed within the AO zoning district accessory to the following uses only:
1. Amusement Facility (Temporary);
2. Drag Strip or Commercial Racing;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/648
3. Fairgrounds;
4. Motorcycle Track;
5. Rodeo Grounds;
6. Stadium;
7. Golf Course; and
8. Zoo, limited to events permitted under City of Abilene Code of Ordinances Chapter 22, Section 22-2(a).
TABLE 2-12: LIQUOR STORES: SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS
District Must be located at least 300 feet from any lot:
In a Residential
district
In a College-
University District
Used primarily for a
Church, School, or
Hospital
Liquor Store On-Premise
Consumption
(See Section 2.5.3.14
[Subsection 2.4.3.3(33)])
Yes Yes Yes
Liquor Store Off-Premise
Consumption
(See Section 2.5.3.15
[Subsection 2.4.3.3(32)])
No Yes* Yes
Liquor Store Off-Premise
Consumption Manufacturer
(See Section 2.5.3.13
[Subsection 2.4.3.3(34)])
No Yes Yes
* This separation is not required for beer and wine sales only.
(34) LIQUOR WHOLESALE/DISTRIBUTION:
a. Location. If located within three hundred feet (300') of any lot used primarily for church or school purposes, the
facility shall not display in a manner visible from outside a structure any signage depicting the name of any alcohol
beverage manufacturer or brand name, nor any reference to a type of alcoholic beverage, including beer, wine, spirits,
alcohol, liquor and whiskey.
b. On-Premise Consumption. No on-premise consumption shall be permitted unless the facility meets all separation
requirements for liquor store on-premise consumption (refer to use #35 [#33] above).
(35) LIVESTOCK - WHOLESALE OR AUCTION: This use shall meet all the same requirements as outlined for
FARMING, RANCHING & LIVESTOCK, HATCHERY.
(36) MINING: The City Council shall have the power to grant a CUP, revocable and valid for specified periods of time, to
permit mining or extractions from, or deposits on the earth of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or
construction materials, as set forth in Article 2, Division 3 of this Chapter 2 [Article 4, Division 3 of Chapter 1]. The following
conditions shall apply to any CUP, in addition to any other requirements the City Council deems necessary for a specific CUP.
a. Insurance Required. Insurance against liability arising from production or operations incidental thereto shall be
required, in such form and amount satisfactory to the City Attorney.
b. Bond Required. The posting a good and sufficient bond, in the opinion of the City Attorney, shall be required to
assure compliance with all other conditions required for approval of said CUP.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/648
c. Other. Additional conditions under which approval of said CUP is granted may include any requirements deemed
necessary to provide:
1. Protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare, including environmental
considerations,
2. Completion of the work, and cleaning up and planting in accordance with approved plans,
3. Designation of the area in which work may be done,
4. Designation of the slope to which excavation may be made and/or controlling the dust,
5. Limited hours during which operations may proceed,
6. Precautions which must be taken to guide traffic movements safely in, around, and by said operations,
7. Enclosure by fences of the property to be used, and any other conditions deemed necessary by the City
Council.
8. Any conditions recommended by the City Engineer, necessitated by or based upon standard engineering
practices.
d. Inspections. The City Engineer shall make such inspections as are required by the City Council to ensure that all
work is performed in accordance with the special exception. The actual cost to the City of all inspection services shall be
paid by the applicant.
e. A CUP shall not be granted on land owned by the City of Abilene and used for park purposes at Lake Fort Phantom
Hill.
f. Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from the provisions of these mining requirements:
1. Exploration and production of oil and gas.
2. Excavations for the foundation or basement of any building or for a swimming pool for which a building
permit has been issued, or deposits on the earth of any building or construction materials to be used in a structure
for which a building permit has been issued.
3. Grading of any parcel of land for a permitted use where no bank is left standing and exposed of more than ten
feet (10') in vertical height, or when less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth is removed from the
premises.
4. Grading in a subdivision which has been approved by the City in accordance with this LDC and any
amendments thereto.
(37) MANUFACTURED HOME (office for sales and service):
a. Number. Not more than one (1) manufactured home may be used as accessory office for mobile home sales on any
lot in any GC (General Commercial), HC (Heavy Commercial), and LI (Light Industrial) district.
b. Conditions. Such use shall also be subject to the following conditions:
1. The manufactured home shall be located not less than ten feet (10') from any property line.
2. The manufactured home shall not be used for living or storage purposes.
(38) MANUFACTURED HOME (security residence): A permanent residence to ensure greater security from theft for
equipment and materials stored out-of-doors, the City Council may authorize the placement of a mobile home in certain
districts by Conditional Use Permit where not otherwise permitted, as long as conditions specified herein are met. The
applicant must show a clear and direct relationship between the presence of such outdoor storage and the need for a mobile
security residence. Should the materials be removed from the site or the facilities vacated, the Conditional Use Permit may be
revoked, causing the security residence's right of use to become invalid and the dwelling will have to be removed immediately.
The following conditions shall apply to this type of use:
a. Such residence may be used as an accessory residence on any tract of land where permitted by the Land Use Matrix
(Section 2.5.2.1 [2.4.2.1]) as long as the principal use of such tract shall be commercial, industrial, or mineral extraction.
b. Such residence shall either have self-contained facilities for water supply and waste disposal, or shall be connected
to underground water and sewage systems (approved by Texas Department of Health) in conformance with City of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/648
Abilene Plumbing Code.
c. Such residence shall either have self-contained facilities for power generation, or shall be connected via its own
meter to public or private electric utility in conformance with City of Abilene Electrical Code.
d. Only one (1) residence shall be permitted on any one or more contiguous lots in common ownership.
e. Such residence shall be separated by no less than ten feet (10') from any existing structure, and shall be set back
from the property boundary by ten feet (10') or by the zoning district requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
f. Such residence shall not be located within regulatory 100-year flood hazard area.
g. There may be other requirements as the City Council may deem necessary.
h. Such residence shall require a special “Security Residence Permit,” certifying compliance with each abovementioned
condition. Such permit shall include a site plan with the following information:
1. Include a diagram showing placement of residence on lot, connection to utilities, and location of such
equipment or materials to be protected. An unencumbered view between such materials and the mobile homes shall
be evident.
2. Be necessary for continual occupancy or placement of such dwelling on any lot where permitted.
3. Be subject to immediate revocation if Planning Director or his designee certifies that such dwelling no longer
complies with conditions set forth in this section.
4. Be maintained on display in full view of the occupant.
i. An annual inspection shall be undertaken by the Planning Director or his representative, to review the above
conditions and determine if the Conditional Use Permit is valid.
(39) MANUFACTURED HOME (temporary security residence) TEMPORARY:
a. Permit and Timeframe. To maintain greater security from theft of materials stored at construction sites, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may grant a temporary permit for a mobile home or vacation travel trailer to be located on any
tract of land for a period not to exceed one (1) year with no more than two (2) extensions of six (6) months each, if the
permit holder maintains active, continuous construction within the tract where such dwelling is located.
b. Temporary Issuance by Planning Director. Pending Planning and Zoning Commission approval, the Planning
Director or his designee may grant a temporary permit for placement of such mobile security residences.
c. Conditions. The following conditions shall also apply to this type of use:
1. Such residence may be used as an accessory residence only at a site where active construction is in progress.
2. Such residence shall have self-contained facilities for water supply and waste disposal, or shall be connected
to underground water and sewerage systems (approved by Texas Department of Health) in conformance with City
of Abilene Plumbing Code.
3. Such residence shall have self-contained facilities for power generation, or shall be connected via its own
meter to public or private electric utility in conformance with City of Abilene Electrical Code.
4. Only one (1) such residence shall be permitted on any one or more contiguous parcels in common ownership.
5. Such mobile home shall be separated by no less than ten feet (10') from any structure, and shall be set back
from the property boundary by ten feet (10') or by the zoning district requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
6. Such residence shall not be located within 100-year flood hazard area.
7. There may be other requirements as the Planning and Zoning Commission may deem necessary.
(40) MOTORIZED RACING:
a. Location and Screening. These uses shall be located at least six hundred (600) feet from any residential district, and
shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet high.
b. Access. These uses shall have ingress and egress from a major arterial.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/648
(41) PERSONAL SERVICES: In O (Office) and MU (Medical Use) districts, a Personal Service shall not be the principal
use of the lot upon which it is located. The Personal Service must be located within a larger building housing the primary use
of the lot, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the larger building, and may only be accessed from the
interior of the larger building.
(42) PETROLEUM OR GAS WELL: No oil or gas well may be drilled within the City limits of the City of Abilene without
first obtaining a permit from the City Council in accordance with Article II, Chapter 21, of the Abilene Municipal Code, as
amended.
(43) PRESSURE CONTROL STATION: Where adjacent to a residential zoning district, these facilities must be screened by
a solid wall or fence with a minimum height of six (6) feet.
(44) PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY: Where adjacent to a residential zoning district, these facilities must be screened by a
solid wall or fence with a minimum height of six (6) feet.
(45) RECREATION BUILDING, MULTIPURPOSE: In residential zoning districts, these facilities must meet the
following:
a. Setback. Must meet the minimum setback requirements of the district in which they are located. However, in no
case shall this use be set back less than ten (10) feet from any property line.
b. Parking. Off-street parking spaces equaling one (1) per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area of the recreation
building, excluding locker rooms and bathrooms.
(46) RECREATION EQUIPMENT, MOBILE (STORAGE AND PARKING):
a. Mobile recreation equipment may be parked or stored on developed residential property in compliance with
applicable fire codes and no closer than ten (10) feet to any building on adjoining properties. Mobile recreation
equipment shall not be parked or stored on a public street, alley or other public right-of-way or parkway. Mobile
recreation equipment shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of pavement on all arterial streets and at least
ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement on all other streets.
b. Mobile recreation equipment shall not be used for sleeping, housekeeping or office space when parked or stored on
property in an AO or residential zoning district or in any other location not approved for such a use, with the exception
that not more than one (1) trailer, semi-trailer or self-propelled motor vehicle owned by a nonresident visitor to Abilene
that is designed, constructed and equipped for human habitation may be occupied by the said nonresident visitor and his
family on a developed residential lot with the permission of the owner or person in control of such lot for not more than
fourteen (14) days during any sixty (60) day period.
(47) RECREATION - OUTDOORS (active):
a. Swimming Pool Location. Swimming pools that are not accessory to an individual residential dwelling unit shall be
located at least twenty-five feet (25') from the nearest residential lot line.
b. Tennis Court Location. Tennis courts that are not accessory to an individual residential dwelling unit shall be
located at least ten feet (10') from the nearest residential lot line.
(48) RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT: These facilities must be placed on and accessible via an all-weather driving
surface.
(49) RECYCLING COLLECTION AND PROCESSING CENTER: Such uses in the GC and HC districts shall meet the
following requirements:
a. Enclosed Area. All processing (collection, storage, flattening, crushing or bundling) must be conducted inside of a
structure or within an area enclosed on all sides by a seven foot (7') high opaque fence and must be a distance of fifty
feet (50') from any residential district.
b. Skirting. The structure must be skirted with matching weatherized material if any space is exposed between the
structure and the slab or ground.
c. Refuse Removal. Trash and debris must be removed daily and must be sprayed for pests and odor weekly.
(50) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES - AUTOMOBILE/SMALL TRUCK (major): Parking of disabled
vehicles awaiting service must be screened from the public right-of-way and any residential zoning district. Long-term storage
of disabled vehicles is prohibited unless in compliance with all requirements for the use SCRAP AND WASTE MATERIAL.
(51) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES (truck and other large motor vehicles): Parking of disabled vehicles
awaiting service must be screened from the public right-of-way and any residential zoning district. Screening must be in
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/648
compliance with Section 4.2.4 of this LDC. Long-term storage of disabled vehicles is prohibited unless in compliance with all
requirements for the use SCRAP AND WASTE MATERIAL.
(52) RESTAURANT (fast food):
a. In an CU, O or MU District. This use shall be permitted in the College & University (CU), Office (O) and Medical
Use (MU) zoning districts with the following requirements:
1. Restaurants shall only be located within a structure.
2. Direct customer access shall only be provided from within the structure containing it.
3. A restaurant shall not be the principal use of the lot upon which it is located and shall occupy no more than ten
percent (10%) of the total floor area of the structure.
b. Restaurants not meeting the above conditions shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
(53) RESTAURANT (standard):
a. In an CU, O or MU District. This shall be permitted in the College & University (CU), Office (O) and Medical Use
zoning districts with the following requirements:
1. Restaurants shall only be located within a structure.
2. Direct customer access shall only be provided from within the structure containing it.
3. A restaurant shall not be the principal use of the lot upon which it is located and shall occupy no more than ten
percent (10%) of the total floor area of the structure.
b. Restaurants not meeting the above conditions shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
(54) RETAIL SALES/RENTAL (trucks and other large vehicles and equipment):
a. Buildings and Premises. A truck rental and leasing business may include buildings and premises for the rental and
ancillary minor servicing of trucks, utility trailers and related items generally used by persons to move their personal and
household belongings.
b. In the GC District. This use shall be permitted in the General Commercial (GC) zoning district with the following
requirements:
1. Such trucks and trailers shall be limited to those vehicles which have only two (2) axles, which have a
maximum box length of twenty-six feet (26'), are no more than twelve feet (12') in height and which do not require
a commercial driver's license to operate. Rental and leasing of trucks and trailers exceeding these dimensions is
prohibited in the GC zoning district.
2. If areas of the property abut a Single-Family (RS) Zoning District, such areas shall be screened from the RS
District. The following landscaping and screening conditions shall be required in addition to those contained within
Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 2 and Division 4, respectively.
i. All property lines that abut an RS zoning district shall be screened by a solid wooden fence, masonry
wall, or landscaping, of at least seven feet (7') in height. Landscaping shall mean the planting of living
material such as grass, shrubs, or trees. Landscaping shall provide a screening effect closely resembling that
of a wall or fence at least seven feet (7') in height within two (2) years of issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. Chain-link fencing shall not constitute screening.
ii. Landscaping must be indicated on the Site Plan and shall be required on developed sites no later than
one hundred and eighty (180) days after first occupancy or completion of buildings, whichever shall occur
first.
iii. Plant material shall be maintained in good and healthy condition. Dead plants shall be replaced as
quickly as possible, but in no case longer than time for the next planting period.
(55) SANITARY LANDFILL:
a. Location. Sanitary landfills shall be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any property line.
b. Design and Operation. Sanitary landfills shall be designed and operated in such a manner as to minimize offensive
odors and hazards to health.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/648
(56) SCRAP AND WASTE MATERIAL: In any zoning district, all scrap and salvage yards with open storage of wrecked
or salvaged automobiles, machinery, appliances, or other used commodities and equipment shall surround such open storage
with a screening wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(57) STORAGE - SELF-SERVICE UNITS: In the CB district, the facade of self-service storage facilities shall have a
maximum of five percent (5%) metal visible on any wall surface.
(58) SUBDIVISION SALES OFFICE (temporary):
a. Permit and Timeframe. Any such office shall be permitted for a period of one (1) year with a Temporary Permit
from the Planning and Zoning Commission; however, extension of one (1) year may be granted upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Not more than four (4) one-year extensions may be granted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
b. Limited to On-Site Sales. The subdivision sales office shall only be used to facilitate sales of land or property on the
same site, within the same subdivision or development. No subdivision sales office may be used to facilitate sales in any
other subdivision.
(59) SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE (accessory to residential use):
a. Accessory to a Single-Family Residence. Such swimming pools shall be located at least three (3) feet from the
nearest property line. Fencing shall be provided as required by the Building Code.
b. Accessory to a Multiple-Family Residence/Development. Such swimming pools shall be located at least twenty-five
feet (25') from the nearest property line, and shall be screened by a fence or masonry wall at least four feet (4') high.
(60) TENNIS COURT, PRIVATE (accessory to residential use): Such tennis court which shall be located at least three feet
(3') from the nearest property line, shall meet performance standards regulating exterior illumination within Chapter 4, Article
2, Division 9, and shall be located within a fenced yard or be enclosed by a fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(61) TRAVEL TRAILERS (accessory to hospitals):
a. Location. Such trailers must be located in a space with minimum dimensions of twenty feet (20') by thirty-five feet
(35').
b. Parking Area. Such trailers must be parked on an all-weather, durable and dustless surface, composed of asphaltic
or Portland cement bind pavement or a penetration surface.
c. Building Line.
1. The travel trailer space(s) shall have the same building line requirements as are required for the Medical Use
(MU) district.
2. In no case shall the travel trailer spaces extend beyond the front building line of the principal structures.
d. Screening. Spaces for more then five (5) travel trailers, on any boundary adjacent to or within fifty feet (50') of a
residential district, shall be effectively screened by a solid, opaque wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height.
e. Occupancy. The travel trailer must be occupied by a nonresident visitor to Abilene with family members under the
care of the hospital.
f. Number Permitted. There shall be no more than ten (10) travel trailers in use as accessory uses to any hospital at any
given time.
(62) URBAN GARDEN: In all zoning districts where such use is permitted by right, the following criteria shall be met:
a. A water meter will be allowed for the cultivation and growing of plant material even when a primary structure does
not exist.
b. No on-site sales of plant material shall be permitted.
c. No building shall be allowed that requires a building permit, electricity or plumbing. Only one such building shall
be allowed on any lot or tract.
d. Only mechanical equipment designed for household use may be stored on an urban garden.
(63) VACATION TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Vacation travel trailers for residential purposes shall be allowed in the GC
and HC zoning districts, only where in the confines of a vacation travel trailer park, as defined within this LDC. Refer to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/648
Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 11 for other requirements.
(64) VETERINARY SERVICE (small animals):
a. Building and Operation. Veterinary services shall be performed within completely enclosed buildings and operated
in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors or noise outside its walls.
b. Boarding. Sheltering and boarding of small animals shall be incidental and secondary to the clinic.
c. The treatment of large animals such as swine, sheep, goats, horses, cattle, and other livestock shall be prohibited in
small animal clinics except in extreme emergency cases.
(65) VETERINARY SERVICE (all size animals):
a. Building and Operation. The proponent shall furnish evidence that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor,
noise, or drainage from becoming a nuisance to uses on adjacent properties.
b. Boarding. Sheltering and boarding of small animals shall be incidental and secondary to the clinic.
c. Location. Such uses shall be located no nearer to a residential district than three hundred (300) feet.
d. Refuse. No incineration of animal refuse shall be permitted.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 24-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 9-9-10; Ord. No.
33-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-10; Ord. No. 49-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-11-12; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 11-1-12; Ord. No. 03-
2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-10-13; Ord. No. 23-2013, pt. 1 (Ex. A), 6-13-13; Ord. No. 25-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14; Ord. No. 45-2017,
pt.1(Exh. A), 11-16-17; Ord. No. 62-2018, pt. 4, 10-9-18)
Section 2.4.3.4 Adult Entertainment Enterprises
(a) All structures housing adult entertainment enterprises (as defined in Chapter 5 of this LDC) shall be located as follows:
(1) At least six hundred feet (600') from the property boundary line of any lot in a College-University zoning district;
(2) At least six hundred feet (600') from the property boundary line of any residentially zoned lot or any lot used for church,
park, or hospital purposes;
(3) At least six hundred feet (600') north of North 1st Street and at least six hundred feet (600') south of South 1st Street and
cannot be located on or between North 1st Street and South 1st Street;
(4) At least one thousand feet (1,000') of another structure housing an adult entertainment enterprise; and
(5) At least two thousand feet (2,000') from any lot used for school purposes.
Said measurements are to be in a straight line in all directions from the structure housing the adult entertainment enterprise to the nearest
property line on any lot in the College-University zoning district, any residentially zoned district, or any lot used for church, school, or
hospital purposes, or any park, North and South 1st Streets, and any structure housing an adult entertainment enterprise.
(b) The measurements for a structure shall be taken from the furthest point that a structure extends in any direction, including
overhanging roofs and all other projections or portions of said structure.
(c) Should said adult entertainment enterprise be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said adult
entertainment enterprise is clearly separated from other portions of the structure, (for example, an adult bookstore in a shopping center)
the adult entertainment enterprise structure's measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space in which the adult bookstore
is housed or confined (not the entire shopping center, motel, or structure).
(d) Should said adult entertainment enterprise be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said adult
entertainment enterprise is situated above the ground level of a multi-story structure and is clearly separate from other activities within
the structure (for example, an adult bookstore on an upper level of an office tower or hotel), the adult entertainment enterprise
measurements shall be taken from the entry to that portion of the structure housing the adult bookstore, thence to the nearest point of
egress (elevator or stairs), thence to the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line to the nearest point on any lot in a residential
district or a College-University district, or any lot or tract used for church, school, hospital or park purposes, North and South 1st Streets
and any structure housing an adult entertainment enterprise.
(e) Each applicant for an adult entertainment enterprise must submit a Site Plan setting out the dimension and locations for such adult
entertainment enterprise. The applicant shall sign a certified and notarized statement attached to the Site Plan that the proposed adult
entertainment enterprise complies with the requirements set forth hereinabove. It shall be the duty of the applicant to prepare the Site Plan
and to assure compliance with the distance requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/648
(f) Adult Viewing Booth Design.
(1) Adult viewing booths and arcades [shall] be constructed according to this section. The interior of an adult arcade and/or
viewing booth shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of every interior area of the adult arcade
and/or viewing booth to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. This unobstructed view shall be from the
manager's station directly into the viewing booth. In the event there is more than one manager's station, then at any of the
manager's stations there shall be at least one unobstructed view to any interior area of the viewing booth or arcade. The view
required in this section must be in direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner and operator of such arcade or viewing booth, and it shall also be the duty of any agents
and employees present in an arcade or viewing booth to ensure that the view area specified in this Subsection (a) [Subsection
(1)] above remains unobstructed by any merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times that any patron is present in
the adult arcade and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the adult arcade which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the plan filed pursuant to this section.
(g) Lighting.
(1) Each adult arcade and viewing booth shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination so that any patron may be observed from the
manager's station.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in an
adult arcade and viewing booth to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the adult arcade and viewing booths.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 2.4.4.1 Description and Regulations by District Type
(a) All Districts.
(1) Accessory buildings and dwellings shall be permitted only in side and rear yards.
a. Carports and patio covers shall be exempted from this requirement and shall meet the requirements within Section
2.5.4.2 [2.4.4.2].
b. Barns and related structures necessary for farming and ranching purposes shall be exempt from this requirement on
parcels or tracts of land that are ten (10) acres or greater in size.
c. Accessory dwellings shall be exempt from this requirement on parcels or tracts of land that are two (2) acres or
greater in size.
(2) Accessory buildings and dwellings shall conform to applicable provisions of the Building Code.
(3) Accessory buildings shall not extend beyond the front building line. No wall of an accessory building shall be placed
within six feet (6') of the wall of any other structure existing or under construction on the same lot. In no case shall any portion
of an accessory building be placed within six feet (6') of any portion of any structure existing or under construction on an
adjacent lot. (Also see separation requirements for accessory dwellings within Subsection (b)(4) below.)
(4) Accessory buildings that are two hundred (200) square feet or less in size do not require a building permit, but must
meet all applicable requirements.
(5) All accessory buildings shall require a Site Plan if they are to be located within zoning district in which a Site Plan is
required. Accessory buildings that are four hundred (400) square feet or less in size are exempt from this requirement.
(6) The total area of building coverage on a lot, encompassing principal as well as accessory buildings and dwellings, shall
not exceed maximum lot coverage and/or density requirements specified within Table 2-2 and Table 2-4, which outline the site
layout and building requirements of each zoning district.
(b) Residential Districts. In a residential zoning district, an accessory building is a subordinate or incidental building, attached to or
detached from the main building, which is not used for commercial purposes. Also see Chapter 5, Definitions, for further information.
(1) A residence must exist on the same lot on which an accessory building or dwelling is located.
(2) Accessory buildings and dwellings may be permitted in specified residential zoning districts (see the Land Use Matrix,
Section 2.5.2.2 [2.4.2.1], and the related regulations for the specific district), and shall conform to the height limitations of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/648
zoning district.
(3) Setbacks.
a. Detached accessory buildings (other than open carports or patio covers) with a maximum height of 10 feet shall be
set back a minimum of 3 feet from an interior side or rear property line.
b. Detached accessory buildings (other than open carports or patio covers) over 10 feet in height shall be set back from
an interior side or rear property line, where no public alley exists, at least 1 additional foot in depth for every 1 foot in
height over 10 feet.
c. Detached accessory buildings (other than open carports or patio covers) over 10 feet in height shall be set back from
an interior side or rear property line adjacent to a public alley at least 1 additional foot in depth for every 2 feet in height
over 10 feet.
d. In no circumstance shall a detached accessory building be required to be set back from a property line any more
than is required of a principal building constructed on that same property.
e. Standards for minimum setback required (and maximum height allowed) of open carports and patio covers shall be
as prescribed in the following Section 2.4.4.2 on Carports and Patio Covers.
(4) Accessory Dwelling Units.
a. Except for properties 2 acres or larger, an accessory dwelling unit shall not be larger than fifty percent (50%) of the
primary structure. For properties 2 acres or larger, an accessory dwelling unit shall not be larger than fifty percent (50%)
of the primary structure or 2.5% of the total lot size, which ever is larger.
b. No accessory dwelling unit shall be sold separately from the primary structure.
c. An accessory building or dwelling unit may have a maximum of one (1) bathroom.
d. An accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed in a manner in keeping with the general architecture and building
material of the main or primary dwelling.
e. No accessory dwelling unit shall have a front facing door unless located to the rear of the primary dwelling.
f. An accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed only with the issuance of a building permit and with the same
minimum building standards as the primary dwelling.
g. Any required additional parking for the accessory dwelling unit shall be provided with the required parking for the
primary dwelling.
h. If detached, any wall of the secondary dwelling must be placed no closer than six feet (6') from the primary
dwelling and/or any other structure existing or under construction on the same lot.
i. For properties 2 acres or larger, accessory dwellings shall be exempt from items ‘c', ‘d', and ‘e'.
j. A Special Exception may be approved by the Board of Adjustment for accessory dwellings larger than permitted by
this Land Development Code. As part of the Special Exception, only items ‘a', ‘c', ‘d', and ‘e' above may be modified in
addition to the size of the accessory dwelling.
(5) The maximum square footage for accessory buildings and dwellings shall be as follows in Table 2-13:
TABLE 2-13: MAX SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS/DWELLINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning District or Lot Size Maximum Square Footage
Accessory Buildings
AO None
RS-6, RS-8, RS-12 Ten percent (10%) of the entire lot area
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/648
MF One-half of the square footage of the principal building(s)
Accessory Dwelling Units
AO, RR, and RS Lots less than 2 acres in size: 1,200 sq. ft.
Lots 2 acres and larger in size: 50% of the primary structure or 2.5% of the
total lot size, whichever is greater
(c) Nonresidential Districts. In a nonresidential zoning district, an accessory building is a subordinate building, or incidental building,
attached to or detached from the main building, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building. Also see Chapter 5,
Definitions, for further information.
(1) A business must exist on the same lot on which an accessory building is located.
(2) Accessory dwellings shall be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts where multiple-family dwellings are permitted
by right.
(3) Side setback requirements shall be the same as for the main building. The rear setback shall be no less than five feet (5')
from the rear property line.
(4) Accessory buildings in nonresidential zoning districts shall not be required to be screened when constructed with the
same building materials and architectural quality as the primary structure. All other accessory buildings shall be screened from
public view by a solid masonry wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(5) The square footage of all accessory buildings in the NO, O, NR, GR, MU, and MX zoning districts shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the square footage of the primary on-site building, or ten percent (10%) of the entire lot area, whichever is
smaller.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 5-2011, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 2-10-11; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-1-12)
Section 2.4.4.2 Carports and Patio Covers
(a) General. Carports that are not connected to the main building, or are connected to the main building only by a breezeway (see
definition in Chapter 5) shall not be considered part of the main building, and shall be considered an accessory building.
(b) Setbacks. Carports shall therefore adhere to all requirements of this Section 2.5.4.2 [Section 2.4.4.1], except that front, rear, and
side yard setbacks shall meet the following:
(1) Exterior Side. A minimum of five feet (5').
(2) Rear and Interior Side. A minimum of three feet (3') unless adjacent to an alley, then one foot (1').
(3) Front. All of the following conditions must be met for any carport or patio cover to be located within the front yard
setback. These conditions are not subject to variance.
a. A Special Exception (SE) must be approved unless the following conditions are met.
1. Other carports/patio covers within the front yard setback must be located on either block face of the same
street.
2. The carport or patio cover shall be similar in color and materials to the principal structure; no canvas or other
non-rigid material is permitted.
3. Determination of compliance with these criteria shall be made by the Planning Director, or designee. An
applicant may appeal an unfavorable determination by seeking a Special Exception.
b. The carport or patio cover must be a minimum of five feet (5') from the front property line.
c. The Board of Adjustment, in approving the SE, shall make a determination that the proposed carport or patio cover
is not detrimental to the visual environment or character of the area.
d. The carport or patio cover must be attached to or abut the primary structure in all RS and MD zoning districts.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/648
e. Support posts may not exceed two feet (2') in width or diameter.
f. The carport or patio cover must be located over/on an improved surface.
(c) Carport Setback Measurement. Carports shall be measured from the part of the carport (usually the roof) that is closest to the street
or alley (see Figure 2-1).
Figure 2-1: Measuring Setbacks for Carports
(d) Maximum Height. Twelve feet (12'), except:
(1) When built into the roofline and with the same roofing materials as the primary structure, in which case the height may
not exceed the height of the primary structure.
(2) When detached and built with a pitched roof utilizing similar materials and colors to the principal structure and where
the height between the grade and the first horizontal element of the roof structure does not exceed 12 feet in height.
(e) Size. Carports/patio covers shall count in the maximum square footage for accessory buildings when detached. Attached
carports/patio covers shall not count toward maximum accessory building square footage.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-1-12)
Division 5 - Home Occupations
Section 2.4.5.1 Purpose
(a) Purpose. Standards for managing home occupations are set forth to minimize annoyance and inconvenience to neighboring property
owners within residential areas. These standards are intended to allow reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby
property by their owners and by occupants of neighboring residential dwellings, while providing opportunities for the pursuit of homebased
businesses. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.5.2 Criteria for Home Occupations
(a) Criteria for Allowed Home Occupation Uses. The allowed uses under a customary Home Occupation shall comply with the
following criteria.
(1) Home occupation must be shown as a permitted or conditional use in the Land Use Matrix, Section 2.5.2.1 [2.4.2.1].
(2) The home occupation shall be conducted by members of the family residing on the premises, and shall have no more
than one (1) employee who does not reside on the premises.
(3) The home occupation may be conducted in the home or a detached accessory structure. The following conditions shall
apply:
a. When Operated Within the Home: The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the Home Occupation.
b. When Operated Within a Detached Accessory Building:
(i) The accessory building used for home occupation must be located to the side or rear of the home or dwelling
unit.
(ii) The area of an accessory building used for a home occupation shall not be more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the floor area of the home or dwelling unit.
(iii) A Special Exception is required for any home occupation when conducted in a detached accessory building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/648
(4) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct
of such home occupation, except that for each street front of the lot on which the building is located, there may be one (1)
unanimated, non-illuminated, accessory identification sign having an area of not over two (2) square feet. Such sign or signs
shall be placed flat against a wall or door or displayed in a window.
(5) There shall be no on-premises sales in connection with such home occupation.
(6) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the
street and not in a required front yard.
(7) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence. In
the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers, or similar electronic devices, off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
premises.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 56-2014, pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-14-14)
Section 2.4.5.3 Prohibited and Permitted Home Occupations
(a) Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited from operating as a home occupation.
(1) Animal clinic
(2) Automobile Repair
(3) Clinic (of any type, including);
(4) Commercial stable
(5) Cooking, catering or other food preparation businesses
(6) Dress shop;
(7) Health studio;
(8) Hospital;
(9) Kennel;
(10) Medical or dental clinic or office;
(11) Radio and television sales, repair and/or service.
(12) Real estate office;
(13) Palm reading;
(14) Printing establishment; and
(15) Tea room;
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
Section 2.4.6.1 Purpose, Applicability, and Definitions
(a) Purpose. These regulations are primarily intended to maximize the use of new and existing towers to prevent the proliferation of
unnecessary towers and to minimize the adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through design, location, landscape and screening
requirements.
(b) Applicability.
(1) This article applies to towers and antennas located in any zoning district.
(2) This article does not apply to the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/648
a. A receive-only television antenna or satellite dish less than six feet (6') in diameter;
b. Satellite dish antenna that is a permitted accessory use as provided in this chapter; or
c. A tower less than fifty feet (50') in height that is used as an amateur radio antenna or station. The Planning
Department, however, may require the applicant to submit information on the height, location, and the manufacturer's
drawings and specifications for the tower, or any other any information as necessary to determine whether a Conditional
Use Permit (CUP) should be granted as required by this article.
(3) Any regulations relating to the height of a tower, alternate tower structure, or antenna contained in this division of this
LDC controls over any conflicting provision of any other regulations not contained in this article.
(c) Definitions. See Chapter 5 for specific definitions
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.2 Conditional Use Permit Required
(a) Requirement & Procedures. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person may not construct, erect, or maintain a tower or
antenna on any land located within the City without first receiving a Conditional Use Permit. The procedures of this article relating to the
application, processing, and determination of whether to grant a Conditional Use Permit, are in addition to any other provisions and
requirements contained in other articles of these zoning regulations relating to Conditional Use Permits.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) Rooftop mounted towers and antennas may be located on any buildings serving a nonresidential use and on an
alternative tower structure without obtaining a Conditional Use Permit, if:
a. The structure, other than a tower on which the tower or antenna will be placed, exceeds fifty feet (50') in height;
b. The tower and antenna will add no more than thirty-five feet (35') total to the height of the existing structure;
c. The tower or antenna does not contain advertising; and
d. It complies with the lighting regulations for towers as specified in this division.
(2) Freestanding antennas do not require a CUP in any nonresidential zoning district if it does not exceed the height
requirement(s) in the district and it meets all other requirements of the district.
(c) Procedures. An application for a CUP for a tower, antenna, or use of an alternative tower structure shall meet the procedural
requirements set forth for a CUP contained within Article 2, Division 3 of this Chapter 2 [Article 4, Division 3 of Chapter 1].
(d) Effects Not Considered. The effects of radio frequency emissions on persons or the environment must not be considered in a
proceeding involving an application for a Conditional Use Permit.
(e) Application. An application for a Conditional Use Permit for a tower, antenna, or use of an alternative tower structure must be made
to the Planning Department. An application will not be considered until it is complete. A complete application must contain the
following:
(1) An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the City or within one mile of the corporate limits,
specifying the location, height, and design of each tower. The Planning Department may share the information with other
applicants for a Conditional Use Permit under this article.
(2) A Site Plan that, in addition to meeting the requirements set forth for a CUP, also includes information specifying the
location of tower(s), transmission building and other accessory uses, street access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and
adjacent land uses.
(3) Professional structural engineering information:
a. A report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Texas documenting the following:
1. Tower height and design, showing a cross-section of the tower structure.
2. Total anticipated capacity of the tower structure, including the number and types of antennas which can be
accommodated.
b. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the actual cost incurred for the services of a radio or electrical engineer or
other qualified consultant should one be required to review the application and provide engineering expertise. However,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/648
any information submitted by an applicant that bears the seal of a qualified professional will be presumed to be correct.
(4) A letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower and to lease additional excess land on the tower site when the shared
use potential of the tower is absorbed, if structurally and technically possible.
(5) No new antenna tower shall be constructed unless the applicant has adequately described the efforts and measures taken
to pursue location co-location, and has adequately explained why co-location was not feasible. The supplied documentation
should describe the following:
a. The proposed antennae would cause unacceptable interference with the operation of other existing or planned
equipment on an existing or approved antenna tower or alternative tower structure, as documented by a qualified
licensed engineer, and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost as determined by a
qualified licensed engineer.
b. The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing or approved antenna towers or alternative tower
structures due to structural deficiencies as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that such deficiencies cannot
be eliminated at a reasonable cost as determined by a qualified licensed engineer.
c. The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved antenna tower or alternative tower structure would
cause unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant as documented by a qualified licensed
engineer and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost as determined by a qualified
licensed engineer.
d. The fee costs required to share an existing antenna tower or adapt an existing antenna tower for sharing would
exceed the cost of constructing a new antenna tower.
(6) Antennas, antenna towers and equipment buildings shall be located to minimize their number, height and obtrusiveness
to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area, considering the applicant's economic, technological, legal and regulatory
requirements for a specific site, and in accordance with the following City policies:
a. The applicant shall ensure that the height of antennas and antenna towers are no greater than required to achieve
service area requirements and potential co-location.
b. The applicant shall demonstrate that the selected site for a new antenna or antenna tower provides minimal visual
impact on residential areas and the public right-of-way by analyzing and documenting the potential impacts from other
vantage points in the area.
c. The applicant shall make every reasonable effort to design, construct, and locate new antennas or antenna towers to
blend into the character and environment of the area in which they are located.
(7) Any other information which may be requested by the Planning Department to fully evaluate and review the application
and the potential impact of a proposed tower or antenna.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.3 General Requirements and Regulations
(a) Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for all proposed antennas attached to alternative tower structures or
co-located on existing towers.
(b) Advertising. No advertising shall be permitted on an antenna or tower.
(c) Signs or Illumination. No signs or illumination shall be placed on an antenna or tower unless required by the City, FCC, FAA, or
other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction. The Planning Department may review the available lighting alternatives and
approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
(d) Location & Height. A tower shall not be located in the required front yard of any zoning district.
(1) Antennas attached to alternative tower structures may not extend more than twenty feet (20') above the highest point of
the structure in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty-five feet (35') in other allowed zoning districts.
(2) In residential zoning districts, antennas attached to alternative tower structures are only permissible if on property that is
legally developed with a nonresidential use.
(3) Antenna towers located in the Medical Use zoning district shall not exceed one hundred feet (100') in height, including
the antenna and all other appurtenances.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/648
(4) No new antenna tower exceeding fifty feet (50') in height shall be permitted unless the tower is designed and constructed
to accommodate co-location. The owner of the tower and the property on which it is located must provide written
documentation to the City that the antenna tower is available for use by another telecommunications provider or user on a
reasonable and non-discriminatory basis and cost. If the proposed tower location is to be leased, the applicant shall submit
those portions of the lease document that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this paragraph.
(e) Tower Separation. All freestanding towers (not mounted on rooftops or alternative tower structures) must conform to the following
minimum tower separation requirements contained in Table 2-14.
TABLE 2-14: TOWER SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS
Tower Height Less Than 50' 50' to 100' 101' to 150' Greater Than
150'
Less Than 50' 300' 500' 750' 1,000'
50' to 100' 500' 750' 1,000' 1,500'
101' to 150' 750' 1,000' 1,500' 2,000'
Greater Than
150' 1,000' 1,500' 2,000' 2,500'
(f) Other Requirements. All antenna towers shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the Federal or State government with
authority to regulate towers or antennas.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.4 Visual Impacts
(a) Materials & Coloring.
(1) Towers must either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other
applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the building and related structures must use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the tower and facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as
to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(b) Security. Antenna towers shall be secured to protect against trespass or unauthorized use of the property, antenna tower, or related
buildings and structures on-site. At minimum, antenna towers shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device and enclosed by security
fencing and a locking gate not less than six (6) feet in height.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.5 Principal, Accessory, and Joint Uses
(a) Structures & Storage. Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower are allowed, but such structures must not be used for
offices, vehicle storage, or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower shall not be stored
or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made.
(b) Towers in Relation to a Principal Use. Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area.
Towers may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. For a monopole
tower, the minimum distance between the tower and any other principal use located on the same lot shall be twenty percent (20%) percent
of the tower height or twenty-five feet (25'), whichever is greater.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/648
(c) More Than One Tower on One Site. Placement of more than one tower on a lot is permitted, provided all setback, design and
landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower
failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.6 Shared Use
(a) No Permit Required. To encourage shared use of towers, no building permit or Conditional Use Permit is required for the addition
of antennas to an existing tower so long as the height of the tower or structure on which the antenna is placed is not increased and the
requirements of this article are met.
(b) Tower Owner Responsibilities. Any Conditional Use Permit which is granted for a new tower is specifically subject to the condition
that the tower owner abides by the following provisions relating to shared use, regardless of whether or not the ordinance granting the
permit contains the conditions:
(1) The tower owner must respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential shared
use applicant;
(2) The tower owner must negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties; and
(3) The tower owner must allow shared use where the third party seeking the use agrees in writing to pay reasonable, prorata
charges for sharing, including all charges necessary to make modifications of the tower and transmitters to accommodate
the shared use, and to observe whatever technical requirements are necessary to allow shared use without creating
interference.
(c) Compliance Required. The willful failure of an owner whose tower was approved under this article to comply with the requirements
of this section is grounds for withholding approval of any application by the owner for a building permit for the approved tower, for
revoking the Conditional Use Permit granted for the tower, and for refusing to approve a new Conditional Use Permit for any new tower
or antenna.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.7 Satellite Dish Antennae as an Accessory to Residential Use
(a) Conditions for Use. The following conditions must be met for the placement of satellite dishes which have a diameter greater than
two feet (2') and are freestanding:
(1) Number. Only two (2) antennas greater than two feet (2') in diameter shall be allowed per dwelling unit or structure
housing a permitted nonresidential use, and may be either ground- or roof-mounted. An antenna shall be considered groundmounted
whenever it is not entirely supported by the roof.
(2) Location.
a. Satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted nearer the front yard of a lot or tract than the plane formed by that
portion of the structure most recessed or removed from the front yard. In the case of attached dwellings or permitted
nonresidential structures, the front of the unit that is most recessed or removed from the front yard shall form the limiting
plane for all units or structures.
b. Satellite antenna array shall not extend into the front yard.
(b) Roof-Mounted. Roof-mounted antennas shall not extend beyond the maximum height of structures permitted in the district in which
they are located, except that when mounted to a two (2) story structure, no portion of the dish or appurtenances shall extend more than ten
feet (10') beyond the roof line.
(c) Satellite antennas shall, to the extent possible, be compatible in character, color and appearance with the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) Antennas shall be accessory to the primary use of the lot or tract upon which it is located.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.8 Receive Only or Amateur Radio Antenna
(a) Height Restrictions.
(1) Freestanding receive only or amateur radio antennas or antenna structures including antenna may not be higher than
twenty feet (20') above the maximum structure height for the zoning district in which the antenna is located, and in no case
shall such antenna and/or antenna structure exceed seventy feet (70') in height.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/648
(2) Roof-mounted antennas may not extend more than twenty feet (20') above the highest point of the structure.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.9 Abandoned Towers
(a) Not Operated for a Specific Period & Removal. Any antenna or antenna tower that is not operated for a continuous period of more
than twelve (12) months shall be removed within ninety (90) days of the end of the twelve (12) month period. The last
telecommunications service provider to use an antenna or antenna tower shall notify the Building Official or designee within thirty (30)
days of the discontinued use of the antenna or antenna tower.
(b) Use After Abandonment. If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use the abandoned tower or antenna, the owner
first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if the tower or antenna were a new
tower or antenna.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.4.6.10 Public Property
(a) Exempt. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a State or Federal entity are exempt from
the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 7 - Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WEC)
Section 2.4.7.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of these regulations to foster the development and use of Wind Energy Conversion systems, enhance both energy
production and security, as well as enhance the choices for clean, reliable, and affordable energy to the residents of the City of Abilene
while providing minimum protective measures to mitigate against negative impacts to nearby residents and properties that might limit the
use and enjoyment of same.
(Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 2.4.7.2 Definitions
a. Wind Energy Conversion System (WEC): A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine/rotor (blades), a tower
(freestanding, engineered, monopole structure only upon which the wind turbine/generator is mounted - no lattice-type or guyed tower
structures allowed), and associated control or conversion electronics, that has a rated capacity of not more than 100kW output at any
given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity in order to reduce consumption of commercial utility power.
b. Wind Energy Conversion System, Large (LWEC): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of more than 10kW, but
not more than 100kW, output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity for a residence, agricultural
structure or business.
c. Wind Energy Conversion System, Small (SWEC): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of not more than 10kW
output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity for a residence, agricultural structure, or small business.
d. Wind Energy Tower Height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower (i.e., to the center of the hub), excluding the
wind turbine itself.
e. Wind Energy Turbine/Generator: The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the
tower.
f. Fall Radius: The Wind Energy Tower Height (d above) plus the blade length.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 2.4.7.3 Requirements
a. WEC Systems Allowed with Building Permit (By Right): One SWEC system per lot shall be allowed with the approval of a building
permit as an accessory use when ALL of the following apply:
(1) When a SWEC system is certified by the Small Wind Certification Council (SWCC) for noise generation of no more
than 45 decibels (Db) when the wind energy turbine/generator will be less than 300' from an adjacent property or no more than
50 decibels (Db) if 300' or greater.
(2) When a SWEC system is setback a minimum of 105% of the fall radius from any habitable structure, right-of-way,
overhead utility line or other tower structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/648
(3) When a SWEC system is located outside of any floodplain or drainage way.
b. Wind energy conversion systems not qualifying under 2.4.7.3.a (above) shall require a Special Exception.
c. Minimum lot size: There shall be no minimum lot size required for a small wind energy conversion system (SWECS). Large wind
energy systems (LWECS) shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot size of five (5.0) acres.
d. Application Requirements. An accurately drawn-to-scale survey/site plan is required with a Special Exception application and shall
include the following:
(1) Applicant, landowner and operator name, address and telephone number,
(2) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property,
(3) Location, dimensions, setbacks and types of existing major structures on the property,
(4) Location of the proposed wind system tower, and setbacks/dimensions from all existing structures on site, from all
property lines, and from structures on adjacent properties,
(5) Locations and dimensions/setbacks from all public rights-of-way that are contiguous with the property,
(6) Overhead utility lines, and approximate locations/canopy coverage of large existing trees on the property,
(7) Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, rated kW
output, noise certifications from SWCC or, an equivalent manufacturer's noise certification detailing the unit's noise
performance at various operating speeds,
(8) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings,
(9) Tower blueprint or drawing,
(10) Elevation drawings showing the design and height of the proposed energy system, and any screening that will be
provided to screen the system/tower from public view.
e. Floodplain. Wind towers and generators proposed to be installed within the 100-year floodplain shall also have approval of the City's
Engineer and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Such tower sites shall take such measures, as required by the City's
Engineer, to protect the sites from damage from potential flooding. The City's Engineer shall require a floodplain permit and a licensed
engineer's certification that the tower/generator will not pose a threat or safety hazard due to flood conditions.
f. Location. No portion of a wind energy system, including the tower, shall be located within any required front, side or rear yard
otherwise specified in the Special Exception standards. The tower and all its appurtenances shall be located behind (i.e., not in front of)
the main building. No portion of a system may protrude over a property line without acquisition of an easement for the encroachment
from the adjacent property owner(s). No portion of a system may protrude over an easement without proper written release from the
utility provider or entity that owns or controls such easement.
g. Accessory Use. A wind energy system may exist only as an accessory use, and it may not be constructed/installed until a primary
structure exists on a property. A wind energy system may only supply power to structures on the lot/parcel where the system is located[.]
This provision is not intended to prevent “net metering” or “aggregate billing” whereby a property owner feeds energy back into the grid
and receives a credit or compensation for said production.
h. Height. For property sizes less than or equal to five (5.0) acres in area, the tower height shall be a maximum of sixty-five (65.0) feet.
For property sizes greater than five (5.0) acres in area, the tower height shall not exceed one hundred (100.0) feet. Blade clearance shall
be a minimum of twenty (20.0) feet above the ground.
i. Wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations close to airports, the City's Airport Zoning regulations in Section 2.4.5.1 [2.3.5.1], and must also
comply with applicable ASHTO engineering standards.
j. Controls and Brakes.
(1) All wind energy conversion systems shall be designed with an automatic over speed control to render the system
inoperable when winds are blowing in excess of the speeds for which the machine is designed.
(2) All wind energy conversions systems shall have a manually operable or electrically dynamic method to render the
system inoperable in the event of a structural or mechanical failure of any part of the system including the automatic over
speed control.
k. Safety and Security Measures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/648
(1) A clearly visible warning sign that states “Caution, High Voltage” must be placed at the base of all pad-mounted
transformers and substations.
(2) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(3) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a
minimum height of 12 feet from the ground.
(4) All towers shall be of a monopole design without lattice work or guy wires[.]
(5) All access doors to wind energy systems and their appurtenances (e.g., cabinets, junction boxes, etc.) shall be locked or
fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
(6) All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to
the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground.
l. Noise and Vibration. Except during short term events such as severe storms, power outages and severe wind events, wind energy
conversion systems shall be required to comply with Performance Standards and requirements contained within the City's Land
Development Code, Chapter 4, Division 9.
m. Visual Appearance.
(1) A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(2) The wind tower and generator shall remain painted or finished in the neutral white, light grey or silver non-reflective
color applied by the manufacturer. Refurbished blades and parts must meet the manufacturer's specifications as applicable.
(3) All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on
a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated with a wind energy system, shall be prohibited. Such signs as
described above shall be no larger than four (4.0) square feet in size, and shall be located near the base of the tower.
(4) No flags, pennants, banners or similar materials may be displayed on or attached to any portion of a wind energy system,
including its tower.
n. Nuisance Prevention.
(1) Shadow Flicker and Blade Glint. Wind energy systems shall be sited, to the greatest extent practical, to minimize the
impact of shadow flicker or blade glint upon any inhabited structures (except for the owner's) or public roadways. Systems
found to be a nuisance or a traffic hazard shall be shut down until the flicker or glint problem is remedied.
(2) Signal Interference. Wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
rules, and shall not cause static noise interference with other individuals' television reception or with private or public
telecommunications (e.g., public safety communications, 911 dispatch, etc.).
o. Roof-Mounted System. No wind energy system shall be placed or constructed on the roof of any existing structure unless such
structure is/was designed and constructed to structurally accommodate and support a roof-mounted wind energy system. Certification by
a structural engineer shall be required for any roof-mounted system. No roof-mounted WEC shall exceed a maximum tower height of
sixty-five (65.0) feet, as measured from the lowest ground level elevation point of the structure or when applicable, 25' above the building
roofline when the building exceeds 40' in height.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 2.4.7.4 Building Permit Required
a. A building permit shall be required for the installation of a wind energy system:
(1) The owner shall submit an application to the Building Official. The application shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, a line drawing of the electrical components, and two copies of the site plan for the
wind energy system, and any fee the City requires for an accessory use or building.
(2) No permit for a wind energy system shall be issued until evidence of written approval has been given to the City that the
utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator, and the
utility company has expressed written approval for the system. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(3) Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine
structure, including the tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the City's
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/648
Building Code, and certified by a licensed professional engineer, shall also be submitted. This analysis is frequently supplied
by the manufacturer.
(4) Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical
components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the City's Electrical
Code. This information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer.
(5) A building permit issued for a wind energy system shall expire if the system is not installed, functioning and passed City
inspection within six (6) months (i.e., 180 calendar days) following the date the permit is issued.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 2.4.7.5 Maintenance and Abandonment
a. Required Maintenance. The owner and operator of a wind energy unit must maintain the unit to manufacturer's standards at all times
and ensure the unit complies with City's performance measures for noise, structural integrity and other performance standards. All
required periodic maintenance must be performed as recommended by the manufacturer.
b. Abandonment.
(1) A wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous 6-month (i.e., 180 calendar days) period will be deemed to
be abandoned. Nonfunction or lack of operation may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility or other site related
information. The owner/operator and successors shall make available to the administrative officer all reports to and from the
purchaser of energy from the wind energy conversion system if requested. The Building Official (or designee) shall issue a
written notice to the owner(s) of a wind energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The owner(s) shall have the
right to respond to the notice within 30 calendar days from the date it was mailed to the owner. The Building Official (or
designee) shall cease abandonment proceedings if within 30 days the owner provides sufficient information in writing
demonstrating the wind energy system has not been abandoned, that it is operational, and that it is in compliance with the
City's regulations for WECs.
(2) If the wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the owner of the wind energy system shall remove the wind
generator and tower structure (including all its appurtenances) from the property at the owner's sole expense within 120
calendar days after the notice of abandonment was been sent to the owner. If the owner fails to completely remove the wind
generator, tower and any associated appurtenances, the Building Official (or designee) may pursue a legal action to have the
wind generator and tower structure removed at the owner's expense. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system shall
be a violation of this ordinance with each day being considered a separate offence.
(3) Right of Entrance: By the acceptance of a special exception or building permit the owner/operator grants permission to
the City of Abilene to enter the property to remove the wind energy conversion system pursuant to the terms of the special
exception and to assure compliance with the other conditions set forth in the permit.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Section 2.4.7.6 Subdivision
a. Future subdivision of any property upon which a wind energy system is located shall only be allowed if the WEC is a legally
conforming use/structure, and if all setback, height and other requirements for WECs (as such exist at the time of such future subdivision)
remain in compliance.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 8-2012, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-12-12)
Article 5 - Supplemental Use Standards
Division 1 - Area, Building and Height Regulations
Section 2.5.1.1 Area and Building Regulations
(a) General. Every building erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or shall have access to (frontage on) an
approved private street. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection,
and required off-street parking.
(b) Minimum Lot Size. Except as otherwise provided within this LDC, minimum lot area and dimensional standards are specified in
Table 2-2 and Table 2-4 of this Chapter 2.
(1) Any lot having less area, width or depth than required herein this Ordinance, and which was an official lot of record
prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, may be used for activities in any district permitting such use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/648
(2) Minimum lot frontage of any keyed lot or other irregularly shaped lot shall be as prescribed within Chapter 3 of this
LDC.
(c) Measuring Setbacks/Building Lines. All setback/building line measurements shall be made in accordance with Figure 2-2.
Figure 2-2: Measuring Setbacks/Building Lines
(d) Building Setbacks.
(1) All setbacks established on a recorded plat shall be enforced, unless such setbacks exceed the required setbacks in this
Code.
(2) Setbacks established on a recorded plat shall only be changed through replat proceedings.
(3) In areas with nonconforming building setbacks, the minimum building setback shall be the average for the entire block
as determined by measuring the setbacks of the main buildings on one side of the street.
(4) Where a property is adjacent to an undevelopable property, such as a railroad right-of-way, park, golf course, drainage
facility, major utility easement, or similar uses, the Planning Director may authorize a reduction in the required side or rear
setback adjacent to such use. However, in no case shall the setback be reduced more than 50% (e.g., a 30' setback may be
reduced to 15')
(e) Configuration of Lots. Figure 2-3 illustrates the various types of lots that are discussed within this LDC.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/648
(1) Flag lots (i.e., lots with minimal, or panhandle type, frontage) shall not be permitted in residential districts unless
otherwise approved by the BOA. Flag lots in nonresidential and mixed use zoning districts shall be permitted upon approval
by the Planning & Zoning Commission, however, such lots shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30').
(2) Double-frontage lots in residential zoning districts shall only be permitted if access is limited to one street frontage.
(3) Lots shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet (100') when located along an arterial street.
Figure 2-3: Types of Lots
(f) Front Yards.
(1) Double-Frontage Lots: Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front
yard shall be provided on both streets. See Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-4: Double-Frontage Lots
(2) Corner Lots:
a. On all corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless
approved specifically otherwise on a plat. (Also see (f)(1).)
b. The side and/or rear yards in the case of single-family and duplex uses shall be identified, and the front of the
structure shall not face the side or rear yard (Figure 2-5).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/648
Figure 2-5: Identification of Side and Rear Yards
(3) Measuring Front Yards and Encroachments: (See Figure 2-6.)
a. The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, to the nearest supporting
member of a covered porch or terrace, or to any attached accessory building.
b. Subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a distance greater than thirty inches
(30").
Figure 2-6: Measuring Front Yard Setbacks and Encroachments
(4) Curved Front Building Line: Minimum lot widths for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius of a street
(e.g., cul-de-sac or “eyebrow” portion of a street) shall be measured as the linear distance of the curved front building line (see
Figure 2-7), and shall be shown on the Final Plat. Lot frontage shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the lot width,
except on cul-de-sac lots. Lot widths for all lots shall be as set forth in the respective zoning district for each lot.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/648
Figure 2-7: Measuring Lot Width of a Curved Lot
(g) Yards in Relation to Future Rights-of-Way. Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of
a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, the front, side, and/or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line.
(h) Side & Rear Yards.
(1) On a corner lot used for one- or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots
platted after the effective date of this Code, except where one street exposure is designated as a side yard for both adjacent lots
or where the two lots are separated by an alley, street right-of-way, creek/floodplain area, or other similar phenomenon. In
such case, the building line may be designated as a side yard of fifteen feet (15') or more (as determined by the applicable
zoning district standards) on the final plat. On lots which were official lots of record prior to the effective date of this Code,
the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard for the respective district.
(2) Measuring Side/Rear Yards and Encroachments:
a. Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for the following:
1. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, and
2. The ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features. Such
projections shall not exceed twelve inches (12") into the required side yard, however roof eaves may project up to
thirty-six inches (36") into the required side yard. No projections shall be permitted closer than twelve inches (12")
to a common property line.
b. Air-conditioning compressors and similar accessory equipment are permitted in the side or rear yard.
(i) Encroachments Permitted in Any Yard.
(1) Bay windows, balconies, covered porches and chimneys occupying, in the aggregate, less than one-third (1/3) of the
length of the building wall on which they are located, may project a distance not exceeding three feet (3') from the required
building line.
(2) Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding four and one-half feet (4-1/2') from the required building line.
(3) Cornices, canopies, eaves, and other such architectural features without posts or columns may project a distance not
exceeding three feet (3').
(j) Sight Visibility.
(1) Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or
landscaping thirty inches (30") or higher above the street centerline obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching
any street, alley, or driveway intersection as follows:
a. At street intersections within nonresidential and mixed use zoning districts, clear vision must be maintained for a
minimum of twenty-five feet (25') across any lot, measured from the corner of the property line in both directions.
b. At street intersections within residential zoning districts, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') across any lot, measured from the corner of the property line in both directions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/648
c. At an intersection with an alley, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of five feet (5').
d. Shrubs and hedges that are typically less than thirty inches (30") in height at maturity, as measured from the
centerline of the street, may be located in the visual clearance areas of all districts.
e. A limited number of single-trunk trees having a clear trunk (branching) height of at least five feet (5') may be
located within sight visibility areas provided that they are spaced and positioned such that they will not produce a
visibility-inhibiting effect when they attain mature size.
Figure 2-8: Sight Visibility in Nonresidential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 2.5.1.2 Height Regulations
(a) Calculation of Height.
(1) For the purposes of calculating the overall height of a structure, slope shall be calculated from the highest point of the
building at natural grade to the lowest point of the building at natural grade, or the natural grade of an adjoining road, along a
line that is, as close as possible, perpendicular to existing contours.
(2) The height shall be measured from the highest parapet or roof ridge to natural grade or finish grade at the lowest point
adjacent to the building exterior, whichever yields the greatest height.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/648
Figure 2-9: Measuring Building Height
(b) Exceptions to Height Regulations. In districts where the height of buildings is restricted, church spires or steeples, flagpoles, radio
or television receiving antennas, amateur radio broadcasting antennas, chimneys, vent stacks, elevator bulkheads, mechanical equipment
rooms, cooling towers, tanks, and ornamental cupolas and domes erected on the top of a building may project beyond the maximum
height allowed, but in no case except church spires, steeples, flagpoles, radio or television receiving antennas or amateur radio
broadcasting antennas, shall such projection exceed twelve feet (12').
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 6 - Nonconforming Uses and Structures
Division 1 - Intent of Provisions
Section 2.6.1.1 Intent and Definition
(a) Continuance. Within the districts established by this Code or amendments thereto, there may exist lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, and characteristics of use which were lawfully in existence and operating before this Code was enacted, amended or otherwise
made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located.
It is the intent of this Code to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as the standards within this article are met.
(b) Expansions/Enlargements. It is further the intent of this Code that nonconforming uses or structures shall not be enlarged, expanded
or extended, and shall not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(c) Incompatibility. Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved.
(d) Construction Underway. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require any change in the overall plans, construction or
designated use of any structure or part thereof where official approval and the required building permits were granted before the
enactment of this LDC or any amendment thereto where the construction thereof, conforming with such plans, shall have been started
prior to the effective date of this LDC or such amendment, and where such construction shall have been completed in a normal manner
within a six (6) month period following the effective date of this LDC with no interruption except for reasons beyond the builders'
control.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Classification of Nonconformities
Section 2.6.2.1 Nonconforming Use Criteria
(a) Criteria. Any use that does not conform to the regulations of this Code on the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto shall
be deemed a nonconforming use provided that:
(1) Such use was in existence under and in compliance with the provisions of the immediately prior Zoning Ordinance; or
(2) Such use was a lawful, nonconforming use under the immediately prior Zoning Ordinance; or
(3) Such use was in existence at the time of annexation into the City, and was a legal use of the land at such time, and has
been in regular and continuous use since such time.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/648
(b) Conformance to a Zoning District. Any other use that does not conform with the regulations of the Zoning District in which it is
located on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto shall be deemed to be in violation of this Code, and the City shall be
entitled to enforce fully the terms of this Code with respect to such use.
(c) Proving a Legal Nonconformity. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide information to the City that his/her
property represents a legal nonconforming use or structure, granting the property owner rights to use and enjoy his/her property as a legal
conformity as outlined within this article.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.2.2 Nonconforming Structure Criteria
(a) Criteria. Any structure that does not conform with the regulations of this Code on the effective date hereof or any amendment
hereto shall be deemed a nonconforming structure provided that:
(1) Such structure was in existence under and in compliance with the provisions of the immediately prior zoning
regulations; or
(2) Such structure was a lawful, nonconforming structure under the immediately prior zoning regulations; or
(3) Such structure was in existence at the time of annexation into the City, and was a legal structure at such time, and has
been in regular and continuous use since such time.
(b) Conformance to a Zoning District. Any other structure that does not conform with the regulations of the Zoning District in which it
is located on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto shall be deemed to be in violation of this Code, and the City shall
be entitled to enforce fully the terms of this Code with respect to such structure.
(c) Proving a Legal Nonconformity. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide information to the City that his/her
property represents a legal nonconforming use or structure, granting the property owner rights to use and enjoy his/her property as a legal
conformity as outlined within this article.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.2.3 Nonconforming Lot Criteria
(a) Criteria. Any platted lot that does not conform with the regulations of this Code on the effective date hereof or any amendment
hereto, except as expressly provided in subsection (c) below, shall be deemed a nonconforming platted lot provided that:
(1) Such platted lot was in existence under and in compliance with the provisions of the immediately prior zoning
regulations; or
(2) Such platted lot was a lawful, nonconforming platted lot under the immediately prior zoning regulations; or
(3) Such platted lot was in existence at the time of annexation into the City, and was a legally platted subdivision of the land
at such time.
(b) Conformance to a Zoning District. Any other platted lot that does not conform with the regulations of the Zoning District in which
it is located on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto, and except as provided in subsection (c) below, shall be deemed
to be in violation of this Code, and the City shall be entitled to enforce fully the terms of this Code with respect to such platted lot.
(c) Conforming Platted Lots. The following types of platted lots shall be deemed in conformance with the provisions of this Code and
nothing in this Code shall be construed to prohibit the use of such lots, notwithstanding the fact that such lots do not meet the standards of
this Code in the district in which it is located:
(1) Any vacant lot that conformed to the City's zoning district regulations at the time that it was platted; or
(2) Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning district regulations in which the lot is located.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.2.4 Application for Change in Nonconforming Status
(a) Application. A property owner may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a change in the status of a nonconforming use or structure
for the following matters:
(1) Expansion of the land area of a nonconforming use;
(2) Expansion of the gross floor area of a nonconforming structure;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/648
(3) Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure that has been destroyed (refer to Section 2.7.3.4 [2.6.3.4]);
(4) Resumption of a nonconforming use previously abandoned;
(5) The enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming structure if such enlargement or expansion does not increase the
structure's nonconformity; or
(6) Encroachment on a zoning setback line.
(b) Effect. If the Board grants the application for a change in nonconforming status, modifications made in the nonconforming use,
structure or lot that are consistent with the approved application shall enjoy the same status and shall be subject to the same limitations as
the original nonconformity under this Code.
(c) Decision. The BOA shall process and decide the petition for a change in nonconforming status as a special exception in accordance
with Section 1.4.4.1.
(d) Criteria for Approval. In deciding the application, the Board shall apply the following criteria:
(1) The proposed change in nonconforming status meets the criteria in Article 7 [Article 6] of Chapter 2;
(2) Granting the application shall not result in greater harm to adjacent and neighboring land uses than the original
nonconformity.
(e) Application for Termination.
(1) A City official may petition the Board of Adjustment for termination in nonconforming status of a nonconforming use,
nonconforming structure or nonconforming lot.
(2) If the Board grants the application for termination of nonconforming status, the nonconforming use, nonconforming
structure or nonconforming lot shall be deemed in violation of this Land Development Code and shall be subject to any
remedy for enforcement, as provided in Article 2, Division 6 of Chapter 1. Thereafter, the property owner may not seek
reinstatement of nonconforming status.
(3) The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for an application seeking termination of nonconforming status.
(4) The application shall include a concise statement of the reasons why the nonconforming status should be terminated,
with specific reference to the rule(s) governing the nonconformity which the petitioner seeks to enforce and a detailed
explanation of how granting the petition enforces the standards governing nonconforming status.
(5) The Board shall process and decide the petition for termination in nonconforming status as a revocation proceeding
under Article 2, Division 6 of Chapter 1.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Regulation of Nonconformities
Section 2.6.3.1 Continuance of Nonconformities
(a) Criteria.
(1) The lawful use of any building, structure, or land in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which the
use was established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the regulations under which the use was created
may be continued.
(2) Abatement of such use or structure within a given period of time may be required by the City, provided, however, the
right to continue such nonconforming use or use of such structure shall be subject to regulations prohibiting nuisances and
shall be terminated when such use or structure constitutes a nuisance.
(3) Such nonconforming use or structure shall be subject to such reasonable regulations as the Board of Adjustment (BOA)
may require to protect adjacent property and shall be subject to the specific nonconforming use or structure regulations herein
contained.
(4) A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be re-occupied by a conforming use. Once such
change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
(5) No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use except as permitted by the Board of Adjustment
(BOA).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.3.2 Expansion of Nonconformities
(a) Criteria. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the structure in which it is located, provided that:
(1) The structure or its premises shall not be enlarged or increased in height, in floor area or in land area to accommodate
extension of the nonconforming use;
(2) No alteration shall be made to the structure occupied by the nonconforming use, except those alterations that are
required by law to preserve the integrity of the structure and alterations that would upgrade the quality, safety or aesthetic
appeal of the structure; and
(3) The number of dwelling units occupying the structure shall not exceed the number of dwelling units existing at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(b) Use Expansion Outside of Structure. A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be extended to occupy land outside the
structure.
(c) Use or Structure Expansion. A nonconforming use or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area
of land than was occupied at the time the use or structure became nonconforming, except:
(1) To provide additional off-street parking or loading areas required by this Code.
(2) Enlargement of a building housing a nonconforming use, for the purpose of storage only, shall not be deemed the
extension of a nonconforming use.
(3) Construction of a detached accessory building for the purpose of storage, on a lot occupied by a nonconforming use,
shall not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.3.3 Repairs and Alterations
(a) Moving a Nonconforming Structure. No nonconforming structure or building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
location on the lot, or to any other location or lot, unless every portion of such structure is in compliance with all the regulations of the
zoning district wherein the structure is to be relocated.
(b) Right to Repair Maintained. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the normal maintenance or repair of any part
of any buildings or structures declared unsafe by the Building Inspection Department of the City of Abilene, unless such repairs or
maintenance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's appraised value, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district.
(Refer to Section 2.7.3.4(c) [2.6.3.4(c)] for replacement cost explanation.)
(1) Structural Alterations Allowed If Changed to Conforming Use: No structural alterations shall be made except those
required by law or ordinance, unless the use within the building is changed to a conforming use, and provided that no
additional dwelling units shall be added where the nonconforming use results from there being more dwelling units on the lot
than is permissible in the district in which the building is located.
(c) Substandard Nonconforming Structure. The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming structure shall terminate and shall
cease to exist whenever the nonconforming structure becomes substandard under any applicable ordinance of the City and the cost of
placing such structure in lawful compliance when the applicable ordinance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of such
structure on the date that the Enforcing Officer determines that such structure is substandard. (Refer to Section 2.7.3.4(c) [2.6.3.4(c)] for
replacement cost explanation.)
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.3.4 Reconstruction Following Damage or Destruction
(a) Structure Totally Destroyed. If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is totally destroyed by
fire or the elements, such structure may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except in conformance with provisions herein. Damages from any
cause exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the value of such structure at the time of damage shall necessitate the discontinuance of use of
such structure and same shall not be restored or reconstructed except in conformity with the current provisions of this Ordinance
applicable to such structure.
(b) Structure Partially Destroyed.
(1) Nonconforming structures damaged by the forces of nature, war or acts of God may be restored to their former condition
if such damages do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of such structure at the time of damage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/648
(2) Such restoration or reconstruction shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the damaging event. If
reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause, then the twelve (12) month
reconstruction period may be extended by the Planning Director.
(c) Replacement Cost. In determining the replacement cost of any nonconforming structure, there shall not be included therein the cost
of land or any factors other than the nonconforming structure itself including foundation.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.3.5 Changing to a Conforming Use
(a) Changing to a Conforming Use.
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use provided that, once such change is made, the use shall not be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
(2) A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to another conforming use, but shall not be
changed to a nonconforming use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 2.6.3.6 Abandonment
(a) Considered Abandoned. A nonconforming use of any building or structure which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be
returned to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when:
(1) It has been replaced with a conforming use; or
(2) Such building or structure is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied or out of use for a continuous period
of six (6) months, or the special equipment and furnishings peculiar to the nonconforming use have been removed from the
premises and have not been replaced within such six (6) month period; or
(3) In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises for any length of time.
(b) Future Use After Abandonment. If a nonconforming use or structure is abandoned, any future use of the premises shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Code, as amended, and with any other applicable City codes or ordinances that are in effect at the
time the use is resumed or the structure is re-occupied.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Chapter 3: Subdivision Regulations
Effective: June 1, 2010
Article 1 - Subdivision Procedures
Division 1 - Provisions Applicable to All Platting Procedures
Section 3.1.1.1 Authority, Purpose and Applicability
(a) Authority. The procedures and standards of this Chapter 3 are authorized under the authority of Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 212 (including Subchapter B) and the City's charter. The provisions of this Article expressly extend to all areas inside the City
limits and the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(b) Purpose.
(1) The provisions of this Chapter are intended to implement standards and requirements provided for herein, and shall be
minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions within the City of Abilene and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, as authorized by State statute.
(2) The subdivision of land, as it affects a community's quality of life, is an activity where regulation is a valid function of
municipal government. Through the application of these regulations, the interests of public and private parties are protected by
the granting of certain rights and privileges. By establishing a fair and rational procedure for developing land, the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/648
requirements in this chapter further the possibility that land will be developed in accordance with existing physical, social,
economic and environmental conditions.
(3) The provisions of this Chapter are intended to implement the following objectives:
a. Promote the development and the utilization of land in a manner that assures an attractive and high-quality
community environment in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning regulations of the City of Abilene;
b. Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and to inform them of the
standards which shall be required;
c. Protect the public interest by imposing standards for the location, design, class and type of streets, walkways
(sidewalks), alleys, utilities and essential public services;
d. Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the City's limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
e. Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the existing community, and coordinate the future
development of adjoining tracts;
f. Ensure the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services for each tract being subdivided;
g. Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings;
h. Provide for the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality;
i. Provide for pedestrian circulation that is appropriate for the various uses of land and buildings;
j. Prevent pollution of the air, streams, bodies of water, and aquifers; assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and endangered or threatened plant and
animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land;
k. Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality, and ensure development that is appropriate with
regard to these natural features;
l. Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision;
m. Ensure that public or private facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve proposed and future
developments and citizens within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
n. Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and prevent
overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
o. Ensure that each subdivision approved by the City is designed in such a way as to minimize stormwater runoff from
the site and to minimize flooding potential downstream from such subdivision.
(c) Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this Chapter 3 apply to any non-exempt (see Section 3.1.1.3) division of land, combination of separate
land parcels, and/or development of land within the corporate boundaries of the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(2) No permit shall be issued for any building or structure on a property until a plat has been approved and filed for record
with the following exceptions:
a. Permits for expansion, repair or remodeling of an existing structure or new accessory building(s) under the
following exceptions:
1. Additions or new accessory building(s) shall not exceed more than thirty (30) percent of the existing floor area
of all structures, nor shall the expansion exceed more than 5,000 square feet, and such addition(s) shall not occur
more than once in any twelve (12) month period;
b. Permits for the construction of agricultural accessory structures and related development activities, or
c. Demolition permits, or permits for removal of a structure from a parcel or tract.
(3) All utility providers shall withhold new or expanded service of any type, including but not limited to utility connection
and street maintenance, until a plat has been approved and filed for record unless meeting qualifications for an exception (see
Section 3.1.1.3).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/648
(4) ETJ Subdivision Provisions. The owner of a tract of land must have a plat of the subdivision approved if the owner
divides the tract into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract including an addition, lots, or streets, alleys, or
other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent to the streets, alleys, or other parts.
a. All tracts under single ownership and described as a single tract greater than ten (10) acres in size shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter unless the subdivision includes any streets, alleys, or other parts of the tract intended
to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, or
other parts.
b. All lands subdivided or resubdivided not otherwise exempted by part (a) above shall be platted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter except as modified below:
1. Lots less than or equal to one (1) acre:
a) All tracts shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60') feet, or thirty (30') feet if irregularly shaped, on a
public road meeting the design and construction standards of the City of Abilene.
b) The residential lot exception regarding double-frontage lots shall apply regardless of intended use of the
land.
2. Lots greater than one (1) acre:
a) All tracts shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet, or 45 feet if irregularly shaped, on a public road or
approved private road meeting the design and construction standards of the City of Abilene.
b) The residential lot exception regarding double-frontage lots shall apply regardless of intended use of the
land to lots less than or equal to three (3) acres.
c) Connection to a sanitary sewer system may be waived if the following conditions are met:
i. Compliance with Section 3.2.5.5 of this ordinance;
ii. Dedication of sewer easements if needed to provide future service.
d) Installation of fire hydrants shall not be required. However, taps shall be provided for future hydrant
installation in compliance with City requirements.
e) An Interim Rural street design, as promulgated by the City Engineer, may be used as an alternative to
full City street standards. However, in the following circumstances the City Engineer may require the
installation of one or more streets in a proposed subdivision be built to full City standards:
i. The subject street(s) is a continuation of an existing street already built to the City of Abilene
standards;
ii. The subject street(s) are intersected by one or more streets already built to the City of Abilene
standards; or,
iii. Any part of the proposed subdivision is within an adopted 3-year Annexation Plan, or is within an
area where formal annexation proceedings have commenced;
iv. Other situations where the City Engineer, with approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
finds reasonable justification.
f) In lieu of meeting the City's water provision standards, a proposed subdivision where all lots front on an
existing public or private street and are served by a public water supply where existing lines are currently in
place may instead provide a separate dry line for future use or may enter into a deferral agreement with the
City to provide upgraded lines in the future.
(d) Subdivision Rules. The provisions of this Chapter 3, the standards governing water and wastewater facilities applicable to plats, and
the technical standards contained in the City of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction, as adopted by the City Council and as
may be amended from time to time, constitute the subdivision rules of the City of Abilene, which apply to applications for plat approval
inside City limits and within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 15-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-13-14)
Section 3.1.1.2 Types of Plats Required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/648
(a) Plats. A Final Plat or a Minor Plat shall be approved prior to any non-exempt land division.
(b) Development Plats. A Development Plat shall be approved prior to development of any tract or parcel for which no Final Plat is
required prior to development of any lot in a subdivision for which dedication of any right-of-way for construction or maintenance of
public improvements is required by this Land Development Code. A Development Plat shall be required prior to approval of a
manufactured home rental community, or to proposed nonresidential development within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. Refer to
Article 1, Division 5 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.1.3 Exemptions
(a) Exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of this article that apply to plats:
(1) Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations;
(2) A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
(3) A division of land for which a Development Plat exemption is claimed (refer to Article 1, Division 5 of this chapter);
(4) Creation of a remainder tract, which must be a tract of land that is of sufficient size to be developed in the future, when
shown on a preliminary plat (also refer to Section 3.1.1.7);
(5) Farmland exception. Permits may be issued by the Building Official for construction or improvements on property other
than lots in a duly recorded subdivision, if said property qualifies for farmland exception as set forth herein. The City and all
utility providers may furnish limited services to property other than a lot in a duly recorded subdivision if said property
qualifies for farmland exception as set forth herein. Property qualifying for farmland exception shall meet all the following
minimum specifications:
a. Have twenty (20) acres or more in common ownership;
b. Be used for no primary purpose other than farming or ranching;
c. Have no more than one (1) single-family residence thereon; and
(6) A division of land which is owned prior to any transfer of ownership by the City of Abilene and is located at Lake Fort
Phantom, and which is leased to a third-party, is less than 1/2 acre, and is not serviced by the City's wastewater utility.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A(Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 22-2018, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-10-18)
Section 3.1.1.4 Time for Decision on Plats
(a) Time Period for Action. All plat applications shall be acted upon within thirty (30) days from the official filing date unless a waiver
is submitted in accordance with Subsection (b) below.
(b) Waiver of Right to 30-day Action.
(1) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official and the initial decision-maker for a Waiver
of Right to 30-Day Action.
(2) Request. An applicant may request in writing a Waiver of Right to 30-day Action in relation to the decision time for
plats of thirty (30) days mandated by State law.
(3) Received. Waiver requests must be received by the Planning Director prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting at which action would have to be taken (based on the 30-day requirement in State law) on the plat application. Waiver
requests that are not received by that day shall not be considered properly submitted, and action shall be taken on the plat
application at such meeting as scheduled.
(4) Action. The Planning Director shall take action on the Waiver of Right to 30-day Action request within the thirty-day
(30-day) period for acting on the plat.
(5) Requirements Maintained. The granting of a Waiver of Right to 30-day Action request shall not be deemed in any way a
waiver to any requirement within this LDC. A waiver from requirements herein is a separate and distinct process.
(c) Final Plat Application for Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. Where the land to be platted lies within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City in a county with which the City has no interlocal agreement under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, no Final Plat
application shall be accepted as complete for filing by the responsible official unless the application is accompanied by verification that a
copy of the Final Plat has been delivered to the applicable County in which the land subject to the application is located. If the City has
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/648
not received a decision from the applicable county on matters pertaining to the Final Plat application which are to be determined by the
applicable county, under the interlocal agreement or common City procedures, the application for Final Plat approval shall be accepted
for filing by the City, but shall be denied, unless a Waiver of Right to 30-day Action is approved in accordance with subsection (b) above.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.1.5 Applications and Procedures
(a) Complete Application. Where a conflict exists between the procedures listed in this section and any other section of the LDC, the
procedures of this section shall control.
(1) An application must be complete in order to be accepted for review by the City of Abilene. All applications shall be
made on forms available from the City. To be complete, it must comply with all the procedures of this section and any other
sections pertaining specifically to each application. Refer to Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 1 of this LDC for complete
application procedures and requirements.
(2) Required documentation for the initial application to be considered complete for each review process is listed on an
application form available in the City Planning Department. Electronic copies of all types of plats are required for a complete
application.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.1.6 Stages of Plat Approval
(a) Plats. A plat may be approved in two stages:
(1) Preliminary Plat (refer to Article 1, Division 3); and
(2) Final Plat (refer to Article 1, Division 4).
(b) Combined Applications. An applicant may submit applications for approval of a Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat simultaneously.
(c) Planning Director and Development Review Committee. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a plat, and the
Development Review Committee shall be the initial reviewing body for a plat.
(1) The Planning Director, and/or other City staff at the direction of the Planning Director, shall review all plat applications
for completeness (refer to Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 1, Section 1.2.1.2) based on a checklist supplied by the Planning and
Development Services Department.
(2) The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall review all plat applications that are deemed complete for
conformance with this LDC and any other applicable City regulations.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.1.7 Remainder Tracts
(a) Definition. A remainder tract is that portion of a larger parcel that is not included within the boundaries of a Final Plat. Remainder
tracts shall not be considered platted lots or tracts of the subdivision. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of
development on a remainder tract. Remainder tracts must be of a size that is able to be developed (i.e., useable) in the future.
(b) Information. Information accompanying a plat application for remainder tracts shall be deemed to be an aid to the Planning and
Zoning Commission in taking action on the plat application and may be used to determine whether development of the land subject to the
plat will be adequately served by public facilities and services and is otherwise in compliance with this Land Development Code, taking
into account the development of the property as a whole. Information concerning remainder tracts, including topography, drainage, and
existing and planned public improvements, may be considered in formulating conditions to approve the plat application. Based upon such
information, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that additional or less land be included in the plat in order to satisfy the
standards applicable to the plat application.
(c) All remainder tracts shall be included in a preliminary plat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 2 - Reserved
Division 3 - Preliminary Plats
Section 3.1.3.1 Purpose, Exceptions and Effect
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/648
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Preliminary Plat shall be to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public
facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this
Land Development Code.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) A Preliminary Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 6 [Division 5]).
(2) A Final Plat in accordance with Division 4 of this Article, along with Construction Plans in accordance with Division 8
of this Article, may be submitted in lieu of a Preliminary Plat.
(c) Effect. Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall authorize the subdivider to submit Construction Plans for approval by the City Engineer
under Division 8 of Article 1 of this Chapter and, upon approval of such plans, to construct public improvements to serve the subdivision
in accordance therewith. Approval of a Preliminary Plat also shall authorize the subdivider to seek approval of a Final Plat for the land
subject to the Preliminary Plat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.3.2 Application and Procedures
(a) Responsible Official and Initial Review. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a Preliminary Plat, and the
Development Review Committee shall be the initial reviewing body for a Preliminary Plat.
(b) Pre-Application Conference. Refer to Section 1.2.1.5 of Chapter 1.
(c) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Planning Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(d) Accompanying Applications.
(1) An application for a Preliminary Plat may be accompanied by an application for rezoning approval, including a request
for a Planned Development District, or a Master Plat application. The rezoning application and Master Plat application shall
be decided first.
(2) An application for a Preliminary Plat may be accompanied by Construction Plans. However, approval of each shall be
separate and in accordance with this Division 3 for Preliminary Plat and with Division 8 for Construction Plans.
(e) Placement on the Agenda. If the Planning Director or his designee determines that the application should be acted upon, the
Planning Director shall place it on the agenda of the next meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(f) Development Review Committee (DRC). The DRC shall, at each meeting, review each Preliminary Plat application to be placed on
the agenda of the forthcoming meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Committee shall make comments on either:
(1) Approval of the Preliminary Plat;
(2) Denial of the Preliminary Plat; or
(3) Approval of the Preliminary Plat with conditions.
(g) Resubmittal Following DRC Review.
(1) The applicant shall retain in his/her possession the original Preliminary Plat that was submitted for review by the DRC.
(2) At least four (4) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission during which the Preliminary Plat is
scheduled for action, the applicant shall provide to the Planning Director a reproducible copy of the Preliminary Plat. The
Planning Director shall then review the Preliminary Plat for compliance with DRC recommendations.
(h) DRC Review Timing. In any case in which a Preliminary Plat is submitted and is deemed complete, but is not reviewed by DRC
because it must be placed on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda due to the State law mandated 30-day timeframe for action on
plats and no Waiver of Right for 30-Day Action is submitted by the applicant, the Preliminary Plat shall be subject to denial by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.3.3 Action
(a) Review and Determination. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all Preliminary Plat applications, findings of the
DRC, findings of the Planning Director regarding compliance with DRC recommendations, and any other information available. From all
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/648
such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat as shown on the application meets the standards of this
LDC.
(b) Approval or Denial. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
Preliminary Plat application. The action of the Commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the Preliminary Plat, referenced and
attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant and one (1) copy shall be retained in the City's
files. A notation of the action taken on each Preliminary Plat application, including any conditions for approval attached thereto, and the
reasons for the action shall be entered in the minutes of the Commission.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.3.4 Criteria for Approval
(a) The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a Preliminary Plat shall be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied:
(1) The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, and any approved development agreement if
applicable;
(2) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, and drainage conform to the City's adopted
master plans for those facilities, including without limitation water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage,
and any other municipal plans;
(3) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage, easements, and rights-of-way are
adequate to serve the subdivision and meet applicable standards of this Chapter of the LDC;
(4) The plat meets all applicable county standards, when the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and in the county;
(5) The plat has been duly reviewed by applicable City staff, including the Planning Director and the Development Review
Committee;
(6) The plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Design, Details, and
Construction Standards; and
(7) The plat is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, except where application of the Plan conflicts with State
law (e.g., land use).
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.1.3.5 Effect of Approval of a Preliminary Plat
(a) Right to Proceed. The approval of a Preliminary Plat application shall allow the applicant to proceed with the development and
platting process by submitting Construction Plans and a Final Plat.
(b) Installation of Subdivision Improvements.
(1) Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed an approval of the layout
illustrated on the Preliminary Plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer, and other improvements that are
planned or required within the proposed subdivision.
(2) Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall not constitute approval of the proposed subdivision, nor shall approval of the
Preliminary Plat be construed to mean acceptance by the public of the dedication of any roads, utilities, drainageways, or other
such land and improvements.
(3) Construction of all subdivision improvements shall be based upon approved Construction Plans, and shall occur either:
a. Prior to Final Plat approval and recordation, or
b. Following Final Plat approval and recordation, upon approval of a Subdivision Improvement Agreement, or upon
submittal of security in lieu of completing construction, in accordance with Division 8 of this Article.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.3.6 Expiration and Extension
(a) The approval of a Preliminary Plat application shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years from the date a complete
application was officially submitted to the City, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for Construction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/648
Plans and a Final Plat for the land subject to the Preliminary Plat. If Construction Plans and a Final Plat application have not been
approved within the two (2) year period, the Preliminary Plat application may be extended for a period of two (2) years in accordance
with Article 2, Division 5 of Chapter 1, but such extension may be predicated upon the applicant waiving any vested rights. If the
Preliminary Plat is not extended, the plat shall expire and shall be null and void. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.3.7 Revisions Following Approval of Preliminary Plat
(a) Minor Changes. Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a Preliminary Plat may be incorporated in an application
for approval of a Final Plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plat. Minor changes shall
include adjustment in street or alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and adjustment of lot lines that do not result in creation of
additional lots, provided that such changes are consistent with any approved prior applications.
(b) Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed
major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plat before approval of a Final
Plat. Approval of major revisions to an approved Preliminary Plat shall occur prior to the date any approved Master Plat would have
expired for the same land.
(c) Determination. The Planning Director shall make a determination of whether changes are deemed to be minor or shall require new
submittal of a Preliminary Plat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Final Plat
Section 3.1.4.1 Purpose, Applicability, Exceptions and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Final Plat is to assure that the subdivision of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of
this Land Development Code pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or
development have been installed and accepted by the City or that provision for such installation has been made, that all other
requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the plat to be recorded, and to assure that the subdivision meets
all other standards of this Land Development Code to enable initiation of site preparation activities for any lot or tract subject to the Final
Plat.
(b) Applicability. Construction of public improvements may occur prior to Final Plat approval if requirements in Division 8 of this
Chapter are met.
(c) Effect. Approval of a Final Plat shall authorize the subdivider to install any improvements in public rights-of-way with approved
Construction Plans and to seek approval of a Site Preparation Permit (refer to Chapter 4, Division 2, Section 4.1.2.2) for any lot in the
subdivision. Approval also authorizes the Planning Director to record the Final Plat; however, recordation shall occur only upon
completion of public improvements or posting of security as required in Section 3.1.8.4.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.1.4.2 Application and Procedures
(a) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a Final Plat, and the Development Review
Committee shall be the initial reviewing body for a Final Plat.
(b) Pre-Application Conference. Refer to Section 1.2.1.5 of Chapter 1.
(c) Prior Approved Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, incorporating all modifications and conditions imposed or required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(d) Consent of Lienholders. The applicant shall furnish with the application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title
insurance company authorized to do business in Texas policy [sic], or a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas,
identifying all persons having an interest in the property subject to the plat, including lienholders. The Final Plat shall be signed (on the
face of the plat in plain view) by each lienholder, effectively denoting that they are consenting to the platting of the property and to the
dedications and covenants that may be contained in the plat. Such lienholder consent shall be subject to review and approval by the City
Attorney.
(e) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Planning Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(f) Placement on the Agenda. If the Planning Director or his designee determines that the application should be acted upon, the
Planning Director shall place it on the agenda of the next meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/648
(g) Development Review Committee (DRC).
(1) The DRC shall, at each meeting, review each Final Plat application to be placed on the agenda of the forthcoming
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Committee shall recommend either:
a. Approval of the Final Plat;
b. Denial of the Final Plat; or
c. Approval of the Final Plat subject to corrections or alterations required prior to consideration by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(2) In case of a recommendation of approval, the DRC must make only a finding that the Final Plat meets all standards set
forth in this LDC, although the DRC may make such additional findings as it deems appropriate. In case of a recommendation
for denial or approval with conditions, the DRC shall make specific findings of the reasons for denial or the imposition of
conditions and shall cite the standards in this LDC which would be violated if the Final Plat were approved unconditionally.
(h) Resubmittal Following DRC Review.
(1) The applicant shall retain in his/her possession the original Final Plat that was submitted for review by the DRC.
(2) At least four (4) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission during which the Final Plat is
scheduled for review, the applicant shall provide to the Director of Planning a mylar of the Final Plat, with revisions made
based on DRC comments and recommendations. The Planning Director shall then review the Final Plat for compliance with
DRC recommendations.
(i) DRC Review Timing. In any case in which a Final Plat is submitted and is deemed complete, but is not reviewed by DRC because it
must be placed on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda due to the State law mandated 30-day timeframe for action on plats and
no Waiver of Right for 30-Day Action is submitted by the applicant, the Final Plat shall be subject to denial by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.4.3 Decision
(a) Review and Determination. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all Final Plat applications, findings of the DRC,
findings of the Planning Director regarding compliance with DRC recommendations, and any other information available. From all such
information, the Commission shall determine whether the Final Plat as shown on the application meets the standards of this LDC.
(b) Approval or Denial. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
Final Plat application. The action of the Commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the Final Plat, referenced and attached to any
conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant and one (1) copy shall be retained in the City's files. Upon approval
of the Final Plat, the applicant shall submit Final Plat copies to the Planning Director so that required signatures can be obtained and
recording completed. If any conditions are attached to the Commission's approval, both Final Plat copies shall be so corrected prior to
signature by any City official. The reasons for any action taken by the Commission, whether a Final Plat is approved, denied, or approved
with conditions, shall be entered in the minutes of the Commission.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.4.4 Criteria for Approval
(a) The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a Final Plat shall be approved, approved with
conditions or denied:
(1) Prior Approved Preliminary Plat:
a. The Final Plat conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat except for minor changes authorized under Divisions 3 or
4 of this Article and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved Preliminary Plat;
b. All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the Preliminary Plat, as applicable, have been satisfied;
c. Where public improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved Construction Plans and
have been approved for acceptance by the City Engineer;
d. Where the City Engineer has authorized public improvements to be deferred, the Subdivision Improvement
Agreement or surety have been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformity with Division 8 of this
Article;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/648
e. The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in
this Chapter;
f. The Final Plat meets any applicable county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the City
and the county under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole
or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and in the county;
g. The plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the current or applicable City of
Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction; and,
h. The plat conforms to the subdivision application checklist.
(2) No Prior Approved Preliminary Plat:
a. The Final Plat conforms to all criteria for approval of a Preliminary Plat;
b. The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Chapter 3;
c. The Subdivision Improvement Agreement or surety for installation of public improvements have been prepared and
executed by the property owner in conformity with Division 8 of this Article 1;
d. The final layout of the subdivision or developments meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained
in Article 2 of this Land Development Code [Article 2 of this Chapter 3];
e. The Final Plat meets any applicable county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the City
and the county under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole
or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and in the county; and
f. The Final Plat conforms to the application checklist.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.4.5 Revisions to Final Plat
(a) Following Approval. An applicant may apply for modification of an approved Final Plat to reflect changes arising from installation
of public improvements thereafter, provided that the approved Final Plat has not been recorded and that approval of the modified Final
Plat occurs prior to expiration of approval of the initial Final Plat application. If the approved Final Plat has been recorded, revisions may
only be approved under Division 7, Revisions to Recorded Plats (replatting), of this Article.
(b) After Denial or Conditional Approval. Following conditional approval or denial of a Final Plat application, the applicant may
submit a revised Final Plat application, together with any revised Construction Plans, for approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, provided that the revised application is approved prior to the original expiration date of any approved Preliminary Plat for
the same land.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.4.6 Expiration and Extension
(a) The approval of a Final Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years from the date a complete application was officially
filed, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and record the plat. If the Final Plat has not been
recorded within the two-year (2-year) period, the Final Plat approval, unless extended in accordance with Article 2, Division 5 of Chapter
1, shall expire and the applicable plat shall be deemed null and void. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.4.7 Plat Recordation
(a) Procedure.
(1) Signatures. After approval of the Final Plat, the Planning Director shall procure the signature of the chairperson of the
Planning and Zoning Commission on the plat, as well as the signature of the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning
Commission who shall attest to the signature of the chairperson.
(2) Recording Upon Performance. The Planning Director shall cause the Final Plat to be recorded with the appropriate
County Clerk upon the subdivider's or developer's performance of one of the following:
a. Completion of the construction of required improvements prior to recordation; or
b. Filing of security in lieu of completing construction in accordance with Division 8 of this Article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/648
c. Regardless of which option, (1) or (2) [a. or b.] above, is chosen, Construction Plans must be approved in
accordance with Section 3.1.8.1 prior to approval of the Final Plat and prior to plat recordation.
(b) Submittal of Record Plat Where Improvements Installed. Where public improvements have been installed prior to recording of the
plat, the property owner shall submit a maintenance bond in accordance with Division 8 of this Article from each contractor, one set of
“as built” plans or record drawings, and a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the City Engineer), together with a letter
stating the contractors' compliance with Division 8 of this Article. The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved Final Plat,
revised to reflect modifications as might be needed as shown on the “as built” plans or record drawings, in the format and number as may
be required by the Director.
(c) Submittal of Record Plat Where Improvements Have Not Been Installed. Where public improvements have yet to be completed in
connection with an approved Final Plat, the property owner shall submit the approved Final Plat, revised to reflect any changes required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(d) Update of Lienholder Consents. In conjunction with the application for a record plat, the applicant shall furnish to the City an
updated title policy commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, or a title opinion letter from an
attorney licensed to practice in Texas, identifying all persons having an interest in the property subject to the plat, including lienholders. If
there has been any change in the lienholders since the time of the lienholder consent agreement provided under Section 3.1.5.2 [3.1.4.2],
the applicant shall submit a new agreement executed by each lienholder consenting to the platting of the property and the dedications and
covenants contained in the plat. The title commitment or title opinion letter and consent agreement shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Attorney.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 5 - Minor Plats
Section 3.1.5.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Minor Plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances outlined in State law.
(b) Applicability. An application for approval of a Minor Plat may be filed only in accordance with State law, when all of the following
circumstances apply:
(1) The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots;
(2) All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a street or
alley is not required to meet the requirements of this Land Development Code; and
(3) The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision, however,
right-of-way widening and easements shall be permitted as part of a Minor Plat.
(c) Effect. Approval of a Minor Plat authorizes the applicant to submit an application for a Site Preparation Permit for any lot in the
subdivision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.2 Application and Procedures
(a) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a Minor Plat.
(b) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Planning Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(c) Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the official filing of a Minor Plat application, the applicant(s) may request a pre-application
conference with the Planning Director and any other pertinent City official(s). Such conference is optional, and before it is convened a
vested rights waiver shall be submitted in accordance with Section 1.2.1.5 of Chapter 1.
(d) Accompanying Applications. An application for approval of a Minor Plat may be accompanied by an application for approval of a
Site Preparation Permit for the land subject to the plat, provided that the Minor Plat shall be decided prior to decision on any Site
Preparation Permit.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.3 Action
(a) Final Approval. The Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or refer to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
consideration the Minor Plat application. Each Minor Plat application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission by the Director of Planning. Planning Director [sic] unless the owner of the property
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/648
provides a Waiver of Right to 30-day Action. Review, approval, and recording of Minor Plats shall be in accordance with procedures set
forth for Final Plats in Division 4 of this Article.
(b) Deemed Approved. If the minor plat is approved by the Director of Planning then no approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission is needed. If the Planning Director fails to act on a Minor Plat application within thirty (30) days, the Minor Plat application
shall be deemed approved.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.4 Criteria for Approval
(a) The Director, or the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeal, shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny
the Minor Plat application based upon the following criteria:
(1) The Minor Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this Land
Development Code that apply to the plat, and any approved development agreement;
(2) All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required City utilities and services;
(3) The ownership, maintenance, and allowed uses of all designated easements have been stated on the Minor Plat; and
(4) The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.5 Expiration
(a) The approval of a Minor Plat application shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years from the date that a complete
application was officially filed with the City. If construction plans or a Site Development Permit (Chapter 4, Division 2, Section 4.1.2.2)
has not been submitted within the two (2) year period, the Minor Plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.6 Recordation
(a) The property owner shall submit the approved Minor Plat, following any required revisions, to the Planning Director, who shall
cause the Minor Plat to be recorded in the property records of the appropriate county. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Conveyance Plats
Section 3.1.6.1 Purpose, Applicability and Effect
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Conveyance Plat is to subdivide land and to provide for recordation of same, for the purpose of
conveying (i.e., selling) the property without developing it. A Conveyance Plat may be used to convey the property or interests therein;
however, a Conveyance Plat does not constitute approval for any type of development on the property. A Conveyance Plat is an interim
step in the subdivision and development of land.
(b) Applicability. A Conveyance Plat may be used in lieu of a Final Plat to record the subdivision of property in the following
instances:
(1) To record the remainder of a tract that is larger than five (5) acres, and that is created by the final platting of a portion of
the property, provided that the remainder is not intended for immediate development.
(2) To record the subdivision of property into parcels, five (5) acres or smaller in size, that are not intended for immediate
development, provided all required public improvements exist to the City's current standards prior to approval and minimum
frontage requirements are met. All public rights-of-way must be dedicated and all abutting street and utilities must be installed
and accepted by the City. Installation of on-site improvements may be delayed if development of other tracts is not affected.
(c) Effect of Approval. The approval of a Conveyance Plat authorizes conveyance of the lot(s) created thereon, but does not authorize
any type of development on the property. The applicant and future owner(s) of the property remain obligated to comply with all
provisions in this Ordinance upon future development of the property including, but not limited to, all requirements for platting, required
public improvements, utility extensions, street improvements or assessments, right-of-way and easement dedications, and all other
requirements in this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.6.2 Application and Procedures
(a) Responsible Official. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for a Conveyance Plat.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/648
(b) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Planning Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.6.3 Action
(a) Final Approval. The Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or refer to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
consideration the Conveyance Plat application. Each Conveyance Plat application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission by the Director of Planning unless the owner of the property provides a
Waiver of Right to 30-day Action. Review, approval, and recording of Conveyance Plats shall be in accordance with procedures set forth
for Final Plats in Division 4 of this Article.
(b) Deemed Approved. If the Conveyance Plat is approved by the Director of Planning then no approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission is needed. If the Planning Director fails to act on a Conveyance Plat application within thirty (30) days, the Conveyance Plat
application shall be deemed approved.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.6.4 Criteria for Approval
(a) Review and Consideration. Unless otherwise specified within this Section 3.1.6 for specific requirements for a Conveyance Plat, a
Conveyance Plat shall be processed and approved using the same timing and procedures, including recordation, as specified for a Final
Plat; refer to Section 3.1.4. Procedures to appeal a decision on a Conveyance Plat shall also be processed and considered the same as a
Final Plat (Section 3.1.4).
(b) Subsequent Filing of a Final Plat. No Final Plat processed and approved in association with a Conveyance Plat shall be filed
without the concurrent or prior filing of the associated approved Conveyance Plat for the remainder of the subject property.
(c) Conveyance Plat Requirements.
(1) No building or development permits shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided for land that has only
received approval as a Conveyance Plat; a Final Plat must be filed for building and development permits and for utility
service. Notwithstanding the above, the Building Official may authorize temporary building permits, temporary occupancy
permits, and temporary utility service.
(2) A Conveyance Plat may be superseded by a revised Conveyance Plat or a Final Plat in total or in part through
compliance with the procedures and requirements of this Ordinance.
(d) Standards for Approval.
(1) Access - All lots created by a Conveyance Plat shall have frontage and access to an existing or proposed public street,
defined on the Major Thoroughfare Plan, or an existing standard street meeting City construction standards and accessing the
existing City street system. All lots created by a Conveyance Plat shall provide points of access as required by the Zoning
Ordinance and/or by this Ordinance.
(2) Dedication of Rights-of-Way - Dedication of rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan
and the City of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.5 Expiration
(a) The approval of a Conveyance Plat application shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years from the date that a complete
application was officially filed with the City. If a Final Plat has not been submitted within the two (2) year period, the Conveyance Plat
approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.5.6 Recordation
(a) The property owner shall submit the approved Conveyance Plat, following any required revisions, to the Planning Director, who
shall cause the Conveyance Plat to be recorded in the property records of the appropriate county. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-
10)
Division 7 - Revisions to Recorded Plats
Section 3.1.7.1 General Requirements for Plat Revisions
(a) Applicability and Terminology.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/648
(1) The procedures in this Division 7 shall apply only if a property owner seeks to change any portion of a plat that has been
filed of record with the appropriate county or a recorded covenant or restriction applicable to such plat.
(2) The term “replat” includes changes to a recorded plat, restriction or covenant, whether the change is effected by vacating
the recorded plat and approval of a new plat application, replatting without vacation, or approving an amended plat.
(b) City Action Required for Replats. Except as expressly stated otherwise in this Division 7, any change to a recorded plat or a
recorded covenant or restriction applicable to any recorded plat shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
requirements and procedures for approval of such changes to a recorded plat shall be in accordance with the requirements and procedures
for a Final Plat application under Division 4 of this Article.
(c) Construction Management. If a replat requires construction of additional improvements, the provisions of Division 8 of this Article
shall apply.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.7.2 Replats Without Vacation
(a) Applicability. A replat of all or a portion of a recorded plat may be approved in accordance with State law without vacation of the
recorded plat, if:
(1) The replat is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; and
(2) Is approved after a public hearing on the replat;
(3) The replat does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded
plat.
(b) Notice and Hearing. Published notice of the public hearing on the replat application shall be given in accordance with Article 2,
Division 2 of Chapter 1. The hearing shall be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Article 2, Division
3 of Chapter 1.
(c) Application. The application for a replat of a subdivision shall meet all application requirements of a Final Plat.
(d) Partial Replat Application. Any replat which adds or reduces lots must include the original subdivision and lot boundaries. If a
replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the replat must reference the previous subdivision name and
recording information, and must state on the replat the specific lots which have changed.
(e) Criteria for Approval. The replat of the subdivision shall meet all review and approval criteria for a Final Plat.
(f) Effect. Upon approval of the application, the replat may be recorded and is controlling over the previously recorded plat for the
portion replatted.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.7.3 Special Replat Requirements
(a) Applicability. In addition to compliance with the requirements of Section 3.1.7.2 above, a replat without vacation of the preceding
plat, in accordance with State law, must conform to the requirements of this section if:
(1) During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning
classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or
(2) Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential
units per lot.
(b) Exception. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any approval of a replat application for a portion of a recorded plat if
all of the proposed area sought to be replatted was designated or reserved for usage other than for single- or duplex-family residential
usage. Such designation must be noted on the recorded plat or in the legally recorded restriction applicable to such plat.
(c) Notice and Hearing. Published and personal notice of the public hearing on the replat application shall be given in accordance with
Article 2, Division 2 of Chapter 1. Personal notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the language of subsection (d) below. The hearing
shall be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Article 2, Division 3 of Chapter 1.
(d) Protest. If the replat application is accompanied by a waiver petition and is protested in accordance with this Subsection, approval
of the replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission present at
the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land
immediately adjoining the area covered by the replat application and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area, but within the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/648
original subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area
under this section, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.7.4 Amending Plats
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an amending plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making minor revisions to a recorded plat
consistent with provisions of State law.
(b) Applicability. The procedures for amending plats shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is to achieve the
following:
(1) Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for
setting monuments;
(5) Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly
as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority
responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
a. Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
b. Neither lot is abolished;
c. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
d. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
(8) Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or
easement;
(9) Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
(10) Make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the
subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: or
a. The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality;
b. The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
c. The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the municipal planning commission or other appropriate
governing body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or
(11) Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
d. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal
facilities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/648
(c) Effect. Upon approval by the Director, an amending plat may be recorded and is controlling over the recorded plat without vacation
of that plat.
(d) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Planning Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(e) Decision. The Director shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for an amending plat.
(f) Criteria for Approval. The Director shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the amending plat application
based upon a finding that the amending plat makes only those changes to the recorded plat that are allowed under Subsection (b) above.
(g) Expiration. Approval of an amending plat shall expire if the plat is not submitted for recordation within the time period specified
for recordation of a Final Plat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.1.7.5 Plat Vacation
(a) Applicability. A plat vacation application must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to vacation of any
recorded plat or portion thereof. A plat may be vacated only in conjunction with approval of a new plat application and in accordance
with State law.
(b) Application. If no lot subject to the recorded plat has been sold, the property owner may apply for a plat vacation. If any lot in a
subdivision has been sold, the recorded plat or any portion thereof may be vacated only upon application of all lot owners in the
subdivision. A plat vacation application shall be accompanied by an application for a Master Plat, Preliminary Plat, or Final Plat for the
land subject to the recorded plat or portion thereof to be vacated, prepared in accordance with this Article. A plat vacation application also
shall be accompanied by an unconditional Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (mandated by the State for general approval of plats) for the
plat vacation application, pending approval of a new Final Plat application for the same land.
(c) Processing and Decision. The plat vacation application shall be decided by the Planning and Zoning Commission in conjunction
with its decision on a new plat application for the same land. The application for plat vacation shall be processed together with the new
plat application in accordance with the procedures applicable to the new plat application under this Article. If the new plat application is
for a Master Plat or Preliminary Plat, decision on the plat vacation application shall be deferred or conditioned on approval of a Final Plat
application for the land subject to the recorded plat or portion thereof to be vacated. The Commission shall decide the plat vacation
application after it decides the Final Plat application.
(d) Criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the plat vacation application upon approving the Final Plat
application for the same land, and shall deny the plat vacation application upon denial of such Final Plat application. The Final Plat
application, as well as any preceding Master Plat or Preliminary Plat application, shall be decided in accordance with the criteria
applicable to such applications under this Article.
(e) Effective Date of Plat Vacation. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved
and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat
shall have no further effect.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 8 - Construction Management
Section 3.1.8.1 Construction Plans
(a) Purpose. The purpose of Construction Plans is to assure that public improvements required to be installed in order to serve a
subdivision or a development are constructed in accordance with all standards of this Land Development Code.
(b) Application Contents. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Engineering Department with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(c) Responsible Official and Decision.
(1) The City Engineer shall be the responsible official for approval of Construction Plans.
(2) For Construction Plans submitted following approval of a Preliminary Plat, the City Engineer shall approve, approve
subject to modifications, or reject the Construction Plans. Incomplete plans shall be returned to the applicant.
(3) If Construction Plans are approved, the plans shall be marked “approved” and one (1) set shall be returned to the
applicant, and at least two (2) sets shall be retained in the City's files.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/648
(4) Once the Construction Plans are approved, the property owner shall provide additional sets of the approved plans to the
City, as specified by the City Engineer, for use during construction. A full set of the City-approved and stamped Construction
Plans must be available for inspection on the job site at all times.
(d) Notification. The City Engineer shall notify the applicant in accordance with Article 2, Division 2 of Chapter 1 that the
Construction Plans are approved.
(e) Revised Plan Submission. If the conditions of approval require revision(s) to the Construction Plans, one (1) set shall be marked
with objections noted (on the plans themselves and/or in memo format) and returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the
applicant's engineer shall correct the plans as requested and resubmit them for decision.
(f) Criteria for Approval. The City Engineer shall render a decision on the Construction Plans in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) The plans are consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat, or the proposed Final Plat;
(2) The plans conform to the development standards, and standards for adequate public facilities contained in this Land
Development Code; and
(3) The plans conform to the specifications contained in the City of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction.
(g) Approval Required. Construction Plans must be approved in accordance with this section prior to approval of the Final Plat and
prior to plat recordation unless a Subdivision Improvement Agreement or surety has been provided in accordance with Section 3.1.8.4.
(h) Effect. Approval of Construction Plans authorizes the property owner to install public improvements in rights-of-way offered for
dedication to the public under an approved Preliminary or Final Plat for which a Site Preparation Permit also has been approved.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.8.2 Timing of Public Improvements
(a) Completion Prior to Final Plat. Except as provided below, after approval of a Preliminary Plat and before an approved Final Plat is
recorded, the installation of all public improvements required to serve the subdivision, as defined by Article 2 of this Chapter, whether to
be located off-site or on-site, including water, wastewater, drainage, and roadway improvements, shall be finally completed in accordance
with the approved Construction Plans.
(1) The installation of improvements required for proper drainage and prevention of soil erosion on individual residential
lots, and improvements on any common areas, also shall be finally competed prior to Final Plat recordation in accordance with
the approved Construction Plans, except as provided below.
(b) Installation after Final Plat Approval. The City Engineer, upon request of the applicant, may defer the obligation to install one or
more public improvements to serve the subdivision until after Final Plat recordation. The request shall be submitted with an application
for Preliminary Plat or Construction Plan approval. Deferral of the obligation to install public improvements shall be conditioned on
execution of sufficient surety to secure the obligations defined in the agreement or sureties as required in Section 3.1.8.4.
(c) Off-Site Easements. All necessary off-site easements required for installation of off-site public improvements to serve the
subdivision or development shall be acquired by the subdivider or developer and conveyed by an instrument approved by the City
Attorney.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.8.3 Reserved
Section 3.1.8.4 Security for Completion of Improvements
(a) Security. Whenever the obligation to install public improvements to serve a subdivision or development is deferred until after
recordation of the Final Plat, the subdivider shall guarantee proper construction of subdivision improvements, in accordance with
standards contained or referred to herein this LDC, by one of the methods described below:
(1) Performance Bond. A bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and
acceptable to the City of Abilene, on the form provided by the City of Abilene in an amount equal to the cost of improvements
required by this LDC. The performance bond shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney.
(2) Trust Agreement. A trust deposit in a bank or trust company for the benefit of the City of Abilene, of a sum of money
equal to the estimated cost of all improvements required by this LDC. Selection of trustee shall be executed on the form
provided by the City and approved as to form by the City Attorney.
(3) Irrevocable Letter of Credit. A letter, on a form provided by the City, signed by the principal officer of a local bank,
Federally-insured savings and loan association, or other financial institution acceptable to the City of Abilene, agreeing to pay
the City of Abilene on demand a stipulated sum of money to apply to the estimated cost of all improvements required by this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/648
LDC. The guaranteed payment sum shall be the costs estimated by the applicant's professional engineer and approved by the
City Engineer.
(b) Warranty & Maintenance. In addition to providing security as described in (a) above, the subdivider or contractor shall also provide
a warranty for the improvements for a period of one (1) year following acceptance by the City and shall provide a maintenance bond in
the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the costs of the improvements for such period;
(c) Amount and Acceptability. The security shall be issued in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the cost estimate approved
by the City Engineer for all public improvements associated with the subdivision. The security shall be subject to the approval of the City
Attorney.
(d) Security for Construction in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. Where the land to be platted lies within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the City, the security shall be in a form and contain such terms as are consistent with an interlocal agreement between the City and the
county under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and in the county. In cases where the requirements governing the form and terms of the security are
defined in such an agreement, they will supersede any conflicting provisions of Subsections (a), (b), and (c) above.
(e) Partial Release.
(1) Upon application of the subdivider, the City Engineer or his designee shall determine the percentage of total work
required which has already been performed. That portion of the total, less any prior amounts released and a retainage not to
exceed ten percent (10%) of the total, shall then be released.
(2) The Planning Director and other necessary City officials shall execute any documents necessary to cause release of any
portion of the security in accordance with this provision, provided that all such documents shall be subject to approval by the
City Attorney.
(3) No partial release shall be granted where any substantial part of work performed prior to the date of application fails to
meet City standards and specifications for any reason other than incompleteness.
(f) Remedies. In addition to all other remedies authorized in Article 2, Division 6 of Chapter 1, where security has been posted, but
required public improvements have not been installed in accordance with the terms of the agreement, the City may:
(1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless of the extent
of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default;
(2) Obtain funds under the security and complete the improvements itself or through a third party; or
(3) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the development
in exchange for the subsequent owner's agreement and posting of security to complete the public improvements serving the
tract.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.1.8.5 Inspection and Acceptance of Public Improvements
(a) Inspections. The City Engineer or his authorized representative shall inspect the construction of improvements while in progress as
well as upon completion. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Any significant change in design
required during construction shall be made by the subdivider's engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. If the City
Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with
the approved Construction Plans, the property owner shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the public improvements.
(b) Submission of Record Drawings. The City shall not accept dedication of required public improvements until the contractor or the
applicant's engineer has provided to the City Engineer a detailed record drawing or plat of the property and any off-site easements,
showing the location, dimensions, materials, and other information establishing that the public improvements have been built in
accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Each record drawing sheet shall show all changes made in the plans during
construction.
(c) Acceptance or Rejection of Improvements.
(1) The City Engineer shall be responsible for certifying acceptance of completed subdivision improvements intended for
dedication to the City of Abilene.
(2) After final inspection, he shall notify the subdivider and the Planning Director in writing as to his acceptance or rejection
of such construction.
(3) The City Engineer shall reject such construction only if it fails to comply with standards and specifications of the City of
Abilene. If the City Engineer rejects such construction, the City Attorney shall, on direction of the City Council, proceed to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/648
enforce the guarantee provided by agreements called for in this section.
(4) If the City Engineer accepts such construction, the City shall execute all the necessary documents to release the full
amount of security, including any retainage. The City Engineer shall issue a letter to the property owner stating that all
required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the
property owner has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the City for use and maintenance. Upon acceptance
of the required public improvements, [sic]
(d) Disclaimer. Approval of a Preliminary Plat or Final Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not constitute acceptance of
any of the public improvements required to serve the subdivision or development. No public improvements shall be accepted for
dedication by the City except in accordance with this Division.
(e) Acceptance of Improvements for Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. Where the facilities to be constructed under the Subdivision
Improvement Agreement are located within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and are to be dedicated to a county, the City Engineer
shall inform the county that the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved Construction Plans, and are
ready for acceptance by the county.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.1.8.6 Maintenance and Warranty of Improvements
(a) Maintenance During Construction. The property owner or contractor shall maintain all required public improvements during
construction of the development.
(b) Bond. The owner or contractor shall covenant to warranty the required public improvements for a period of one (1) year following
acceptance by the City of all required public improvements and shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred percent
(100%) of the costs of the improvements for such period. All improvements located within an easement or right-of-way shall be bonded.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Article 2 - Subdivision Standards
Division 1 - Adequate Public Facilities
Section 3.2.1.1 General Policy
(a) Adequate Service for Areas Proposed for Development. Land proposed for development in the City and in the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, limited to water facilities, wastewater facilities,
transportation facilities, and drainage facilities, as set forth in this Article of this Chapter. Land shall not be approved for platting or
development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the
facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or off-site.
(b) Responsibilities of the Developer. The subdivider shall pay all design, engineering, labor, and construction costs for facilities
required by this LDC, except to the extent that this section specifically provides for full or partial payment by the City of Abilene. The
provisions of this section shall apply to resubdivisions as well as to subdivisions. Specifically, the developer shall be responsible for the
following:
(1) Phasing of development or improvements in order to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities;
(2) Extensions of public facilities and roadways (including any necessary on-site and off-site facilities) to connect to
existing public facilities;
(3) Providing and/or procuring all necessary property interests, including rights-of-way and easements, for the facilities
(whether on-site or off-site);
(4) Providing proof to the City of adequate public facilities;
(5) Making provisions for future expansion of the public facilities as needed to serve future developments, subject to the
City's oversize participation policies, if applicable;
(6) Providing for all operations and maintenance of the public facilities, or providing proof that a separate entity will be
responsible for the operations and maintenance of the facilities;
(7) Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the public facilities;
(8) Obtaining approvals from the applicable utility providers other than the City; and
(9) Complying with all requirements of the utility providers, including the City and applicable drainage districts
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/648
(10) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require any dedication or construction that is not explicitly required by
the standards within this Article.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.1.2 Conformance to Plans
(a) Conformance. Proposed capital improvements, as limited in 3.2.1.1, serving new development shall conform to and be properly
related to the public facilities elements of the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan, other adopted master plans for public facilities and
services, and applicable capital improvements plans, and shall meet the service levels specified in such plans.
(1) Adequate sites and convenient access for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other community services indicated in the
City's Comprehensive Plan shall be related to the character and uses of the surrounding properties in accordance with the
intent, policies and provisions of this Chapter 3.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the Abilene Comprehensive Plan as well as appropriate school
district plans, and may deny approval of subdivisions and resubdivisions not in conformity with these plans. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may refer the subdivider to the Parks Board or the appropriate School Board of Trustees to seek
appropriate recommendations.
(b) Thoroughfare Plan Amendments. The Thoroughfare Plan is a guide for the roadway connections and types that will be needed as
development occurs. All plats shall provide roadway connections consistent with the Thoroughfare Plan and in the same general area as
shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. A Thoroughfare plan amendment shall be necessary in the following instances:
(1) When a roadway connection is made in a location other than the general location shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
(2) When a roadway connection is not made due to a City or City Council, through P&Z Commission, determination that
such connection is not necessary.
(3) When a roadway cross-section is a different type than what is shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
(c) Water and Wastewater Plans. No Final Plat shall be approved for any subdivision within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction
until the applicant has made adequate provision for a water system and a sanitary wastewater system of sufficient capacity to adequately
provide service to all tracts and lots within the area to be subdivided. The design and construction of the water system and of the sanitary
wastewater system to serve the subdivision shall be in conformance with the City's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and
with the Design, Details, and Construction Standards and shall be subject to approval by the Director of Water Utilities, or designee.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 2 - Dedication and Construction Requirements and City Participation
Section 3.2.2.1 Findings on Necessity for Right-of-Way Dedication and Construction as a Condition of Development Approval
(a) Support for New Development.
(1) New development must be supported by adequate levels of public facilities, as limited in 3.2.1.1, and services as
required herein.
(2) It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of rights-of-way and easements for capital improvements, as
limited in 3.2.1.1, to support new development at the earliest stage of the development process.
(b) Essential Nexus. There is an essential nexus between the demand on public facilities systems created by a new development and the
requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct capital improvements to offset such impacts.
(c) Mitigation of Development Impacts; Fair Share. The City desires to assure both that development impacts are mitigated through
contributions of rights-of-way, easements and construction of capital improvements, and that a development project contributes not more
than its fair share of such costs.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.2.2 Property Owner's Obligation
(a) Dedication and Construction of Improvements. The property owner shall dedicate all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall
construct, capital improvements within the rights-of-way or easements for those water, wastewater, road or drainage improvements
needed to adequately serve a proposed development consistent with the applicable master facilities plans and construction design
standards, as limited in 3.2.1.1, whether the facilities are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries of the property being
developed. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/648
Section 3.2.2.3 Timing of Dedication and Construction
(a) Initial Provision for Dedication or Construction. The City shall require an initial demonstration that a proposed development shall
be adequately served by public facilities and services, as limited in 3.2.1.1, at the time for approval of the first development application
that portrays a specific plan of development, including but not limited to a petition for establishing a Planned Development (PD) zoning
district, or other overlay zoning district; a petition for an annexation agreement or a development agreement; an application for a Master
Plat, or an application for a Preliminary Plat or Final Plat. As a condition of approval of the development application, the City may
require provision for dedication of rights-of-way or easements for, and construction of, capital improvements to serve the proposed
development.
(b) Deferral of Obligation. The obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to construct one or more capital improvements to serve a
new development may be deferred until approval of a subordinate development permit, or, in the case of a development proposed to be
developed in phases, until a subsequent phase of the development, on the sole discretion of the City, upon written request of the property
owner, or at the City's own initiative. As a condition of deferring the obligation, the City may require that the developer enter into a
capital improvements agreement pursuant to Division 8 of Article 1 of this Chapter, specifying the time for dedication of rights-of-way
for or construction of capital improvements serving the development.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.2.4 Relief From Obligations
(a) In order to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed development on public facilities and the obligation
to provide adequate public facilities, as limited in 3.2.1.1, the City may participate in the costs of public facilities in accordance with this
Article or relieve the property owner of some or part of the obligations in response to a petition for relief from a dedication or
construction requirement pursuant to Chapter 1. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.2.5 Roadway Participation Policies - Improvement of Adjacent (Perimeter) Roads and Utilities
(a) Improvement of Fair Share of an Adjacent Substandard Road. When an area within a proposed plat, whether residential or
nonresidential, abuts on one or both sides of an existing substandard road or utility facility, or a planned or future road or utility facility as
shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan and/or adopted plans related to water and wastewater, the developer shall be required to improve
its reasonable share of the road (including appurtenant sidewalks, paths, bikeways, barrier-free ramps, storm drainage facilities, screening
and landscaping, median openings, left turn lanes, and water quality or erosion controls) and utility facilities, to bring the facilities to City
standards, or to replace them with standard City road or utility facilities at no cost to the City.
(b) Calculation of Fair Share.
(1) The developer's share of improvements to a substandard perimeter road is twenty and a half feet (20'-6") of pavement
(not including curb), or the equivalent of one-half of a collector street, along the entire frontage of the subdivision.
(2) The developer's share of improvements to a roadway when a subdivision is to be located on both sides of a roadway is
the full width of a primary collector roadway, which is forty-one feet (41') of pavement, not including curbs. The roadway
shall be improved by the developer on each side of the road along the entire length of the subdivision.
(3) The City shall participate in the costs of perimeter roads in excess of the developer's fair share obligations and where
such costs are not borne by another public entity, and in cases where the application of the standards in this Section result in a
disproportional burden on the development, as determined in accordance by the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article 3, Division 2.
[(c) Reserved.]
(d) Improvements. All streets bordering subdivisions shall be improved, and/or rights-of-way platted, in accordance with standards
prescribed herein. If the subdivider widens existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut back a distance required by the City
Engineer to assure adequate subbase and pavement joint before additional paving material is laid on top.
(1) Existing Boundary Streets. For boundary streets which exist to some degree, for example, by previous partial dedication
or prescriptive easement, the following standards shall apply.
a. For all classifications of such streets, the subdivider must dedicate additional right-of-way to complete the desired
street width from the desired roadway centerline to the final edge of right-of-way. Dedication of more than half this
additional increment may be required, in some instances, to maximize use of existing roadway and/or ensure a consistent
street alignment with a minimum of undesirable curvature.
b. For all classifications of such streets, except expressways, the subdivider must pave one-half the additional portion
of street right-of-way remaining to be paved, according to the adopted Thoroughfare Plan of the City for improving that
street alignment. In no instance, however, shall there be required any more than thirty-three feet (33') of additional
paving, nor shall there result any less than a twenty-six-foot (26') paved roadway. In lieu of actual street improvement,
the subdivider shall have the following options:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/648
1. The subdivider shall contribute to the City an amount of money necessary to complete all paving and curbing
required. These funds shall be held, and eventually disposed of, in the manner described within Section 3.2.7.2(b)
(1)b of this chapter; or
2. If the subdivision includes no more than two lots, then the subdivider may execute a Developer Agreement
which runs with the ownership of the land and which obligates the landowner to pay the City of Abilene on
demand the amount of money necessary to cover the cost of all required public street improvements. The
Developer Agreement shall be on a City-designated form, signed by the property owner, notarized, and filed with
the official property records of the county in which the property is located.
c. If the right-of-way for an expressway lies adjacent to or forms part of the subdivision boundary, no paving
improvements shall be required of the subdivider.
(2) New Boundary Street. For new boundary streets forming part of the subdivision boundary, the following standards shall
apply.
a. Minor Streets and Subcollectors. Where a minor street or subcollector forms part of the subdivision boundary, the
subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make such street conform to requirements of this Division. The
subdivider shall also improve such street in conformance with all standards and specifications of the City of Abilene,
including installation of curbs on both sides of the street.
b. Other Streets. Where a proposed thoroughfare (other than a minor street or subcollector) forms part of a subdivision
boundary, the subdivider shall dedicate approximately one-half the additional right-of-way necessary to comprise the full
street width required by this Division, up to a maximum of one hundred feet (100'). Dedication of more than half this
additional increment may be required, in some instances, to maximize the use of existing streets and/or to ensure a
consistent street alignment with a minimum of undesirable curvature.
c. Partial Boundary Street. If the right-of-way for an arterial or collector street forms part of the subdivision boundary,
the subdivider shall comply with requirements of either one of the following two paragraphs:
1. The subdivider shall pave thirty-three feet (33') of the right-of-way in accordance with City standards and
specifications.
2. The subdivider shall contribute to the City an amount of money equal to that necessary to complete paving
and curbing as required by this Division.
d. Expressway. If the right-of-way for an expressway lies adjacent to or forms part of the subdivision boundary, no
paving improvements shall be required of the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 3 - Interlocal Agreements
Section 3.2.3.1 Interlocal Cooperation Agreements Between Abilene and Taylor County
(a) The City has executed a separate interlocal cooperation agreement as authorized under Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government
Code. This agreement is with Taylor County. Taylor County has assigned the City its respective authority to approve plats in the City's
ETJ. The agreement generally provides for the City to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with specified regulations of Taylor
County, within the applicable areas of the ETJ. (For specific responsibilities, see the separate interlocal agreement.) (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt.
1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.3.2 Interlocal Cooperation Agreements Between Abilene and Callahan County
(a) The City has executed a separate interlocal cooperation agreement as authorized under Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government
Code. This agreement is with Callahan County. Callahan County has assigned the City its respective authority to approve plats in the
City's ETJ. The agreement generally provides for the City to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with specified regulations of
Callahan County, within the applicable areas of the ETJ. (For specific responsibilities, see the separate interlocal agreement.) (Ord. No. 8-
2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.3.3 Interlocal Cooperation Agreements Between Abilene and Jones County
(a) The City has executed a separate interlocal cooperation agreement as authorized under Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government
Code. This agreement is with Jones County. Jones County has assigned the City its respective authority to approve plats in the City's ETJ.
The agreement generally provides for the City to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with specified regulations of Jones County,
within the applicable areas of the ETJ. (For specific responsibilities, see the separate interlocal agreement.) (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh.
A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/648
Section 3.2.3.4 Interlocal Cooperation Agreements Between Abilene and Shackelford County
(a) Reserved
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Water
Section 3.2.4.1 Water Extension Policy
(a) Water Required for Public Safety. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public water
system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection.
(b) Responsibility. The subdivider shall install and pay for all municipal water extensions and associated facilities, including fire
hydrants, in accordance with all standards required by this Chapter of the LDC and Chapter 32 of the City code, except to the extent that
Section 32-114 of Chapter 32 provides for refunding the cost of certain water mains larger than eight inches (8") in diameter[.] All such
extensions and facilities shall be installed within a public right-of-way or easement designated for utility access. Upon certification that
municipal water extensions and associated facilities have been completed in conformance with applicable standards and specifications,
such extensions and facilities shall be dedicated to the City of Abilene.
(c) Extension and Related Expense. Where the City of Abilene's water distribution system is not planned to be extended, all necessary
water facilities shall be provided by and at the expense of the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.4.2 The City System
(a) Installation of Water Facilities. Where water is to be provided through the City system, the developer shall install adequate water
facilities, including fire hydrants, in accordance with the current Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems of the TCEQ, and the
firefighting standards of the Texas Board of Insurance, and the standards and specifications of the City.
(b) Facilities for Health and Safety Emergencies; Alternative Water Sources. All water facilities connected to the City's water system
shall be capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including fire protection. Water supply facilities shall be in
accordance with city requirements. The design and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall also
comply with the following standards:
(1) Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the TCEQ.
(2) Design and construction of water service from the City shall be in accordance with the standards in the City's Design,
Details, and Construction Standards.
(3) Design and construction of a fire protection and suppression system shall be in accordance with the standards in the
Design, Details, and Construction Standards, and in accordance with the City's Fire Department and Fire Code.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.4.3 Location; Performance Guarantees
(a) Construction Plans. The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements and the boundary lines of special districts,
private systems and certified water service areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the Construction
Plans.
(b) Cost. The cost of installing all water supply improvements to be made by the developer, including required off-site public facilities,
shall be included in the performance guarantees furnished by the developer.
(c) Location of Lines. Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the plat adjacent to a street or
thoroughfare.
(1) If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities shall be accomplished in such a manner as
to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions.
(2) If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the City
Engineer may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction at the time of Final Plat approval and prior to
construction of the subdivision.
(d) Compliance with Other Regulations. Installation, operations and maintenance of utilities not specifically referenced herein shall
comply with regulations of the TCEQ, and with any other applicable State rules and regulations, whichever is the most stringent
requirement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.4.4 Individual Wells
(a) Within the ETJ. Individual wells within the ETJ shall be subject to approval by the appropriate county health official (depending on
the location of the development), and this approval shall be documented by the health official's signature on the water system statement
on the plat. If the well water is intended to be the primary water source in order to meet adequate public facilities requirements, the
developer must submit with the plat application a certificate from a professional engineer registered in this state, a geoscientist licensed to
practice in this state, or a report from an independent testing laboratory, verifying the adequacy and quality of water for human
consumption of the proposed source of well supply prior to plat approval.
(b) Compliance with Other Regulations. Installation, operations and maintenance of individual wells shall comply with City standards,
regulations of the TCEQ, any other applicable State rules and regulations, and applicable regulations of any groundwater conservation
districts. In the event of conflict among these regulations, whichever is the most stringent shall apply.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.4.5 Central Water Systems
(a) Design and Construction. All water facilities within a subdivision shall be designed and constructed to City standards and to all
state laws, policies, standards, rules and regulations for an approved public water system, including those covering the preparation,
submittal and approval of plans and specifications for water systems and acceptable operating practices, and in conformance with all
laws, policies, standards and rules and regulations for establishing the ISO rating of the City and current fire codes of the City. The entire
water system may not meet these standards, but the part that serves the subdivision must meet these standards in order to be approved by
the City.
(b) Other Water Systems. For water systems other than the City system, the following apply:
(1) If the water system that will serve a proposed development is not to be a part of the City water system, the developer
must submit with the application for approval of the Preliminary Plat a current letter from the TCEQ certifying that the public
water system that will serve the subdivision is in compliance with TCEQ rules and regulations. Plans and specifications for the
subdivision's water system that will be built to serve the subdivision shall be submitted as part of the subdivision's
Construction Plans.
(2) The developer must submit a letter from the TCEQ verifying that the public water system proposed to serve the
development holds a current valid certificate of convenience and necessity (CCN) for the area proposed for development. The
letter must be accompanied by a map showing the boundaries of the water system CCN in the vicinity of the development.
(3) If a water system cannot meet the standards of this Subsection, at the Planning and Zoning Commission's discretion, the
subdivision may be approved, if arrangements have been made for an approved water system that will meet City standards to
serve the subdivision upon annexation by the City. This shall be arranged by means of a mutually acceptable contract with the
City, unless a contract with another entity ensures compliance with the technical requirements of this chapter, as determined
by the City Attorney.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 5 - Wastewater
Section 3.2.5.1 Wastewater Extension Policy
(a) Wastewater Collection and Treatment Required for Public Safety. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall
be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The Director of Water Utilities, or designee, shall be responsible
for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The City may require the phasing of development and/or
improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity.
(b) Responsibility. The subdivider shall install and pay for all municipal sewer extensions and required public facilities in accordance
with all standards required by this Chapter of the LDC and Chapter 32, except to the extent that Section 32-114 of Chapter 32 provides
for refunding the cost of certain sewer mains larger than eight inches (8") in diameter. All such lines and public facilities shall be installed
within a public right-of-way or easement designated for utility access. Upon certification that municipal sewer extensions and required
public facilities have been completed in accordance with applicable standards and specifications, such extensions and public facilities
shall be dedicated to the City of Abilene.
(c) On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems. Where the City of Abilene's sanitary sewer system is not required or planned to be extended, in
accordance with applicable standards of this chapter, plans shall be prepared for installation of on-site sewage disposal systems designed
to serve each lot in the subdivision. Where non-municipal sewers are planned to collect wastes for transport to private, self-contained
sewage treatment facilities within the subdivision, both the sewage collection system as well as necessary treatment facilities shall be
installed by and at the expense of the subdivider, including adequate provisions for long-term maintenance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.5.2 The City System
(a) Extension. Extension of the City of Abilene's sanitary sewer system shall be required for any subdivision within City limits.
Extension of municipal sewers shall also be required, outside City limits, for any subdivision comprising a lot or lots less than one-half
(1/2) acre in size if served by a public water supply or a lot or lots less than one (1) acre on other properties. In no way is the City of
Abilene obligated, however, to permit extension of municipal sewers outside City limits.
(b) Waiver. The required extension of municipal sewers may be waived wherever the City Council finds that:
(1) such extension would require unreasonable expenditures, as compared with other methods of sewage disposal,
(2) on-site sewage disposal facilities will function properly, and
(3) there are not substantial negative impacts for development on adjacent properties and surrounding areas.
The advice of the Planning Director and the Director of Water Utilities, or designees, shall be considered in making a decision.
(c) On-site sewers in lieu of extension of City sanitary sewer system. In a proposed subdivision where public wastewater facilities are
not currently accessible, but are expected to be extended to the property in the future, the subdivider receiving a waiver may be required
to install sewer lines meeting all applicable standards throughout the subdivision for future connectivity.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 16-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-13-14)
Section 3.2.5.3 Centralized Wastewater System; Connection to Existing System
(a) Design Requirements. Where wastewater is to be provided through a centralized system, the developer shall install adequate
facilities, subject to the Design, Details, and Construction Standards and state design criteria for wastewater systems.
(b) Existing System. Where insufficient capacity exists downstream of a proposed connection, the replacement and upsizing of the
existing main is required of the developer. The installation of a parallel main is prohibited, unless approved by the Director of Water
Utilities, or designee.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.5.4 Location; Performance Guarantees
(a) Construction Plans. The location of all wastewater improvements and the boundary lines of special districts, private systems and
certified areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the Construction Plans. It is the policy of the City to
require all systems to have gravity flow. The use of lift stations is prohibited unless a gravity design is impractical, as determined by the
Director of Water Utilities, or designee.
(b) Cost. The cost of installing all wastewater improvements to be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be
included in the performance guarantees furnished by the developer.
(c) Future Extension of Lines. Pipe stub-outs shall be located in manholes to facilitate the future extension of wastewater lines. The
Director of Water Utilities, or designee, will determine the location and size of the stub-outs.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.5.5 On-Site Sewage Facilities
(a) On-Site Sewage Disposal - Where Acceptable. An on-site sewage disposal system may be acceptable in any one of the following
circumstances:
(1) Any subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, as long as no one lot is less than one-half (1/2) acre in size and is
served by a public water supply or as long as no lot is less than one (1) acre in size on other properties.
(2) Any subdivided lot within the extraterritorial jurisdiction which is greater than or equal to one-half (1/2) acre in size and
is served by a public water supply or is greater than one (1) acre in size on other properties.
(3) Any subdivision or subdivided lot not meeting criteria specified in (a)(1) and/or (a)(2) above, but for which a waiver
from sewer requirements has been duly approved by City Council.
(b) On-Site Sewage Disposal - General Standards. Plans for on-site sewage disposal, as well as actual installation of such facilities,
shall be subject to approval by appropriate public health authorities in order to meet requirements of this LDC. Sewage disposal facilities
requiring soil absorption systems may be prohibited where such systems will not function due to high groundwater, flooding, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/648
unsuitable soil characteristics. To this end, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require that the subdivider note on the face of the
plat that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated areas.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Utilities Generally
Section 3.2.6.1 Utility Participation and Extension Policies
(a) Connections to the City's Water and Wastewater Systems. All connections to the City's water and wastewater systems shall be in
accordance with Chapter 32 of the City Code.
(b) Connections to Existing City Water or Wastewater System Outside the City Limits. Applications for connection to existing portions
of the City water or wastewater system for uses located outside the City limits will be granted only with the approval of the City Manager.
(c) General Extension Policies.
(1) It is in the City's best interest to encourage development in areas adjacent to compatible development already receiving
City services where those services have excess capacity.
(2) It is in the City's best interest to discourage development in remote areas as well as those areas that exhibit
environmental hazards.
(3) It is in the City's best interest fiscally, socially and environmentally to annex areas that:
a. Need to be protected in order to prevent or reduce flood damage in existing urban areas;
b. Possess unique physical characteristics;
c. Have requested City services;
d. Minimize fiscal liability;
e. Are currently urbanizing or exhibit potential for urbanization.
(4) It is in the City's best interest to withhold all water and sewer extensions outside City limits except in instances where
the extension will serve a large volume user who has agreed to annexation at a predetermined date; and, who has demonstrated
that a significant community benefit will accrue to the City if it provides such service outside City limits; and where no
significant fiscal liabilities will be incurred by the City of Abilene.
(5) It is in the City's best interest fiscally, socially and environmentally to provide services other than water and sewer to
individual users beyond City limits:
a. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that minimize future fiscal liability;
b. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that encourage compact development;
c. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that ensure compliance with City subdivision,
building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes;
d. When it is not in the City's best interest to annex the areas to be served.
(6) It is in the City's best interest fiscally, socially and environmentally to provide services through water supply
corporations, county or other similar organizations in the extraterritorial jurisdiction:
a. Under contracts that minimize future fiscal liability;
b. Under contracts that encourage compact development;
c. Under contracts that ensure compliance with City subdivisions, building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes;
d. When it is not in the City's best interest to annex the areas to be served.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.6.2 Utility Location Policies
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/648
(a) Placement. It is in the City's best interest to coordinate and regulate the placement of public and private utilities in the public rightof-
way and in easements on private property. Such regulations and coordination shall be managed under the general guidelines of this
Section.
(b) Guidelines.
(1) Utilities are to be placed in accordance with the City's “Design, Details, and Construction Standards” as maintained by
the City Engineer.
(2) The subdivider shall be responsible for insuring that utility providers are given a coordinated schedule for the
installation of respective facilities, including sufficient notice of desired installation dates. Prior to the start of curb and
pavement installation, the subdivider shall obtain a written release from each utility provider indicating that required utility
installation is complete, or shall ensure that subsequent installation of these utilities is performed in a manner that does not cut
or otherwise damage newly constructed streets that will be dedicated to the public.
(3) The subdivider shall be responsible for providing the Planning Director with adequate information on the Final Plat to
show the exact locations of all utilities installed. The Planning Director will distribute copies to appropriate City Departments
(and utility providers). No public facilities or improvements shall be accepted for dedication until such “as built” plans or
record drawings, as required herein as part of the Final Plat, have been submitted accordingly.
(4) In those instances where existing utilities in easements on private property need to be replaced, such utilities shall be
relocated within nearby public rights-of-way in accordance with the location criteria available in the office of the Department
of Public Works, wherever feasible.
(5) There shall be sufficient right-of-way along local and collector streets for utilities and solid waste pick-up, except where
alleys or other easements allow for these services to be located off-street.
(6) There shall be sufficient right-of-way such that sidewalks and related pedestrian activity is not impeded by the location
of utilities, including solid waste pick-up, fire hydrants, and utility poles.
(7) In those instances where unusual circumstances arise, not specifically covered by foregoing provisions and/or referenced
location criteria, the general intent of this Section shall be used to guide the placement of utility facilities.
(8) Polyvinyl conduit, to accommodate telephone and television service lines extending from closures on one (1) side of the
street, shall be provided by and at the expense of the subdivider. All such conduit shall be installed at all locations and in
conformance with all standards required by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.6.3 Utility Easements on Platted Lots
(a) Side of Platted Lots. If one or more utilities must be located at the side of platted lots, an easement shall be designated as prescribed
below:
(1) If the easement is for one utility only, then the easement shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in width and shall be located
entirely within the boundaries of one lot.
(2) If the easement is for two or more utilities, then the easement shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width and shall
be split equally between two adjoining lots in the subdivision where the subdivider owns both adjoining lots.
(3) Easements shall be considered a part of the lot area, for purposes of minimum lot size requirements.
(4) Easements shall not be placed at locations which will interfere with placement of buildings on lots.
(5) The property owner whose property is subject to such easement shall be responsible for its maintenance and shall keep it
free and clear of any permanent building or structure. No building permits shall be issued to place any building or other
improvement on, over, or within such easement, in whole or part.
(6) The owner of the property upon which the utility easement is located may fence across the easement if such fencing is so
desired, providing that by placing such fencing across the easement or by allowing such fence to remain across the easement,
the owner shall be conclusively presumed to have consented to permit reasonable access to the utility easement and any
utilities therein by any affected utility company over other unfenced portions of the landowner's property.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 7 - Roadways
Section 3.2.7.1 Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/648
(a) Responsibility for Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares. The property owner shall assure that the subdivision is served by
adequate streets and thoroughfares, and shall be responsible for the costs of rights-of-way and street improvements, in accordance with
the following policies and standards, and subject to the City's cost participation policies on oversized facilities. Additional right-of-way
may be required at some street intersections to accommodate utilities, sidewalks, paths, bikeways, traffic-control devices and/or sight
distances.
(b) Road Network. New subdivisions shall be supported by a road network having adequate capacity, ingress/egress, and safe and
efficient traffic circulation.
(1) In the event the property to be developed is intended as a phase in a larger development project, or constitutes a portion
of the land to be ultimately developed, the City Engineer may require a demonstration of adequacy pursuant to this article for
additional phases or portions of the property as a condition of approval for the proposed Preliminary Plat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.2 Subdivider Responsibility
(a) Safety, Convenience, Functionality. Proposed roads serving new development shall provide a safe, convenient and functional
system for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the applicable master thoroughfare plan and any
amendments thereto, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. New
developments shall be supported by a thoroughfare network having adequate capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. Each
development shall have adequate access to the thoroughfare network.
(b) Streets, Generally. All streets, including curb and gutter improvements, shall be provided by and at the expense of the subdivider.
The subdivider shall install streets at all locations and in accordance with all standards required by this Chapter of the LDC.
(1) The subdivider shall pay the cost of all such improvements, except as follows:
a. Arterial Streets Within Subdivision Boundaries. If the right-of-way for any arterial street lies entirely within the
boundaries of any subdivision or portion thereof, the City shall be responsible for awarding the contract for construction
of required improvements. The subdivider shall deposit his share of construction costs with the City prior to award of the
contract. The subdivider's share shall include the cost of pavement, curb and gutter for a street forty-one feet (41') wide.
However, the subdivider may be allowed to construct the required improvements at the City Engineer's discretion.
b. Arterial Streets Bordering Subdivision Boundaries. If the right-of-way of any arterial street forms part of the
subdivision boundary, the subdivider shall either improve the street in conformance with this Chapter or contribute to the
City an amount of money equal to that necessary to improve the street in conformance with this Chapter. All money
received from subdividers for improving boundary streets shall be deposited in an appropriate fund(s) of the City. When
the City Council resolves to improve a bounding arterial street to standards appropriate to its use, then the Assessment
Fund or similar funds shall be utilized in payment of necessary construction costs.
c. Improving State- or Federally-Owned Right-of-Way. If the right-of-way for any thoroughfare owned by the State or
Federal government lies within or adjacent to the subdivision, the subdivider shall not be required to pave any portion of
it. The subdivider shall, however, install sidewalks per Division 13 of this Chapter [Article] and contribute to the City an
amount of money equal to that necessary to furnish curb and gutter improvements to any State- or Federally-controlled
arterial lying within or adjacent to the subdivision, if adequate curb and gutter improvements do not already exist but are
determined to be necessary within the foreseeable future. Funds shall be deposited and disposed of in a fashion similar to
that described in the preceding paragraph (1)b of this subsection, concerning improvements to arterial streets bordering
subdivision boundaries.
(2) Existing Boundary Streets For Small Subdivisions. If the right-of-way of an existing street forms part of the boundary
for a subdivision meeting all of the following conditions, the subdivider shall have the option to make the contribution to the
City for the cost of required street improvements, as determined by the City Manager, through an extended payout
arrangement. Such conditions are as follows:
a. The subdivision includes no more than two (2) lots under a single ownership;
b. The total street frontage of the subdivision is no more than two hundred feet (200');
c. Each lot is used for farming/ranching purposes and/or has one (1) residence but no more than one (1) residence with
accessory structures;
d. The street(s) for which improvements are necessary are not listed in the Capital Improvements Program in effect at
the time of the subdivision.
(3) Alleys. Each alley shall be provided by and at the expense of the subdivider. Alleys shall be installed at all locations and
improved in accordance with all standards required by this chapter. The subdivider shall pay the full cost of all such
improvements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.3 Street/Thoroughfare Escrow Policies and Procedures
(a) Request for Escrow. Whenever this Land Development Code requires a property owner to construct a street or thoroughfare, or
other type of public improvement, the property owner may petition the City, or the City may require, that the improvements be
constructed at a later time, in exchange for deposit of escrow as established in Subsection (b) below, if unusual circumstances exist, such
as a timing issue due to pending improvements by another agency such as TxDOT or the applicable county, that would present undue
hardships or that would impede public infrastructure coordination or timing. If more than one street or thoroughfare must be constructed
in order to meet adequacy requirements for roadways, the City Engineer may prioritize roadways for which escrow is to be accepted and
require the deposit of all funds attributable to the development in escrow accounts for one or more of the affected roadways. The City
Engineer shall determine whether or not provision of escrow deposits will be acceptable in lieu of the property owner's obligation to
construct the street or thoroughfare.
(b) Escrow Deposit with the City. Whenever the City Engineer agrees to accept escrow deposits in lieu of construction by the property
owner, the property owner shall deposit in escrow with the City an amount equal to the owner's share of the costs of design, construction,
permits, reviews and approvals, inspections, any additional land acquisition, and an appropriate (and realistic) inflation factor to ensure
that the actual “future dollar” costs will be covered when actual construction occurs in the future. This amount shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer, and shall be paid prior to recording of the Final Plat. The obligations and responsibilities of the property
owner shall become those of the property owner's transferees, successors and assigns; and the liability therefor shall be joint and several.
(1) Determination of Escrow Amount: The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using comparable “turnkey” costs
for construction of the improvements (including design, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections and any additional land
acquisition that may be needed). The determination of the escrow amount shall be made as of the time the escrow is due
hereunder, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
(2) Termination of Escrow: Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which have been placed with the City under this
section and which have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date of such payment or agreement, in the event that
the City has not authorized the preparation of plans and specifications for construction of such roadway facilities for which the
escrow was made, shall, upon written request, be returned to the property owner or applicant who originally paid the escrow
amount, along with all of its accrued interest. Such return does not remove any obligations of the property owner for
construction of the required facilities if a building permit has not been issued on the subject lot(s) or if application for a new
building permit(s) is made.
(3) Refund: If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the City, or is
reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the City, the escrowed funds and accrued interest shall be
refunded to the property owner or applicant who originally paid the escrow amount after completion and acceptance of the
public improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the City and the other portion of the cost by another
party or governmental authority, the difference between the property owner's actual proportionate cost and the escrowed funds,
including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements.
(4) Interest Limitation: If money is refunded within one (1) month of deposit, only the principal will be refunded. Monies
returned after this date will be refunded with all of its accrued interest.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.4 Street, Alley Abandonment and Closure Policy
(a) General. The abandonment or closure of a thoroughfare, alley, right-of-way or public street shall be by replat or plat abandonment
unless such was obtained by the City without platting.
(b) Quit Claim Deed. A Quit Claim deed that eliminates any and all future claim for City responsibility for the abandoned thoroughfare
or alley may be required by the City Council as part of the approval of the document (i.e., plat or separate instrument) that achieves
abandonment.
(c) Approval Process. Any street or alley closure or abandonment shall follow the same process as required for a zoning change. City
Council shall be the final decision maker.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.5 General Requirements
(a) Approach Roads and Access. All subdivisions with one hundred (100) or more lots must have at least two (2) points of vehicular
access (primarily for emergency vehicles), and must be connected with improved roadways to the City's improved thoroughfare and street
system by one or more approach roads of the dimensions and standards hereinafter set forth.
(1) Requirements for dedication of right-of-way and improvement of approach roads may be increased depending upon the
size or density of the proposed development.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/648
(2) Points of vehicular access into subdivisions shall meet the requirements of the City's adopted Fire Code.
(3) The subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public safety vehicles. Each residential lot
in the subdivision shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated public street as required by applicable zoning, or twenty-five
feet (25'), whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval. Each
nonresidential lot shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated public street as required by applicable zoning or fifty feet
(50'), whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval.
(b) Off-Site Improvements. Where the City believes public safety is at risk, the property owner shall make improvements to off-site
collector and arterial streets and intersections necessary to mitigate traffic impacts generated by the development or in conjunction with
related developments. The City may participate in the costs of oversize improvements with the property owner as set out herein, and
subject to the City's cost participation policies on oversized improvements.
(c) Street Dedications.
(1) Dedication of Right-of-Way: The property owner shall provide all rights-of-way required for existing or future streets,
and for all required street improvements, including perimeter streets and approach roads, as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan
and as required by the Design, Details, and Construction Standards or by other valid development plans approved by the City.
(2) Construction Easements: Construction easements, in addition to rights-of-way, shall be required when adequate width
for streets and/or utilities is not available.
(d) Street Construction. All streets and thoroughfares shall be constructed and paved to City standards and within rights-of-way as
required by the Thoroughfare Plan and this article, and in accordance with the Design, Details, and Construction Standards and other City
standards, as may be from time to time amended or adopted.
(e) Intersection Improvements and Traffic-Control Devices. Intersection improvements and traffic-control devices shall be installed as
may be required by the City for traffic safety and efficiency. Construction and design standards shall be in accordance with City standards
and the Design, Details, and Construction Standards.
(f) Private Streets. In relation to private streets, the City will not assist in enforcing deed restrictions. The City may periodically inspect
private streets, and may require any repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency access and to protect the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare.
(1) Private Streets: Construction and Maintenance: The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or
maintaining a private street. In the case of construction of new private streets, the City Engineer shall certify said streets
conform to all applicable standards and specifications referred to or contained herein this chapter. The subdivider shall
furthermore provide to the City Engineer a schedule of construction of private streets to accommodate inspection. In addition,
the subdivider shall reimburse the City of Abilene in costs of inspections.
(2) Private Streets: Traffic-Control Devices: All private traffic-control devices and regulatory signs shall conform to the
“Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,” as amended, and to City standards.
(3) Private Streets: Restricted Access: The subdivision homeowners' association shall clearly mark entrances to all private
streets with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, indicating that the streets within the subdivision are private, and
not maintained nor regularly patrolled by the City. All restricted access entrances shall be manned twenty-four (24) hours
every day, or they shall provide a reliable, alternative means of ensuring access into the subdivision by the City, by emergency
service providers, and by other utility or public service providers, such as postal carriers and utility companies, with
appropriate identification. The method used to ensure City and emergency access into the subdivision shall be approved by the
City's Fire Department and by any other applicable emergency service providers. If the homeowners' association fails to
maintain reliable access as required herein, the City may enter the private street subdivision and remove any gate or device
which is a barrier to access, and bill the expense to the association. If the bill is not paid, the City may file a lien for the
expense against any property owned by the association.
(4) Private Streets: Waiver of Services: Certain City services may not be provided for private street subdivisions. Among
the services which may not be provided are: routine law enforcement patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking regulations,
preparation of accident reports, and street lighting. Depending on the characteristics of the development and access limitations
posed by the design of entrances into the subdivision, other services (such as sanitation) may not be provided as well.
(5) Private Streets: Petition to Convert to Public Streets: The property owners' association may petition the City to accept
private streets and any associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members
and upon the favorable vote of a majority of the membership. However, in no event shall the City be obligated to accept the
streets as public. The City, as a condition of accepting a private street, may impose a requirement either for repairs and
improvements to a street at private expense prior to acceptance, or a written agreement by all property owners along the street
to payment of a pro-rata assessment of the costs for repairs or improvements to the street by the City prior to acceptance. The
City shall be the sole judge of the nature and extent of repairs or improvements needed. The City may also require, at the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/648
association's or the lot owners' expense, the removal of any guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other
aesthetic amenities located within the street or other common area prior to City acceptance.
(6) Private Streets: Hold Harmless: The property owners' association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances,
shall release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any other governmental entity, and any public utility entity for
damages to the private streets that may be occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by same, and for damages
and injury (including death) arising from the condition of the private streets, out of any use of access gates or cross arms, or
out of any use of the subdivision by the City or governmental or utility entity.
(7) Private Streets: City's Discretion: The City, at its discretion, retains the right to require a public street to ensure adequate
public street connectivity and appropriate access for vehicles and pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.6 Street Standards
(a) Design, Details, and Construction Standards Met. In addition to the requirements of the Design, Details, and Construction
Standards, the requirements of the street standards in this Section shall be met. If any conflict exists, the City Engineer shall determine
which standards shall be met.
(b) Arrangement of Streets and Conformance to the Thoroughfare Plan. Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) below, the City's
adopted Thoroughfare Plan shall be used as a guide for the type of roadway, the location of the roadway, and areas that the roadway is
intended to connect as part of the platting process.
(1) Streets Not Shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. For streets that are not shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, such as
local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets within a subdivision shall:
a. Conform to any plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impractical;
b. Provide for future access, such as by stubbing streets for future extension; and
c. Not conflict in any way with existing or proposed driveway openings (including those on the other side of an
existing or planned median-divided arterial, in which case new streets shall align with such driveway openings such that
median openings can be shared).
(c) Projections and Related Requirements. Where adjoining unsubdivided areas exist, the subdivision street arrangement shall make
provision for projection of streets into such areas. Dead-end streets shall otherwise be prohibited, except where projections into
unsubdivided land are necessary or where turnarounds are provided in accordance with Section 3.2.7.9 of this chapter. Private streets shall
not be allowed to project beyond the subdivision boundary, and therefore shall not be allowed to dead-end at the subdivision boundary.
(d) Transitions of Right-of-Way Width. Wherever the right-of-way width of a residential local or collector street must transition to a
greater or lesser width, the transition shall not occur within an intersection but within the street right-of-way so that the right-of-way shall
be the same on both sides of the street intersection.
(e) Subdivisions Abutting or Containing Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may require marginal access streets, shared driveway access on nonresidential lots, reverse or
double-frontage lots (lots which back onto the arterial), deep lots with rear service alleys, or such treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(f) Configuration Shall Reduce Minimal Offsets. Intersecting streets onto an existing or future divided roadway must be configured
such that the centerline offset will accommodate the appropriate median opening and left-turn lanes (with required transition and stacking
distances) on each divided roadway, and shall be aligned with any existing or proposed streets or driveways on the opposite side of the
divided roadway (in order to share the median opening).
(g) Right-of-Way Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan and as defined by the corresponding
roadway cross-sections on the Thoroughfare Plan, in the Design, Details, and Construction Standards, and in accordance with Section
3.2.7.9 (for cul-de-sacs) and Section 3.2.7.11 (for streets).
(h) Names of Extensions of Existing Streets. New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets, and
shall be dedicated at equal or greater right-of-way widths than the existing streets for an appropriate transition length, if applicable.
(i) Construction of Streets. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with paving widths and specifications as set forth in the
Design, Details, and Construction Standards at the time at which the Preliminary Plat application is officially submitted and deemed a
complete application.
(j) Street Grades and Horizontal Curves. Minimum and maximum street grades and horizontal curves will conform to standards set
forth in the Design, Details, and Construction Standards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/648
(k) Access Management. Access management standards and requirements related to TxDOT roadways and City roadways shall be in
accordance with Division 9.
(l) Screening Along Roadways. Screening requirements for roadways shall be in accordance with the zoning districts outlined in
Chapter 2 of this LDC; or with Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 2; or with Chapter 4, Article 2, Division 4, whichever is most applicable.
(m) Pedestrian Connectivity. Pedestrian connectivity and access shall be provided between subdivisions, schools, cul-de-sacs (i.e.,
bulb-to-bulb access) and park areas. In cases where a subdivision is constructed in a location that is adjacent to another subdivision,
pedestrian access shall be provided such that adjacent development can connect to such access at a later date, when development occurs.
Gated subdivisions may be exempt from this requirement upon approval by the Planning Director. Also refer to Article 2, Division 13 of
this Chapter (Sidewalks).
(n) Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. Streets and the layout of streets shall be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, and specifically the Thoroughfare Plan, to the furthest extent possible.
(o) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is required by the City and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.7 Intersections, Half-Streets
(a) Intersections. Street intersections shall be situated at an angle of ninety degrees (90°), plus or minus fifteen degrees (15°).
(b) Half Streets. Construction of half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision
in conforming with the other requirements of this Code and the Thoroughfare Plan, and where the Planning and Zoning Commission
makes a determination that there is no immediate benefit to be gained by constructing the full street section since no access from the
street will be needed by the subdivision in question. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also find that it would be more practical,
or cost effective, to delay construction of the other half of a street until when the adjoining property is developed.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.8 Street Length
(a) Length of a Block or Street Segment. The maximum length of any block or street segment (including a looped street) shall be
sixteen hundred feet (1,600') along arterial streets and in nonresidential zoning districts and shall be twelve hundred feet (1,200') along
other streets. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the minimum length of any block or street segment shall
be three hundred feet (300'), as measured along the street centerline and between the point(s) of intersection with other through streets
(i.e., not dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs).
(1) In cases where physical barriers or limitations imposed by existing adjacent development or subdivisions creates
conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased (through issuance of
a plat waiver with plat approval) to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic
and public safety.
(2) Where block lengths exceed the maximum, mid-block pedestrian crossings and/or cul-de-sac connections may be
required to facilitate pedestrian connectivity.
(b) Maximum Length of a Cul-De-Sac Street. No cul-de-sac in any multiple-family, industrial, or commercial district shall exceed six
hundred feet (600') in length. No cul-de-sac in any other zoning district shall exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length, nor shall any
such cul-de-sac be designed to serve more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units. For purposes of this paragraph, cul-de-sac length shall be
measured as the distance from the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround along the centerline of the right-of-way to the nearest right-of-way
line of an intersecting through street with more than one outlet to the City's thoroughfare system.
(c) Cross-Reference. Also see Section 3.2.7.9 below for cul-de-sac requirements.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.9 Cul-de-Sac Streets
(a) Cul-De-Sac Streets. Except where projecting into adjacent unsubdivided areas, any street having only one vehicular access to
another street shall be terminated by a permanent turnaround. Standards for both the turnaround and its street approach are set forth
within this Section 3.2.7.7 [3.2.7.9].
(1) That portion of any street extending from an intersection to a turnaround shall be improved and rights-of-way platted
with the minimal dimensions provided in Table 3-1 below.
TABLE 3-1: WIDTH FOR CUL-DE-SAC STREETS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/648
Activity Served Right-of-Way Width
Residential Districts 50'
Medical Use, College-University, and Nonresidential Zoning
Districts (except as otherwise specified) 60'
Heavy Commercial District and Industrial Districts 65'
(2) The turnaround portion of any cul-de-sac shall be improved, and rights-of-way platted, as prescribed below:
TABLE 3-2: VARIOUS CUL-DE-SAC TURNAROUNDS FOR
CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
Activity Served Right-of-Way
Radius
Right-of-Way
Radius Under
Certain
Circumstances**
Residential Zoning Districts, Medical Use,
College-University, and Nonresidential
Zoning Districts (except as otherwise
specified)
50' 50' or 54'
Heavy Commercial District and Industrial
Districts 60' 60' or 64'
** Where all public and private utilities are required or desired to be within street right-of-way. The more narrow measure indicates the
subdivider exercises his option to provide a common trench for electric and communication utilities. (See Section 3.2.6.2, Utility
Location Policies.)
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.10 Dead-End Streets
(a) Dead-End Streets. Except when recommended by the City Engineer, no public dead-end streets will be approved unless they are
provided to connect with existing streets (including stubbed-out streets) or future platted streets on adjacent land.
(1) In the case of dead-end streets which will eventually be extended into the adjacent property, no more than one lot (per
side) can front onto the dead-end street stub unless a temporary turnaround bulb (with the appropriate temporary street
easement) is provided at the end.
(2) A temporary dead-end street shall not exceed the maximum allowed length of a normal cul-de-sac, and the temporary
turnaround bulb must be constructed as provided in Section 3.2.7.9 above.
(3) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat clearly labeling any temporary dead-end streets (if any) that will at some point
be extended into the adjacent property, and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the
barricade, also stating that the street may be and is intended to be extended in the future. Signage and lettering must be large
enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a fifty-foot (50') distance. Any required temporary turnaround
easements shall be shown on the Final Plat along with their appropriate recording information, if they are off-site or
established by separate instrument.
(4) Private dead-end streets shall meet all the standards and requirements herein for public dead-end streets.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/648
Section 3.2.7.11 Street Width and Design
(a) Rights-of-Way Widths. Rights-of-way widths shall be as follows:
TABLE 3-3: WIDTHS REQUIRED BY STREET TYPE
Street Type Standard
Right-of-Way
Width
Minimum
Right-of-Way*
Right-of-Way
Width**
Sidewalk
Required
(See Division 13)
Expressway 300' 200' n/a Yes, on external
sides of frontage
roads
Arterial 120' 80' n/a Yes
The minimum centerline radius shall be sufficient to
accommodate a design speed of 45 miles per hour.
Minor Arterial 100' 60' n/a Yes
Collector 70' 60' 61' or 65' Yes
Additional right-of-way and paving width may be
required on approaches to arterial streets and
freeways or for bikeways.
The minimum centerline radius shall be 400'.
Subcollector 60' 55' 57' or 61' Dependent on
location and type
of development.
The minimum centerline radius shall be 250', except
for L-shaped (90°) intersections.
Local 50' 30' 51' or 55'
The minimum centerline radius shall be 150', except
for L-shaped (90°) intersections.
Alley -
Residential
20' 15' n/a No
Alley -
Commercial
28' 24 n/a No
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/648
* The purpose of the minimum right-of-way is to accommodate pre-existing situations in developed areas where it is impractical to
require the standard width.
** Where all public and private utilities are required or desired to be within street right-of-way. The more narrow measure indicates the
subdivider exercises his option to provide a common trench for electric and communication utilities. (See Section 3.2.6.2, Utility
Location Policies.)
(b) Design. Streets shall be designed according to the following requirements:
(1) Expressways. Streets shall be designed to accommodate cross-country and/or limited cross-city traffic movement, with
partial control of access and possible grade separation at major intersections. Unless otherwise specified, an expressway shall
also be considered a type of arterial street for the purpose of this code.
(2) Arterial. Streets shall be designed to accommodate cross-city traffic movement, distributing traffic to and from collector
streets. Unless otherwise specified, this definition shall be inclusive of minor arterial streets.
(3) Minor Arterial. Streets shall be designed to accommodate cross-city traffic movement at moderate volumes and speeds,
distributing traffic to and from collector streets.
(4) Collector. Streets shall be designed to collect traffic from local streets (i.e., subcollector and minor) and connect with
arterial streets and freeways.
(5) Subcollector. Generally, the term “subcollector” shall refer to streets designed to accommodate traffic movement from
minor streets to higher classifications of streets as well as provide direct access to activity on individual lots. Specifically, a
subcollector may be defined as any street or portion thereof providing direct access to property within commercial or
industrial districts as designated on the official Zoning Map of the City of Abilene, any street or portion thereof providing the
shortest direct route to a collector street for twenty-five (25) dwelling units or more, or any street segment extending without
offset from a collector street and connecting two or more collector streets. Where subcollector streets are terminated by a
permanent turnaround, standards for street width and paving shall be as described in Table 3-3.
(6) Minor. Streets shall be designed to provide direct access to residential activity, and in such a way as to discourage
through traffic. Where minor streets are terminated by a permanent turnaround, standards for street width and paving shall be
as described in Table 3-3.
(7) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to allow the minimum width in Table 3-3 above based on
the following criteria:
(a) Subdivision is located on a street that has been platted, and is primarily built out, on a narrower right-of-way.
(b) Sidewalks and/or utilities are located in easements outside the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.12 Street Offsets
(a) Intersection Offsets. No combination of two (2) streets intersecting a third shall have their centerlines offset any less than the
distance specified in Table 3-4:
TABLE 3-4: MINIMUM OFFSET DISTANCES
Types of Streets
Intersecting at Offset*
Type of Street
Intersected
Minimum Offset Distances
Non-Conflicting
Left Turn
Conflicting Left
Turn
Minor/Minor Local 75' 75'
Minor/Minor Collector 75' 75'
Minor/Minor Arterial 125' 125'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/648
Minor/Collector Collector 75' 125'
Minor/Collector Arterial 125' 200'
Minor/Arterial Arterial 200' 300'
Collector/Collector Collector 200' 300'
Collector/Collector Arterial 200' 300'
Collector/Arterial Arterial 200' 400'
* For the purposes of this paragraph, subcollectors shall be considered as minor streets, and freeways shall be considered as arterial
streets.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.13 Curbs and Gutters
(a) Curbs and Gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed according to the provisions of this Section 3.2.7.11 [3.2.7.13] and to the City
of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction. Combination curb and gutter improvements shall be provided to mark the edge of
pavement and carry off surface water, as set forth below:
(1) Beside Freeways. The subdivider shall be required to install curbs along any freeway frontage road within or adjacent to
a subdivision, where required by TxDOT.
(2) Beside Arterial and Collector Streets. The subdivider shall install curbs on both sides of all arterial and collector streets
within the subdivision, and on streets at the subdivision boundary per section 3.2.7.2(b)(1)(a).
(3) Beside Minor Streets and Subcollectors. The subdivider shall install curbs on both sides of all subcollector and minor
streets within the subdivision and at subdivision boundaries, except for existing boundary streets, in which case curb and
gutter installation shall be required on the subdivision side only.
(4) At Street Intersections. The minimum curvature of curbs at street intersections shall be as prescribed in Table 3-5:
TABLE 3-5: MINIMUM CURVATURE OF CURBS AT
STREET INTERSECTIONS
Intersection Curb Turn Radius
Minor with:
Minor, Subcollector, or
Collector
15'
Minor with:
Arterial or Freeway 20'
Subcollector with:
Subcollector, or Collector 20'
Subcollector with:
Arterial or Freeway
20'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/648
Collector with:
Collector 25'
Collector with:
Arterial or Freeway 30'
Arterial with:
Arterial or Freeway 40'
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.14 Street Names
(a) Preventing Conflict or Confusion. New streets in a subdivision shall be named in a way that will provide continuity of street names
and prevent conflict or confusion with existing street names in the City, in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction or in a neighboring
jurisdiction. A proposed new street name is in conflict with this subsection where:
(1) It duplicates or sounds phonetically similar to the name of a street already in use within the City or the City's
extraterritorial jurisdiction or designated as a future extension in the current Thoroughfare Plan;
(2) It differs from an existing street name in the City or the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction by the addition of an auxiliary
designation including “avenue,” “way,” “boulevard,” etc.; or
(3) The street to be named is an extension of or is in substantial alignment with an existing street in the City, the City's
extraterritorial jurisdiction or a neighboring jurisdiction and the proposed street name is different from the existing street
name.
(b) Continuous Extensions. For any new street segment that is or is planned to be a continuous extension of an existing street, the name
of the existing street shall be continued.
(c) Aligned Arterial and Collector Streets. For new segments of arterial and collector streets extended in approximately the same
alignment as an existing arterial or collector street, the name of the existing street shall be continued, even if some natural or man-made
feature such as a creek, freeway, or golf course precludes physical continuation of the street.
(d) Aligned Subcollectors and Minor Streets. New segments of minor streets and subcollectors shall not bear the name of any street
existing in approximately the same alignment and separated by some natural or man-made feature such as a creek, freeway, or golf
course.
(e) Duplication. The primary name of a new street shall not duplicate the primary name of an existing street, except as specified above
or if the new street is a cul-de-sac serving six (6) or fewer lots, in which case the new street may have the same primary name as the street
from which it extends, provided that all the following conditions exist:
(1) The suffix “court” is used to distinguish the name of that cul-de-sac from the name of the street from which it extends,
and
(2) The house numbers on that cul-de-sac are assigned as if they were actually on the side of the street from which the culde-
sac extends, and
(3) No existing cul-de-sac or court already carries the primary name.
(f) Renaming or changing existing street names.
(1) Application shall be submitted to the Planning Department no less than 21 days prior to the date of the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting at which the request is to be heard. An application form for such requests is available in the
Planning and Zoning office.
If a Department of the City is the applicant, an application form will be required but no application fee is required.
The Department Manager is required to sign an application for their Department.
(2) All requests or proposals are submitted to Plat Review Committee members 3 days following application submittal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/648
(3) Notice of the Plat Review Committee is posted 4 days prior to the meeting. The notice contains the agenda, which itself
contains street name change requests.
(4) Owners of property within 200 feet of the request are notified of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which
the request is to be heard.
(5) Notice of the request is published in the newspaper 15 days prior to the date of the City Council final action on the
ordinance changing the street name.
(6) The Plat Review Committee reviews the request and makes a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(7) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the request. If denied and not appealed, the
proposed change cannot be resubmitted for at least one year. If approved or denied and appealed, the request goes to City
Council in the form of an ordinance.
(8) The City Council shall consider the ordinance at two readings - the second reading being a public hearing.
(9) Conditions may be placed on the approval, including a requirement that the applicant is responsible for some or all of
the public costs associated with the change (for example, new street signs, etc.).
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.15 Private Streets
(a) Permitted Only as Subcollector or Minor Street. Private streets shall be permitted only as minor or subcollector streets in all
subdivisions. Construction and development of private streets shall meet the standards for right-of-way width and improvement as set
forth in this Division 7 as applied to public streets.
(b) Classification. At the time a private street is proposed, it shall be classified as either a minor or subcollector street, as described
herein and made to conform in all respects with right-of-way paving, curb and gutter, construction, and design requirements as applicable
to a public street.
(c) Subdivision Boundary Streets. New subdivision boundary streets shall not be private.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.7.16 Alleys
(a) Required.
(1) Alleys may be required to be dedicated in commercial and industrial subdivisions, but only if a formal request is made
by a member of the Development Review Committee (DRC). Said request shall be made in writing to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and it shall be kept as part of the file of the particular subdivision case.
(2) If a request of a DRC member is not made, the dedication of alleys shall be optional in all subdivisions, except where
alleys must be dedicated as direct continuations or extensions of ones existing in adjacent subdivisions. Such continuations
shall be extended in the same alignment as evident from adjacent lots in the existing subdivision, except where an existing
alley is less than twenty feet (20') wide. In that case, additional land shall be dedicated so as to form an alley at least twenty
feet (20') wide.
(b) Existing Subdivisions with Alleys. Where lots are subdivided or resubdivided adjacent to or within subdivisions already having
alleys, the alley must be improved only to the same extent as may be evident from the existing alley. Where lots are subdivided as
continuations of existing subdivisions already having alleys, alleys in the new subdivision shall be improved only to the same standards
as those existing alleys, all the way to the first street intersection. Thereafter, if alleys are required or desired, they should conform to
standards for alley dedication and improvement set forth in subsections (1) and (2) below:
(1) Alleys in commercial, industrial, and multiple-family residential districts (including townhouses and patio homes where
rear automobile access is intended) must be a minimum width of twenty-eight feet (28'). Twenty-four feet (24') of the
minimum width must be surfaced in accordance with the City's Design, Details, and Construction Standards.
(2) Alleys in subdivisions, or portions thereof, proposed for single-family residential use must be a minimum width of
twenty feet (20'). Sixteen feet (16') of the minimum width must be surfaced in accordance with the City's Design, Details, and
Construction Standards.
(c) General Requirements.
(1) Alleys shall be as nearly parallel to the street frontage as reasonably possible.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/648
(2) Alley intersections with streets shall be as close to right angles (90°) as practical.
(3) Where two alleys intersect or turn at an angle, a corner clip of not less than ten feet (10') from the normal intersection of
the property line shall be provided along each property line.
(4) If alleys are not straight within each block or do not connect on a straight course with alleys on adjoining blocks, an
easement shall be provided for the placement of guy wires on lot division lines necessary to support overhead utility poles set
on curving or deviating alley rights-of-way.
(5) Alleys shall not be platted to intersect any arterial streets.
(6) Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted unless a permanent or temporary turnaround is provided. The following standards
shall apply:
a. Turnarounds shall be provided with a minimum radius of thirty feet (30').
b. In instances where dead-end alleys will clearly be permanent, turnarounds shall be surfaced in accordance with the
City's Design, Details, and Construction Standards.
(7) Layout and arrangement of alleys shall be designed to avoid the creation of shortcuts for traffic and to discourage use by
traffic other than that generated by activity within property abutting the alley.
(8) Cross intersections of alleys shall not be permitted.
(9) Alleys forming the boundary of a subdivision, and adjacent to unplatted property, shall be dedicated and improved the
same as if situated in the interior of a subdivision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.7.17 Alternative Design Standards
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the consideration of subdivision improvement designs which differ from the
conventional design standards as outlined within this Division of the LDC, but which are based upon sound engineering judgment. Such
alternative(s) shall meet the purpose and intent of the standard being varied. In this context, “subdivision improvements” shall mean
physical improvements such as streets, water and sewer, as well as any other infrastructure element of a proposed development.
Alternative designs shall not be accepted for the layout of streets, lots, blocks, or street connectivity.
(b) Approval Based on Engineering. Decisions regarding design of various physical improvements in a subdivision should be based on
engineering studies. Thus, while this Code provides standards for design, the regulations are not a substitute for sound engineering
judgment. Therefore, a licensed engineer may submit alternative designs to be reviewed and considered by the City Engineer.
(c) Relationship to Standards in Division 7. If the proposed alternative design is approved by the City Engineer, then the all other
applicable provisions of Division 7 shall be deemed to have been met. If the proposed alternative design standards are not approved by
the City Engineer, then the standards contained within Division 7 shall apply.
(d) Appeals to the Planning & Zoning Commission. If a proposed alternative design is rejected by the City Engineer, the subdivider
may appeal the decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Prior to being considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission, the
appeal shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC). The DRC shall make a recommendation on the appeal to the
Planning & Zoning Commission.
(e) Decision. The decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be final.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 8 - Reserved
Division 9 - Driveways and Access Management
Section 3.2.9.1 Reference
(a) Major Driveways. The location of new major driveways on arterial and minor arterial streets shall include consideration of major
driveways and public streets on the opposite side of the street from the new driveway. A major driveway is a Type II or Type III driveway
if it has a Monday through Saturday peak hour volume that exceeds 200 vehicles based upon ITE trip generation rates and standard traffic
engineering application of trip assignment. New major driveways shall be aligned with existing major driveways and public streets on the
opposite side or shall be located more than 200 feet before (relative to the traffic flow on the side of the new driveway) or more than 100
feet after the new driveway. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/648
Section 3.2.9.2 Driveway Approaches and Related Requirements
(a) Other Standards. Driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, pavements and appurtenances on public property and other facilities to
provide access to abutting properties in the City and ETJ in connection with platting or building construction shall be constructed,
provided, altered or repaired in accordance with the Design, Details, and Construction Standards and as prescribed by the standards
outlined within this Division.
(b) All Driveway Approaches. All driveway approaches shall comply with the following standards.
(1) Sidewalk to Be Removed. Where a driveway approach is designed to cross an existing sidewalk, the sidewalk included
in the driveway approach area shall be removed and reconstructed as a driveway approach unless the City Engineer has
determined that the section of sidewalk fully complies with the requirements of this section for driveway approaches. The area
across the driveway will be jointed and edged as a sidewalk. The depth and design for the sidewalk will be consistent with the
driveway approved design and will be consistent with ADA regulations.
(2) Removal of Curb and Gutter. Where a driveway approach is to be constructed at a location where a curb and gutter is in
place, the curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest existing construction joint or a new construction joint formed by
other methods as may be approved by the City Engineer. The driveway approach shall be constructed in accordance with the
City's Design, Details, and Construction Standards.
(3) Drainage. Driveway approaches shall be designed to prevent the entrance of water from the street onto private property,
except that a drainage system may be provided within the property to handle water coming from the street. Driveway
approaches and related drainage systems shall be constructed in accordance with the City's Design, Details, and Construction
Standards.
(4) Radius. Driveway approaches shall be constructed with either flared side slopes or with return curbs having a rolled face
disappearing at the sidewalks and joining the street curb with a radius to conform to the dimensions as required by Table 3-6.
Flared side slopes shall be used whenever a curb return may present an architectural barrier within a pedestrian path. Driveway
flares shall not extend in front of the adjacent property. The radius shall continue beyond the sidewalk to the end of the
required dimension.
(5) Design Criteria.
(a) For all gated driveways the gate shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the edge of the street pavement
except gated driveways on arterial streets serving heavy truck traffic shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet.
(b) Driveway construction shall not occur without a driveway permit issued by the Engineering Division. Applications
for all Type II and Type III driveways shall be accompanied by an approved site plan of the parcel [with a] scaled
drawing showing the total street frontage of the parcel and the driveway's relationship to the parking and buildings on the
parcel.
(c) For driveways with medians, the driveway width criteria apply to the sum of the driving surface on both sides of
the median and the median width is in addition to that. The minimum width of the median is five (5) feet and the
maximum width is 20 feet. For median widths greater than ten (10) feet, the end of the median shall have a bullet-nose
design based on AASHTO standards. The end of the median shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge
of the roadway.
(d) Residential driveways shall have a minimum separation equal to the sum of the required curb returns for the two
driveways.
(6) Release of City. In consideration for the approval of substandard construction, the applicant/property owner shall be
required to release and acquit the City from any and all damages that may result from substandard construction. The form of
release shall be as approved by the City Attorney.
(c) Type I Driveway Approaches. Type I driveway approaches shall comply with Table 3-6.
TABLE 3-6:
Driveway Development Width (ft.) Curb Return (ft.)
Min Max Min Max
Type I Single-Family, Duplex 10 20 3 Local & Collector
5 Arterial
5 Local & Collector
10 Arterial
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/648
Type II
Multifamily,
Commercial
10 1-Way
24 2-Way
16 1-Way
36 2-Way
10 Local
15 Other
20 Local
25 Other
Type III
Industrial (Serving
Heavy Trucks Only)
30 40 20 30
(d) Type II and Type III Driveway Approaches. Type II and Type III driveway approaches shall comply with the following standards
and with Table 3-6.
(1) Width of Driveway Approach. On local streets the width of any driveway approach shall conform to the dimensions as
required by Table 3-6, and the width shall be as measured along the property line, except that driveway approaches for motor
vehicle docks, within a building, shall not exceed sixty feet (60') in width at the property line. The width shall be measured to
the centerline of the driveway at the property line where the curb return ends.
(2) Maximum Space to Be Occupied By Driveway Approaches. Driveway approaches shall not occupy more than seventy
percent (70%) of the roadway abutting frontage of the tract of ground devoted to one particular use.
(3) Number of Driveway Approaches Allowed. On local streets not more than one (1) driveway approach shall be permitted
on any parcel of property with a frontage of one hundred feet (100') or less, except that additional openings may be permitted
with the approval of the City Engineer for the necessity and convenience of the public. For arterials the distances shall be 300
feet.
(4) Driveway Separation. When more than one (1) driveway approach is required to serve a parcel of property, the driveway
approaches shall be separated by a minimum distance, as measured between the edge of the driveway and the adjacent
driveway or street right-of-way, as required by Table 3-7. The minimum separation from an arterial or collector intersection
shall be 100 feet.
TABLE 3-7: DRIVEWAY SPACING STANDARDS
Street Type Minimum Separation
Between Drives (feet)
Minimum Separation
from Intersection (feet)
Arterial 200* 150'
Minor Arterial 150* 100
Collector 100 75
Subcollector 50 50
Local 25 50
* Separation may be reduced, at the discretion of the City Engineer, where right-in/ right-out only driveway is used.
Such drives must be on a median-separated road or be designed to physically prevent vehicles from making a left
turn.
Notes:
a) Single-family and two-family developments are exempt from these standards on local and collector streets.
b) Where a bike path is adjacent to the roadway, driveway spacing shall be increased to minimize conflicts and
accommodate bicyclist safety:
a. Arterial or Minor Arterial: 250 feet driveway spacing
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/648
b. Collector or Lower: 200 feet driveway spacing
c) Where a property at a corner does not have the necessary frontage to accommodate the required spacing from the
intersection, or an interior property does not have adequate width to meet the spacing requirements from an existing
driveway on an adjacent property, a common access easement with adjacent property(ies) shall be utilized to obtain the
necessary spacing. Where site limitations preclude such common access easements, or where cooperation of adjacent
property owners cannot be obtained (within a period of 90 days), the City Engineer may authorize a noncompliant
driveway, which should be spaced as far from the intersection as practical.
d) Where there is a signalized “T” intersection on the opposite side of the street, the spacing requirements shall apply.
(5) Requirements for Safety Curb. Where the grade at the property line may result in part of the vehicle extending into the
pedestrian way, a safety curb or pipe rail, post and cable shall be located so that no part of a vehicle shall extend over the
property line into the right-of-way. The safety curb shall be constructed or arranged to end twenty-four inches (24") from the
intersection of the driveway approach with the property line.
(6) Shared Driveways. Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the frontage of the premises abutting the work,
except that shared driveway access with adjoining property holders may be permitted provided joint application is made by all
interested parties and the requirements of Section 3.2.9.3 below are met.
(7) Angle of Driveway Approach. The angle of the driveway approach with the curbline shall be approximately ninety
degrees (90°) for two-way driveways, or forty-five degrees (45°) to ninety degrees (90°) for one-way driveways.
(8) Driveway Approaches at Intersections. Corner parcels less than one hundred and fifty feet (150') in length along the
right-of-way shall combine access with adjoining property, wherever possible. Where it can be shown that access is effectively
denied a corner parcel because of the required distance from the corner of the intersecting right-of-way and combined access is
not available from adjoining property, a variation to the requirement may be granted by the City Engineer, provided the
applicant demonstrates that a variation will not create a traffic hazard.
(9) Driveway Approaches at Roadway Facilities. Driveway approaches at or near traffic interchanges, grade separations and
traffic circles shall be so located that traffic entering or leaving the street will not impede, confuse, imperil or otherwise
interfere with vehicular traffic.
(10) Driveway Approaches in Existing On-Street Angle or Head-In Parking Areas. Driveway approaches shall not be
constructed in existing on-street angle or head-in parking areas unless all curb is restored to a standard location along the
roadway in front of the premises.
(11) Obstruction of Driveway Approaches. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or designed so that standing or
parked vehicles may obstruct the driveway.
(12) Premises Used As Motor Bank. Premises used as a motor or drive-through bank may have driveway approaches as
approved by the City Engineer. The approaches shall be utilized for drive facilities and shall not be utilized for angle or headin
parking.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.9.3 Shared Driveways and Cross-Access Drives
(a) Driveway Approaches and Shared Driveways. Shared access for all driveways are encouraged by the City in order to ensure public
safety access by providing mutual/common access to a median opening, to minimize the number of driveway cuts on streets, thereby
maintaining street mobility, and to facilitate traffic flow between adjacent lots. (See Figure 3-1.)
(1) Arterial Street. A shared mutual access easement(s) for a driveway(s) may be required by the City between driveways
on adjacent lots fronting on an arterial street, as designated on the Thoroughfare Plan (as the street exists or is planned to be
improved in the future);
(2) Location and Dimension. The location and dimensions of such easement(s) shall be determined by the Planning Director
and City Engineer.
(3) Easement on Plats. Such easements shall be noted on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat with the language specified as
part of the City's application requirements.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/648
Figure 3-1: Shared Access Driveway & Cross Access Internal Driveway
(b) Type II and Type III Driveway Approaches and Cross Access Internal Driveways. Cross access easements for internal driveways
are encouraged by the City in order to minimize the number of driveway cuts on streets, thereby maintaining street mobility, and to
facilitate traffic flow between adjacent lots. (See Figure 3-1.)
(1) May Be Required. A cross access easement(s) for an internal driveway(s) may be required between adjacent lots;
(2) Location and Dimension. The location and dimensions of such easement(s) shall be determined by the Planning Director
and City Engineer.
(3) Easement on Plats. Such easements shall be noted on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat with the language specified as
part of the City's application requirements.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 10 - Reserved
Division 11 - Stormwater Management Requirements
Section 3.2.11.1 Purpose, Definitions, and Methods
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Division 11 to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to achieve the following:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
(4) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(5) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of all areas in such a manner as to
minimize future flood blight areas;
(6) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area;
(7) Secure review and approval of the method for handling and disposing of stormwater runoff in the City of Abilene and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, and securing review, analysis, and approval by the appropriate authority of the design,
construction, and maintenance of drainageway facilities in conformance with the Abilene Stream Management Plan and
Abilene Drainage Standards;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/648
(8) Impose standards and conditions upon the excavating, grading, filling, berming, and diking of the land within the City of
Abilene in conformance with the Abilene Stream Management Plan and Abilene Drainage Standards;
(9) Minimize the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands causing injury to others;
(10) Insure the safety of access to property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and,
(11) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(b) Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Division 11 shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give the provisions of this Division their most reasonable application.
(1) Abilene Drainage Standards. The criteria, standards and specifications for storm drainage, streets, and earth change
adopted by the City of Abilene.
(2) Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provisions of this ordinance or a
request for a variance.
(3) Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one
percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
(4) Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in a floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FIRM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, or A1-99.
(5) Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(6) Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also
called the Base Flood.
(7) City. The City of Abilene and all lands located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(8) Critical Feature - means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
(9) Detention. The temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff.
(10) Detention Facility. A facility that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff.
(11) Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
(12) Drainage Facilities. Includes all elements necessary to convey stormwater runoff from its initial contact with earth to
its disposition in an existing drainageway, and said drainageway facilities shall consist of both public and private storm sewers
(closed conduits), improved channel constructed in conformity with adopted Abilene Drainage Standards, unimproved
drainageways left in their natural condition, areas covered by restricted drainageways, easements for the purpose of providing
overland flow and all appurtenances to the foregoing, including inlets, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls, dissipators,
culverts, etc.
(13) Drainage Plan. A plan which consists of engineering drawings, contour maps, and all supporting engineering
calculations, as applicable to the land area covered by the plan, which are required to demonstrate full compliance with the
Stormwater Management Requirements and the Abilene Drainage Standards.
(14) Earth Change. Excavating, grading, filling, berming, or diking of land.
(15) Elevated Building. A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, B, C,
X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, B, C, X, D,
“elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/648
(16) Existing Construction. For the purpose of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing
construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
(17) Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is
completed before the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
(18) Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).
(19) Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
(20) Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A.
(21) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has determined both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
(22) Flood Insurance Study. Is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report
contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
(23) Floodplain Administrator. The official designated by the City Manager to administer this ordinance, or an authorized
representative.
(24) Floodplain or Floodprone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition
of flooding).
(25) Flood Protection System. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a
community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such as system typically
includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
(26) Floodway Development Permit. A permit required prior to building construction or earth change of any property within
a designated floodway.
(27) Floodway (Regulatory Floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
(28) Habitable Floor. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation,
or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only (such as storage of cars) is not a “habitable floor.”
(29) Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
(30) Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/648
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or;
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(31) Impervious Surface. Any surface with a runoff coefficient based on the Rational Method of runoff calculation with a
value equal to or greater than 0.85. Examples of impervious surfaces include roofs, pavement, and compacted base material.
(32) Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
(33) Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure
and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. At a minimum, they
are to meet all Federal Emergency Management Agency Requirements.
(34) Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
(35) Major Drainage System. The l00-year frequency flood shall be contained within the right-of-way or dedicated
easement of all major drainage systems. These facilities include floodways, improved channels, detention reservoirs, and
overland swales.
(36) Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
(37) Natural. The cover and topography of land before any man-made changes, or in areas where there have already been
man-made modifications, the state of the area and topography of land on April 30, 1983.
(38) New Construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
(39) New Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after April 30, l983.
(40) Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
(41) Regulatory Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based upon
the existing conditions, adopted Floodwater Management Policies, and the Stormwater Management Requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations.
(42) Sedimentation Facilities. Including but not limited to land terraces, hay bales, and vegetation groundcovers used to
reduce transport of suspended solids.
(43) Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or addition[,] placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(44) Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/648
(45) Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
(46) Substantial Improvement. Within a regulatory floodplain or floodway, any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a “historic structure.”
c. Routine maintenance, minor repairs, painting, or similar improvements.
(47) Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Division 11 when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this Section.
(48) Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance with these requirements is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
(49) Water Surface Elevation. The height in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(c) Methods for Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purpose, this Division 11 uses the following methods:
(1) Limit runoff from development to a level not to exceed that runoff that would exist under natural, undeveloped
conditions unless provided for in a regional detention facility. The ‘natural' state shall be as defined in subsection (b)
Definitions above.
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood, or cause increases in flood
heights or velocities.
(3) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at
the time of initial construction.
(4) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(5) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage.
(6) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 27-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 5-14-15; Ord. No. 10-2016, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 2-25-16)
Section 3.2.11.2 General Provisions
(a) Lands to Which This Section Applies. This Division 11 shall apply to all areas within the City of Abilene and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(b) Proper Drainage, Plans, Approval. All subdivisions shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater without damage to persons
or property. The subdivision shall be designed to ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide positive drainage away from
building sites while, simultaneously, preventing discharge of runoff onto adjacent properties.
(c) Responsibility. All drainage facilities required in accordance with this chapter shall be installed and paid for by the subdivider in
accordance with applicable standards and specifications of the City of Abilene.
(d) Additional Standards and Requirements. All plans for drainage control shall be consistent with requirements of Article 2, Division
11 of this Chapter as well as with local and regional drainage plans. All plans for drainage control shall also be subject to approval by the
City Engineer or his duly authorized representative.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/648
(e) Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a specific engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Abilene,” dated August 23,
1979, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Maps and any revision thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this LDC of the City of Abilene.
(f) Drainage Standards. The Floodplain Administrator shall apply standards, where applicable, for drainageway facilities and
stormwater detention facilities which shall become adopted “Abilene Drainage Standards” after the same are approved by resolution of
the Abilene City Council. Said Abilene Drainage Standards shall be followed by every person, firm, corporation in the construction,
installation, and maintenance of drainageway facilities and stormwater detention facilities. The Abilene Drainage Standards, as adopted,
may be amended by City Council resolution. The adopted Abilene Drainage Standards shall regulate the design, installation, utilization
and maintenance of all detention and drainage facilities and structures; the design, installation, utilization and maintenance of
sedimentation and erosion control procedures, facilities and structures; and shall establish acceptable methods for controlling soil
sedimentation and erosion.
(g) Establishment of Floodway Development Permit. A Floodway Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this Division 11.
(h) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms
of this Division and other applicable regulations. The provisions of this Section shall apply to and be binding upon every person, firm, or
corporation who seeks to develop, redevelop, grade, excavate, fill, berm, or dike land within the City of Abilene.
(i) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. The requirements of this Division are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(j) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Division, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the purpose of this Division; and,
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
(k) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Division is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. The requirements of this Division shall not
create liability on the part of the City of Abilene or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this Division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(l) Localized Flooding Areas. A map depicting the drainage areas which contribute to localized flooding problems shall become
adopted as the “Localized Flooding Areas Map” after the same is approved by resolution of the Abilene City Council. The map as
adopted may be amended by City Council resolution. The map will serve as the basis for application for the stormwater management
criteria to individual developments.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.11.3 Standards for Subdivision Plats
(a) Consistency Required. All subdivision plats shall be consistent with all provisions of this Division 11.
(b) Requirements. All plats for the development of subdivisions shall meet Floodway Development Permit requirements of Section
3.2.11.5, in addition to the provisions of Section 3.2.11.6 and the Drainage Plan requirements of Section 3.2.11.4.
(c) Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision plats and other proposed development, if
applicable.
(d) Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions.
(1) All subdivision plats including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(2) All subdivision plats including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(e) Provisions Prior to Final Approval of Plats. Prior to final approval of a Final Plat, the developer shall provide either:
(1) Actual construction of all approved drainage and detention facilities required by the City of Abilene; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/648
(2) Sufficient surety bond, trust agreement, performance bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit approved by the Floodplain
Administrator and City Attorney guaranteeing the developer's pro-rata share of construction of all required drainageway and
detention facilities in accordance with an approved Drainage Plan (in conjunction with approved Construction Plans) and duly
adopted Abilene Drainage Standards; or,
(3) An alternative form of assurance proposed by the developer to guarantee the developer's pro-rata share of construction
of all required drainageway and detention facilities in accordance with an approved Drainage Plan (in conjunction with
approved Construction Plans) and the adopted Abilene Drainage Standards, said alternative form of assurance having been
accepted by the Abilene Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.11.4 Drainage Plans
(a) Drainage Plans. A Drainage Plan, as defined and regulated by the provisions of this Section, shall be submitted to and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator as part of the requirements for Construction Plans for any subdivision of land or site plan. Property not
located in areas of special flood hazard as defined herein, and where no improvements are required, shall not be required to submit a
Drainage Plan.
(b) Responsible Official. The Floodplain Administrator shall be the responsible official for a Drainage Plan.
(c) Determination of Requirement in Relation to a Floodway Development Permit. Prior to the Floodplain Administrator's approval of
any Floodway Development Permit, and prior to the issuance of a building permit or a Site Development Permit for the construction of a
parking lot, when a Drainage Plan has not been previously required under the terms of this Section, the Floodplain Administrator shall
determine whether a Drainage Plan should be required and may require such plan in such instances where the same is necessary to meet
the purposes of this Section.
(1) In general, development on a tract of less than one-half (1/2) acre that has less than forty-five percent (45%) impervious
surface will not be required to submit a formal Drainage Plan.
(2) Development which creates less than twenty thousand (20,000) total square feet of impervious surface on the site will
not be required to submit a formal Drainage Plan. This calculation is determined as new impervious surface from its natural
state as defined in Section 3.2.11.1(b) Definitions for ‘Natural'.
(3) Development located within the following designated infill areas will not be required to submit a formal Drainage Plan:
a. The Central Business District, as defined in the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
b. Infill development corridors, as defined in the City's Infill Development Strategy, excluding East Highway 80.
(4) When a Drainage Plan is required prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the structure for which the Building Permit has
been obtained shall not be used or occupied until the facilities as shown on the approved Drainage Plan have been completed
by the permit applicant and accepted by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) An updated Drainage Plan is required when associated with a revised site plan where drainage plans have been
previously approved.
(d) Required Submissions and Technical Data. All Drainage Plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed by
the State of Texas.
(1) Drainage Plans submitted for final approval shall bear the signature of the submitting engineer and the following
certification:
“I hereby certify that I am familiar with the adopted ordinances and regulations of the City of Abilene governing
detention and drainage facilities; that these plans have been prepared under my direct engineering supervision; and
that the above and foregoing Drainage Plan complies with all governing ordinances and the adopted drainage
standards of the City of Abilene pertaining to detention and drainage facilities to the best of my knowledge,
information and belief.”
(2) Upon completion of the proposed improvements, a certification from a contractor or registered professional engineer
shall be provided similar to the following certification:
“I hereby certify that the detention improvements were constructed and completed in accordance with the approved
Drainage Plans.”
(e) Plan Elements. A Drainage Plan shall consist of engineering drawings, contour maps, and all supporting engineering calculations,
as applicable to the land area covered by the Plan which are required to demonstrate full compliance with the requirements of this
Division and Abilene's adopted Drainage Standards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/648
(f) Requirements in Areas of Special Flood Hazards. Drainage Plans for developments in areas of special flood hazard shall also
contain the following:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all proposed structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any residential and nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that to the best of their knowledge the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 3.2.11.6 and applicable building codes; and,
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
(g) Administration of Drainage Plans.
(1) Processing of Drainage Plans. All Drainage Plans as required by this Section shall be submitted to and received by the
Floodplain Administrator. A conference to discuss the Drainage Plan may be held with the Floodplain Administrator, but only
after Construction Plans have been officially submitted.
a. Within ten (10) working days after receipt of a properly completed Drainage Plan (also refer to Chapter 1, Section
1.2.1.2), the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or deny the submitted plan.
b. Approval of a submitted Drainage Plan shall only constitute acceptance by the Floodplain Administrator of the
certification of the submitting engineer and such acceptance shall not operate to remove any requirement of Abilene's
adopted Drainage Standards which are not specifically considered in the approved plan.
c. Drainage Plans which meet the requirements of this ordinance and which conform to all requirements of the
adopted Abilene Drainage Standards shall be approved.
d. If the required findings cannot be made based upon the information contained in the submitted plan, such additional
information as is required by the Floodplain Administrator to make such determination will be identified; in the event
that the information deficiency is of a technical nature, the Floodplain Administrator may request an engineering
conference with the submitting engineer.
e. If a submitted Drainage Plan is denied, the certifying engineer or applicant, as applicable, shall be advised in
writing of the disapproval.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 27-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 5-14-15; Ord.
No. 39-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 8-13-15)
Section 3.2.11.5 Floodway Development Permits
(a) Floodway Development Permit Requirements. A Floodway Development Permit, as defined and regulated by this Division, shall be
required prior to the commencement of any building construction, or earth change, of any property within a designated floodway.
Floodway Development Permits shall not be required for activities listed in 3.2.11.2(b) [3.2.11.5(b)]. A separate permit shall be required
for each separate, noncontiguous site or lot, and no permit shall be transferable without the prior written consent of the Floodplain
Administrator.
(b) Floodway Development Permit Exemptions. A Floodway Development Permit shall not be required for the following activities:
(1) Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the principal use of any lot or tract of ground in the City
of Abilene and which meets the requirements of the zoning regulations within Chapter 2 of this LDC.
(2) Customary and incidental routine grounds maintenance, landscaping, and home gardening which does not require a
permit, a zoning variance, or a building permit, and which does not affect stormwater drainage through the site.
(3) Emergency repairs of a temporary nature made on public or private property which are necessary for the preservation of
life, health, or property, and which are made under such circumstances where it would be impossible or impracticable to obtain
a Floodway Development Permit.
(4) Excavation for the purpose of constructing, installing, maintaining, or repairing any public street, public utility facility,
or any service lines related thereto.
(c) Floodway Development Permit Application. A written application for a Floodway Development Permit shall be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Applications shall be in such form and content as the Floodplain Administrator shall establish, and shall be
accompanied by the payment of a permit fee, the amount of which shall be determined by fee resolution by the City Council and placed
on file in the office of the City Secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/648
(d) Contents of Permit Application. Each Floodway Development Permit application shall include all the information specified within
paragraphs (1) through (6) below. Provided, however, that if the Floodplain Administrator is unable to determine from the application
submitted that it meets the policies and standards governing the issuance of the requested permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
request the applicant in writing to furnish such additional information as may be essential to such determination. This Section governing
the contents of Floodway Development Permit applications shall not require the resubmission of any documents, drawings, or other
information which was previously submitted by the applicant in conjunction with the processing of a Drainage Plan approved since April
30, 1983, by the Floodplain Administrator for the same site and type of development.
(1) The name and address of the legal owner of the property for which the permit is requested.
(2) A vicinity sketch and boundary line survey of the site for which a permit is requested, including a legal description of
such property.
(3) Site drawings indicating each separate land area to be excavated, filled, graded, or leveled, the finished depth of each
separate land cut or fill, the present and future (as completed) points of entry and discharge for surface water on the subject
property and identification of all temporary or permanent structures or other devices to be erected or established for the
purpose of controlling or regulating surface water and erosion on such property.
(4) The applicant's plans for controlling erosion and sedimentation for the purpose of preventing the deposit of sediment
from the lot or tract under application upon any other public or private property or watercourse during all phases of project
construction.
(5) The applicant's plans for receipt of surface water on his property and discharge of surface water from his property during
periods of construction, and a statement specifying the anticipated time period for the completion of all drainage and related
improvements.
(6) For developments in areas of special flood hazard, the requirements of Section 3.2.11.6 must be addressed within the
Floodway Development Permit application.
(e) Processing Permits. Within twenty (20) working days after receipt of a complete application for a Floodway Development Permit
application (also refer to Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1.2), the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or deny the permit application.
(1) If the required findings cannot be made based upon the information contained in the submitted permit application, the
general nature of such additional information as is required by the Floodplain Administrator to make such determination will
be identified. In the event that the information deficiency is of a technical nature, the Floodplain Administrator may
additionally request an engineering conference with the submitting engineer.
(2) If a Floodway Development Permit is denied, the certifying engineer or applicant shall be advised in writing of the
denial with an explanation for such.
(f) Conditions for Approval. Floodway Development Permits shall meet the following conditions:
(1) No earth change shall be permitted which creates a public hazard upon any property within the City of Abilene through
the obstruction, impairment, sedimentation, blockage or alteration of any storm sewer drain or any existing surface
watercourse.
(2) No earth change shall be permitted which will channelize, obstruct, or impede any watercourse in a manner which is
inconsistent with accepted engineering practices and/or the adopted Drainage Standards of the City of Abilene. (Also see Site
Preparation, Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 2 [Division 3].)
(3) All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, and completed in a manner which minimizes the exposure of bare earth
to precipitation.
(4) No earth change shall be permitted which will increase surface runoff to a level, amount or a rate greater than that
existing under natural conditions, except runoff which has been provided for through use of an approved regional detention
facility.
(5) Construction activity on residential tracts or commercial and industrial tracts shall be conducted only if appropriate
sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period in accordance with the adopted
Abilene Drainage Standards.
(6) As may be applicable to any lot, parcel, or tract of land for which an approved Drainage Plan exists, the requirements
and conditions of the Drainage Plan shall be incorporated as a condition upon the issuance of any Floodway Development
Permit.
(7) In the regulatory floodway, Floodway Development Permits may not be issued until the standards of this Division have
been satisfied and until evidence has been presented demonstrating that the proposed encroachment:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/648
a. Will not result in any increase in floodway levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge; and
b. Is consistent with the Abilene Stream Management Plan and Abilene Drainage Standards; and
c. Meets the standards of this Division including, specifically, Section 3.2.11.6 concerning special provisions for flood
hazard reduction in areas of special flood hazard.
(8) Prior to granting any Floodway Development Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall attach such additional
conditions thereto as he may deem reasonable and necessary to prevent hazard to public or private property resulting from the
blockage, obstruction, alteration, or impairment of any storm sewer drain or surface watercourse and to prevent the work
thereby authorized from being conducted in a manner hazardous to lives or property, or otherwise likely to create a public
nuisance.
(9) Requirements established and approved by the Floodplain Administrator shall become conditions upon the issuance of
the Floodway Development Permit; no changes in approved plans, design standards, or conditions shall be made without prior
written approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
(g) Map Amendment. Where an approved Floodway Development Permit has been issued and the proposed improvements will result
in changes in the floodway boundary, the Floodplain Administrator may immediately take the appropriate steps necessary to secure a map
amendment.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.6 Special Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction in Areas of Special Flood Hazard
(a) General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following general provisions shall prevail:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and,
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(8) All applicable building codes of the City of Abilene.
(b) Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in this
Division, the following provisions are required.
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement), elevated to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or eighteen inches (18") above the
gutter whichever is most restrictive. For a hillside lot in an area of special flood hazard, the eighteen (18) inch above gutter
requirement may be waived by an approved Drainage Plan prepared by a registered professional engineer that demonstrates
that the residence is safe from flooding. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification in the specified format to the City Engineer that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. Such certification shall
include both the elevation relative to base flood and the elevation relative to the gutter or that the construction conforms to the
approved Drainage Plan.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot above the base flood level
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/648
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer, architect or land
surveyor shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A
record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes.
a. Require that manufactured homes or manufactured homes used commercially that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, and AO on the community's FIRM on sites:
1. Outside of manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
b. Require that manufactured homes or manufactured homes used commercially to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zone A, A1-A30, AH and AE, and on
the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provision of Subsection (b)(4)a above be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
c. Require that manufactured homes or manufactured homes used commercially to be placed on substantially
improved sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zone AO on the community's FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of Subsection (b)(4)a above be elevated so that either
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at the zone depth number, or
2. The manufactured home chassis supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements or at least
equivalent structures that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
d. All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with Subsections (b)(4)a, (b)(4)b, and (b)(4)c, or shall be eighteen
inches (18") above gutter, whichever is more restrictive.
e. Require that all manufactured home parks located within floodprone areas as defined on the community's FIRM
develop a plan for evacuating residents of said parks [and such plan shall] be filed with the City's Emergency
Management authorities within ninety (90) days of the passing of this ordinance.
f. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites with Zones A1-30, AH, AE and AO on the community's FIRM
either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/648
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
3. Meet the permit requirements of Subsection (b)(4)a, (b)(4)b, or (b)(4)c. A recreational vehicle shall be
considered ready for highway use if it is on its own wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
g. Require that manufactured homes or manufactured homes used commercially placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision which
lies within the floodway as designated on the community's floodway map must meet the requirement of Subsection (b)
(5) below.
h. Require owners of mobile homes located in areas of special flood hazard to sign before a Notary Public a form
prepared by the City that acknowledges that the mobile home is located in a flood hazard area, that the mobile home is
subject to damage during a flood and that federal flood insurance is available.
(5) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in 3.2.11.2(b) [3.2.11.2(e)] are areas designated as
floodways. Since the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designated to carry the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot (1') at any point; and since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:
a. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, earth changes and other developments
will not be permitted except when an approved Floodway Development Permit has been secured demonstrating that the
proposed encroachment:
1. Will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge; and,
2. Is consistent with the Abilene Stream Management Plan and Abilene Drainage Standards; and
3. Meets the standards of this ordinance and specifically Section 3.2.11.5, Floodway Development Permits, and
Section 3.2.11.6 Special Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction in Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
b. The following are exempt from the requirements in above Subsection (b)(5)a.
1. Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the principal use of any lot or tract of ground
in the City of Abilene and which meet the requirements of the zoning regulations in Chapter 2 and Chapter 4 of this
LDC.
2. Customary and incidental routine ground maintenance, landscaping and home gardening which does not
require a zoning amendment, a zoning variance or a building permit, and which does not affect stormwater
drainage through the site.
3. Certain parks and recreational uses which do not affect stormwater drainage through the site.
4. Emergency repairs of a temporary nature made on public or private property which are necessary for the
preservation of life, health, or property and which are under such circumstances where it would be impossible or
impracticable to obtain a Floodway Development Permit.
5. Excavation for the purpose of constructing, installing, maintaining or repairing any public street, public utility
facility or any service lines related thereto.
6. Improvements consistent with the Abilene Stream Management Plan and Abilene Drainage Standards.
(6) Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Section 3.2.11.2(b) [3.2.11.2(e)] are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated
with base flood depths of one (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified).
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
1. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified), or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/648
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designated [designed] so that below the base flood
level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects on buoyancy.
c. A registered professional engineer, architect, or surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator
that the standards of “a” and “b.1” of this subsection are satisfied.
d. A registered professional engineer, architect, or surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator
that the standards of “b.2” of this subsection are satisfied.
e. Require within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.7 Detention and Drainage Facilities
(a) Requirements and Standards. On-site stormwater detention shall be required for all new developments to offset increased runoff
resulting from new developments except for those developments for which approved regional detention facilities have been established or
for which alternate plans have been approved by the City Engineer. Design standards for all stormwater detention and drainage facilities
shall be established by adopted Abilene Drainage Standards.
(b) Title Ownership and Maintenance. Detention and drainage facilities herein provided for shall be dedicated to the public and
maintained by the public unless such facilities are an integral, usable part of the development, in which case the ownership and
maintenance of said facilities may remain with the private sector. These systems, when retained by the owner shall be maintained by the
current and subsequent owners in a manner that will allow them to function as designed. The owner must execute a written maintenance
agreement with the City before this option is used and such agreement shall be filed for record at the appropriate county courthouse.
These agreements shall be as encumbrances upon the land.
(1) Major drainage systems not retained by the owner shall be conveyed by title or easement to the City of Abilene as
required by the Floodplain Administrator and City Attorney.
(2) The dedication of a detention facility shall provide that, in the event that the City Council determines that the detention
facility is unneeded or unnecessary as a result of drainageway improvements, the same may revert to the party making such
dedication, or the abutting owners, or their respective heirs, successors, or assigns.
(3) All drainage structures and facilities located within a dedicated drainageway shall be owned and maintained by the City
of Abilene.
(c) Private Drainage Facilities. Roof drains, building drains, and parking lot drainageways may be located outside dedicated
drainageways.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.8 Alternative Design Standards
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the consideration of detention and drainage facility designs which differ
from the conventional design standards as outlined within this Division of the LDC, but which are based upon sound engineering
judgment. Such alternative(s) shall meet the purpose and intent of the standard being varied. In this context, “detention and drainage
facilities” shall mean physical improvements such as detention ponds, retention ponds, drainage swales, as well as any other
infrastructure element of a proposed development.
(b) Approval Based on Engineering. Decisions regarding design of such physical improvements in a subdivision should be based on
engineering studies. Thus, while this Code provides standards for design, the regulations are not a substitute for sound engineering
judgment. Therefore, a licensed engineer may submit alternative designs to be reviewed and considered by the City Engineer, including
the option of providing a downstream assessment.
(c) Relationship to Standards in Division 11. If the proposed alternative design is approved by the City Engineer, then the all other
applicable provisions of Division 11 shall be deemed to have been met. If the proposed alternative design standards are not approved by
the City Engineer, then the standards contained within Division 11 shall apply.
(d) Appeals to the Planning & Zoning Commission. If a proposed alternative design is rejected by the City Engineer, the subdivider
may appeal the decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Prior to being considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission, the
appeal shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC). The DRC shall make a recommendation on the appeal to the
Planning & Zoning Commission.
(e) Decision. The decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be final.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/648
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.9 General Administration
(a) Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The City Manager shall appoint a Floodplain Administrator to administer and coordinate
the provisions of this ordinance, and to implement its provisions.
(b) Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all files and records pertaining to this ordinance, and shall hold open for
public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance. All actions involving an appeal and all variances
from the flood hazard regulations shall be reported to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(2) After submission on the appropriate forms, the Floodplain Administrator shall review and approve or deny all
applications for Floodway Development Permits or Drainage Plans required by this LDC.
(3) After submission on the appropriate forms, the Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed development
to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. Applicants shall submit a written certification to the effect that all known Federal, State and local
permits have been obtained.
(4) When interpretation is needed as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator
shall make the necessary interpretation.
(5) The Floodplain Administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the proper state or federal authorities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(6) The Floodplain Administrator shall ensure through maintenance agreements and available funding that maintenance is
provided in accordance with the Stream Management Plan within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
(7) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this Section, the Floodplain Administrator
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in
order to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for notifying the Planning Director and the Building Official of all
approvals or denials of Floodplain Development Permits and Drainage Plans. Where Drainage Plans are being considered in
association with Construction Plans, the Floodplain Administrator shall advise the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
status of Drainage Plans prior to consideration of plat documents.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A, A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
[(c) Reserved.]
(d) Amendments to Stream Management Plan. The City Council of the City of Abilene may approve amendments and deviations from
the Stream Management Plan after conducting a public hearing. Property owners directly affected by the proposed appeal, deviation, or
amendments shall be given notice of the meeting in writing prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.10 Appeals Process
(a) Waiver or Deviation Requests to the Board of Adjustment.
(1) In the same manner and under the same circumstances as generally provided by Chapter 1, Article 1, Division 5 and
Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 5 [sic], and except as otherwise specified in this Division, the BOA shall:
a. Hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this Division concerning special flood hazard area
regulations;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/648
b. Hear and determine an appeal when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by any City of Abilene administrative official in the enforcement of Section 3.2.11.6 relating to the flood hazard
area regulations.
(2) Waivers or deviations shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
(3) Waivers or deviations may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(4) Generally, waivers or deviations may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot
of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 3.2.11.6 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Division 11, the Board of Adjustment may attach
such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Division.
(6) Prerequisites for granting a waiver or deviation:
(a) A waiver or deviation shall only be issued upon a determination that it is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
(b) A waiver or deviation shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
2. A determination that failure to grant the waiver or deviation would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant, and
3. A determination that the granting of a waiver or deviation will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(c) Any applicant to whom a waiver or deviation is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation no more than two feet (2') below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.11.11 Enforcement
(a) Stop Work Orders. If at any time an earth change is performed which is not in accordance with this Division or a Floodway
Development Permit, including conditions and approved modifications thereof, a written notice to stop work shall be given by the
Floodplain Administrator stating the nature and location of the alleged noncompliance, and specifying what remedial steps are necessary
to bring the project into compliance. The responsible parties shall have such time as may be allowed in writing by the Floodplain
Administrator to correct all noted deficiencies; the time allowed shall be reasonable, and shall be determined by the nature of the
deficiency and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard.
(b) Revocation or Suspension of Floodway Development Permit. A Floodway Development Permit may be revoked or suspended by
the Floodplain Administrator. A Floodway Development Permit may be revoked or suspended upon the occurrence of any one of the
following events:
(1) Violation of any conditions of the permit, or
(2) Violation of any provision of this ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation pertaining to the
Floodway Development Permit; or
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangering human life
or property of others.
(c) Following Revocation or Suspension of Floodway Development Permit. Upon the revocation or suspension of a Floodway
Development Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a stop work order on all construction activity on the permit holder's
property which may be directly or indirectly related to site drainage and which is being performed pursuant to any permits, licenses,
franchises or contracts issued or approved by the City of Abilene; such order may order a work stoppage on all construction activity on
buildings or structures and all appurtenances thereto, including buildings, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and street work, storm sewers,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/648
sanitary sewers, gas lines, and all utilities including gas, electric, telephone and cable TV. Notices and orders required by this Division
shall be served upon the parties concerned either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the individual contracting party(ies) or
permit holder at the address given on the contract document or permit application filed with the City.
(d) Appeal. The revocation or suspension of a Floodway Development Permit may be appealed to the City Council, if notice of appeal
is properly filed with the City Secretary within ten (10) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Division 12 - Reserved
Division 13 - Sidewalks
Section 3.2.13.1 Purpose and Applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this Division is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents, property owners, and visitors to
the City of Abilene and to implement objectives and strategies of the Abilene Comprehensive Plan. This Division shall also be known as
the “Sidewalk Master Plan of the City of Abilene.”
(b) The Sidewalk Master Plan will:
(1) Improve the safety of walking by providing separation from motorized transportation and improving travel surfaces for
pedestrians in high priority locations.
(2) Improve public welfare by providing an alternative means of access to transportation and social interaction, especially
for children, other citizens without personal vehicles, or those with disabilities, in areas with higher pedestrian activity or
potential activity.
(3) Facilitate walking as a means of physical activity recognized as an important provider of health benefits in areas where
such activity is most likely to occur.
(4) Establish minimum criteria for the development of sidewalks as a part of the pedestrian element of the transportation
system within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Section 3.2.13.2 Policy Statements
(a) Walking is a primary form of transportation that should be accommodated in the design of public roadways and transportation
systems only on major streets and in areas where pedestrian activity is currently prevalent or in areas where it is most likely to occur in
the future.
(b) A pedestrian system is critical to achieve the benefits of a functional multi-modal transportation system.
(c) Where this document is silent, the design of pedestrian facilities shall follow the City's Sidewalk Design Standards and applicable
State and Federal laws and regulations.
(d) All sidewalks, sidewalk amenities, and landscaping in the external right-of-way shall be maintained by the adjoining property
owner unless otherwise specifically provided for by public policy.
(e) These requirements are intended to apply within the City and its ETJ, but are not intended to apply to existing single-family
residential neighborhoods where sidewalks are not present and have not historically been provided. These requirements are intended to
apply to both public and private streets.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Section 3.2.13.3 General Requirements
(a) Unless noted otherwise, sidewalks shall have a minimum clear path width of four feet on local streets in a district zoned for
primarily single-family residential purposes and a minimum clear path width of five feet in all other locations.
(b) The timing of sidewalk construction shall be as required by this Master Plan, unless a development agreement between the property
owner and the City provides for alternative timing for construction.
(c) In addition to sidewalks within the right-of-way, internal pedestrian circulation shall be provided in new development or
redevelopment serving any multifamily, commercial, retail, office, service, or similar use and at any governmental facility, school, church,
or other place of public assembly. Sidewalks, or other accessible pedestrian routes, shall be installed to connect all buildings to one
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/648
another and to parking areas and to connect the development to the public street system. All such sidewalks or routes shall be protected
from encroachment by parked vehicles.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Section 3.2.13.4 Sidewalk Requirements for New Streets
(a) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all new streets except local streets in a single-family residential subdivision where all
lots are 1 acre or greater.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided at the time of road construction on all new expressway frontage roads, arterial streets, or collector
streets.
(c) Sidewalks shall be installed concurrently with other street improvements on local streets where streets abut non-development areas
such as common areas, drainage features, utility rights-of-way, or publicly owned areas.
(d) A developer of a new subdivision may contribute the projected cost of the sidewalk construction into an escrow fund or through
other form of financial guarantee to delay the time of construction of the sidewalk according to procedures that may be promulgated by
the City.
(e) All required sidewalks in new subdivisions must be constructed within 5 years of plat approval unless a different schedule is
specifically authorized in writing by the City Engineer for the purpose of coordination with other capital improvement activities.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Section 3.2.13.5 Sidewalk Requirements for Existing Streets
(a) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of existing collector streets, arterial streets, and the external sides of the frontage roads of
expressways, except for property zoned AO, Agricultural - Open Space for uses that do not require a site plan.
(b) Sidewalks shall be required along block faces of existing local streets in any of the following categories or combinations of
categories:
(1) The Central Business District designated by the Abilene Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Designated pedestrian routes in a neighborhood plan, corridor plan, or other small area plan adopted by the City of
Abilene.
(3) Locations that would connect existing or otherwise required sidewalks by closing gaps of less than 250 feet.
(4) Locations in which an adjacent property has a public sidewalk along the same block face.
(5) Street frontages in all land use zones except the following:
a. Zones intended primarily for single-family residential purposes and where sidewalks are not present (Example: RS
and MH).
b. Zones intended primarily for multifamily residential purposes where the current or proposed use of the property is
for single-family residential (Examples: MD, MF).
c. Zones intended primarily for warehousing, manufacturing, and industrial uses (Examples: HI, LI).
d. Zones intended to preserve agricultural activities and open space (Example: AO).
(c) No plat or subdivision of land along an existing collector street, arterial street, or expressway frontage road may be approved
without provision for the installation of public sidewalks along such streets and roads unless the subdivision is subject to exceptions to
requirements for infrastructure improvement. The sidewalks must be provided concurrently with other street improvements except as
otherwise provided in this Master Plan.
(1) This requirement does not apply along streets where no other street improvements are required.
(2) This requirement does not apply along a rural road or a road maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation
where drainage ditches are present.
(d) No new or amended site plan may be approved for development on any property in a location unless applicable provisions for
required sidewalks are included in the site plan.
(e) A certificate of occupancy, or building final approval for residential development that does not require a certificate of occupancy,
may not be issued until required sidewalks are installed or brought up to applicable standards when there is development activity
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/648
requiring:
(1) A permit for new construction of a structure other than an accessory structure,
(2) A permit for a major addition to a structure other than an accessory structure, or
(3) A permit for major alterations or repairs to a structure other than an accessory structure.
(f) An existing sidewalk may not be removed unless a replacement sidewalk is constructed to standards current at the time of removal.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Section 3.2.13.6 Exceptions, Waivers, and Deferrals
(a) A complete waiver of the requirement for sidewalks should be rare and allowed only where there are unusual factors. The waiver
must be approved by both the Planning Director and the City Engineer to be granted and their decision shall be documented with
supporting data that states the basis for the decision. However, in the event of a split decision, the City Manager or designee shall also
make a determination as to whether or not the waiver should be granted, and document that determination with supporting data that states
the basis for the decision. Unusual factors include:
(1) Projects where the cost of establishing sidewalks or walkways would be unreasonably disproportionate to the cost of the
associated roadway construction or overall project costs (however a partial waiver may be granted in lieu of a full waiver to
reduce the cost of required sidewalks such that the costs will not be unreasonably disproportionate),
(2) Areas with severe topography or other natural constraints that will constrain proper implementation of this plan,
(3) Situations inherently adverse to pedestrian activity, such as harmful noise, dust creation, and high volume truck traffic,
in certain areas, such as agricultural, heavy commercial, and industrial developments, or
(4) Situations where an applicant can show other factors or circumstances amounting to reasonably justifiable good cause to
support such waiver.
(b) Deviations from these requirements and the City's Sidewalk Design Standards may be allowed when necessary due to the physical
circumstance of the street or when necessary to accomplish adopted development goals of the City or in situations where an applicant can
show other factors or circumstances amounting to reasonably justifiable good cause to support such a deviation.
(1) The specific nature and justification for any deviation must be documented and authorized in writing by both the
Planning Director and the City Engineer.
(2) Deviations should be minimal and consist primarily of changes to required width of clear path or alignment within the
right-of-way.
(3) Deviations shall not allow a minimum clear path width of less than 3 feet.
(c) Sidewalk construction may be deferred through a Sidewalk Deferral Agreement, when approved by the Planning Director and City
Engineer or by the City Council upon appeal of a denied sidewalk waiver request. Deferrals should be granted only in situations where an
applicant can show factors or circumstances amounting to reasonably justifiable good cause to support such deferral.
(d) The applicant must submit sufficient documentation supporting the request for a waiver, deviation, or deferral and the determination
shall be based on the information provided.
(e) A denial of a request for a waiver, deviation, or deferral of these requirements may be appealed to the City Council.
(1) A written appeal must be filed with the Planning Director within 10 days of the denial.
(2) The appeal must provide justification for the requested waiver, deviations, or deferral based on the criteria described in
(a), (b), and (c) above.
(3) The Council must make findings based on these criteria in order to approve a waiver or deviation. If substantial new
information, not provided as part of the original request, is provided by the applicant within 14 days of the City Council
meeting, or during the City Council meeting, the item shall be referred back to the Planning Director and City Engineer for
reconsideration prior to a decision by the City Council.
(f) Sidewalks shall not be required when specifically exempted in a neighborhood plan, corridor plan, or other small area plan adopted
by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/648
Section 3.2.13.7 Definitions
(a) “Alley” means a minor public right-of-way not intended for general traffic circulation that is primarily used for secondary access to
the rear or side entrances of abutting property.
(b) “Arterial street” shall mean any route designated as arterial, minor arterial, planned arterial, or planned expressway by the
Thoroughfare Plan.
(c) “Block face” refers to one side of a street between major intersecting features.
(d) “Change in use” means any change of occupancy as defined by the building code adopted by the City of Abilene.
(e) “Clear path” means an unobstructed way free from obstacles or overhanging projections to a height of 8 feet above the ground,
sidewalk, or surface.
(f) “Collector street” shall mean all routes designated as collectors or planned collectors by the Thoroughfare Plan.
(g) “Common area” means a portion of a real estate development that is held for the common use or benefit of multiple owners or
tenants: such as parking lots, malls, common recreational areas, landscaping lots, group detention facilities, etc.
(h) “Drainage feature” means a natural or manmade feature that collects, conveys, or stores surface water or stormwater runoff: such as
a channel, stream, detention area, wetland, or lake.
(i) “Existing street” means a street existing at the time that a sidewalk requirement is triggered, including, but not limited to, all streets
existing on the ground on August 10, 2006.
(j) “Expressway” means an arterial street where access from abutting land is not permitted adjacent to the main travel lanes of the
roadway except along a separate frontage road.
(k) “External right-of-way” means the area located within the public right-of-way between the curbline of a street, or edge of roadway,
and the property line at the edge of right-of-way; sidewalk easements shall be considered a part of the external right-of-way.
(l) “Frontage road” means a roadway within the right-of-way of an expressway corridor that provides access to abutting land.
(m) “Local street” shall mean a minor street or subcollector street as defined by the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
(n) “Major addition” shall mean:
(1) Any addition to a structure in excess of fifty percent of the existing floor area or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less; or
(2) Any addition that increases the value of the structure in excess of fifty percent or $1,000,000.00, whichever is less.
(o) “Major alterations or repairs” shall mean any alterations, repairs, or combination thereof to a structure in excess of fifty percent of
the value of said structure.
(p) “Obstacles” means fixed or portable obstructions to the safe passage of pedestrians including, but not limited to: signs, streetlights,
mailboxes, landscaping, utility poles, trashcans, parked vehicles, merchandise, furniture, junk, and debris.
(q) “Project costs” means the following:
(1) If a sidewalk is triggered by the subdivision process, project costs include the other infrastructure improvements
required in the platting process, such as road construction, water lines, sewer lines, drainage facilities, etc.
(2) If a sidewalk is triggered by the site plan process or any process other than through subdivision, project costs include all
development costs associated with the site plan or building project, including site development, buildings, parking lots, etc.
(r) “Property” means any platted lot or other parcel of land.
(s) “Road construction” as used in the context of this Master Plan shall mean any new construction, widening of roadways, or adding
curb and gutter.
(t) “Roadway” means that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curblines or that part, exclusive of
shoulders, improved and intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
(u) “Sidewalk” means an improved facility intended to provide for pedestrian movement; often located in the public right-of-way
adjacent to a roadway.
(v) “Sidewalk amenities” means accessory features such as sidewalk furniture, planters, railings, bicycle racks, canopies, and
specialized lighting.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/648
(w) “Street” means the entire width between property lines of every way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel with the
exception of alleys.
(x) “Unreasonably Disproportionate” means exceeding twenty percent of the project costs or exceeding three times the cost of a
standard sidewalk with no topographic constraints or other unique issues that would raise the cost of a sidewalk. For transportation
projects, right-of-way acquisition costs shall not be included in the calculation.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 18-2014, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 3-27-14)
Division 14 - Fire Lanes and Fire Department Access
Section 3.2.14.1 Reference
(a) Reference. Fire lanes and access provisions shall comply with all requirements of the City's Fire Code[.]
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 15 - Easements, Lot Design and Improvement Standards
Section 3.2.15.1 General
(a) Easements for New Development.
(1) For new development, all necessary on-site easements shall be established on the Final Plat and not solely by separate
instrument, and they shall be labeled as a “public utility easement” or labeled for the specific purpose for which they are being
provided.
(2) Such easements may be permitted to be established solely by separate instrument only in the following limited
circumstances:
a. If requested by the entity providing services with the easement, and
b. If permitted by the City Engineer.
(3) The ownership, maintenance, and allowed uses of all such easements that are not designated as public utility easements
shall be stated on the plat. Examples include the following: a water, wastewater or drainage easement, which is dedicated to
the City for a water or wastewater line or for a drainage structure; an access easement, which is dedicated to the public for
unrestricted access purposes; a fire lane easement, which is dedicated to the City and fire suppression and emergency medical
service providers for access purposes; and an electrical, gas or communications easement, which is dedicated to the specific
utility.
(b) Fencing.
(1) Utility Easement. A wall, fence or screen shall be permitted over any utility easement provided that the easement
remains fully accessible to the City for maintenance and repair purposes.
(2) Drainage Easement. A wall, fence or screen shall be permitted over any drainage easement if the water flow within the
easement is not adversely affected by the wall, fence or screen.
(3) Removal. In addition to all other remedies provided by this Land Development Code, the City may summarily remove
any wall, fence or screen erected in violation of this section, and the City shall not incur any liability or assume any duty to
compensate the owner or replace the wall, fence or screen.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.15.2 Lot Area
(a) Easements Included. A lot's area shall be computed inclusive of all required public and utility easements. However, the area of
required easements on a lot shall in no case exceed one-half of the lot size; floodway easements shall be exempt from this requirement
and therefore shall not be included in this calculation. If the property owner disputes the total easement area required for any lot, the
owner shall submit a written computation of the percentage of the lot occupied by easements to the City Engineer. The City Engineer
shall, in coordination with affected entities, consider a reduction in the area of required easements for the lot. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1
(Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.15.3 Blocks - Determination and Regulation of Size
(a) Determination Criteria. The length, width, placement, and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/648
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the particular needs of the type of use contemplated;
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks and dimensions (if within the City's corporate limits); and
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic, including access for pedestrians or
bicyclists.
(b) Streets. Intersecting streets, which determine the lengths and widths of blocks, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve traffic
adequately, to provide adequate fire protection, and to conform to customary subdivision practices. Street design should promote
connectivity. Cul-de-sacs and curvilinear developments discourage walking and create long travel distances, and often create bottlenecks
for emergency vehicles. New streets should be based on a modified grid system of streets that provides multiple routes to better diffuse
traffic and shorten walking distances.
(c) Block Lengths. Refer to Section 3.2.7.8 of this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 3.2.15.4 Lots - Determination and Regulation of Size
(a) Zoning District Requirements, If Applicable. Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district, if
located within the City's corporate limits.
(b) Lot Frontage. All lots shall have at least one boundary abutting either a private or public street.
(1) Each residential lot in the subdivision shall have a minimum frontage on a public or private street as required by
applicable zoning, or twenty-five feet (25'), whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through
planned development approval.
(2) Each nonresidential lot shall have a minimum frontage on a public or private street as required by applicable zoning or
fifty feet (50'), whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval.
(3) In addition, lot frontage shall be sufficient to ensure driveway access to each lot consistent with applicable access
management restrictions unless shared driveways are accommodated through cross access easements.
(c) Lot Depth. The minimum depth of each lot shall conform to requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located, if
applicable. All lots which are not required to adhere to zoning district requirements shall conform to the following:
(1) Where the rear of any lot abuts a railroad, public recreational facility, arterial street or freeway, the minimum depth shall
be one hundred and twenty feet (120').
(2) Where the rear of any residential lot abuts a nonresidential zoning district, the minimum depth shall be one hundred and
twenty feet (120').
(d) General Shape and Layout. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots, and the minimum building setback lines shall
conform to standards set forth herein or within the appropriate zoning district, as applicable. Lots shall be designed to assure the adequate
provision of public facilities and the purpose of these subdivision regulations (within this Chapter 3 of the LDC), taking into
consideration the location and size of the subdivision and the nature of the proposed uses.
(e) Irregularly Shaped Lots.
(1) Irregularly shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet lot width and frontage requirements of the
appropriate zoning district if within the City's limits.
(2) Such lots shall provide a reasonable building pad without encroachment into front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any
type of easement.
(3) The rear width of such lots shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities. When alleys are present, there
must be sufficient width for access for driveways and solid waste collection and a minimum twenty (20)-foot alley frontage.
(4) In general, triangular, severely elongated (in excess of a three-to-one (3:1) depth-to-width ratio) or tapered, or flag lots
shall be not be permitted.
(5) Keyed Lots and Irregular Lots.
a. All keyed lots and irregular lots shall meet the minimum width requirements in Table 3-8.
TABLE 3-8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/648
Type of Lot Residential Lots
(feet)
Nonresidential Lots
(feet)
Keyed 22 45*
Irregular 30 45**
Corner 45
* Keyed lot frontages in nonresidential districts may be reduced to a minimum of 22 feet if the proposed plat
reflects an appropriately dimensioned easement for joint driveway access by two abutting lots.
** Within subdivisions, or portions thereof, intended exclusively for patio home or townhouse development,
more narrow lot widths permitted by zoning regulations shall be applicable.
NOTE: All requirements of a zoning district, if applicable, shall be met. If the requirements herein and those
of the zoning district conflict, the zoning district regulations shall control.
b. Any keyed lot or other irregularly shaped lot shall include no portion which measures less than the minimum width
required by zoning regulations, if applicable.
(6) The City reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, will not be suitable or desirable for the
purpose intended or which is so oddly shaped as to create a hindrance to the logical lot layout of surrounding properties.
(f) Side Lot Line Configuration. Side lot lines shall be at ninety degree (90°) angles or radial to street right-of-way lines to the greatest
extent possible. The City reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, is shaped or oriented in such a fashion as to be
unsuitable or undesirable for the purpose intended, or which is not attractively or appropriately oriented toward its street frontage.
(g) Double-Frontage Lots.
(1) Double-frontage lots under two (2) acres shall be avoided, except where they may be essential to provide separation of
residential development from arterial streets, or to overcome a specific disadvantage or hardship imposed by topography or
other factors.
(2) Where lots have double frontage, are not screened, and/or are provided access directly onto an arterial street, building
setback lines shall be established for each street side.
(3) Lots in single-family residential districts and lots measuring less than one hundred feet (100') wide and located within
the Residential Medium Density (MD) zoning district may abut a street on both the front and rear boundaries, but only under
the following conditions:
a. One lot boundary must abut an arterial street or freeway.
b. A reservation or easement at least ten feet (10') wide, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
designated beside the abutting arterial street or freeway.
(4) Residential lots, where double frontage is permitted, shall adhere to the following:
a. The lot does not back onto any minor, subcollector, or collector street within a residential area or neighborhood.
b. The lot does not have more than one-half (1/2) of its perimeter boundaries along streets.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/648
Figure 3-1: Types of Lots
(h) Extra Depth and Width in Certain Cases. Additional depth shall be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission when a lot in
a residential area backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a high pressure gasoline, oil or gas pipeline, an electric transmission line, an arterial
street, an industrial area, or other land use that has a depreciating effect on the residential use of the property and where no marginal
access street or other street is provided at the rear of the lot. A depth in excess of one hundred and forty feet (140') shall not be required.
Where a lot sides to any of the uses listed in this subsection, additional width shall be required by the Commission, but a width in excess
of seventy-five feet (75') shall not be required.
(i) Lots Adjacent To or In Floodplains. Subdivision of property in a designated floodplain must meet the requirements for floodplain
management Division 11 of this Chapter.
(j) Building Lines. Front building lines shall be shown for all lots on all plats submitted for land within the City's ETJ.
(1) The minimum building setback from lot boundaries adjacent to street rights-of-way shall be as set forth in the zoning
regulations, if applicable, by subsection “a” below, except as specified in subsection “b.”
a. Setback from boundary adjacent to freeway (without frontage road in place): Forty feet (40').
Setback from boundary adjacent to expressway (with frontage road in place): Thirty feet (30').
Setback from boundary adjacent to arterial or collector street: Thirty feet (30').
Setback from boundary adjacent to subcollector or minor street: Twenty-five feet (25').
b. For new lots created by resubdivision of land originally subdivided before 1985, the minimum building setback
from street-side boundaries shall be the same as that indicated on the most previously recorded plat or replat of the
particular lot(s) under consideration. In all cases, however, there shall be required a front yard of not less than twenty
feet (20') and an exterior side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15'), where no building setback lines are represented on a
previously recorded plat or replat.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 3.2.15.5 Monuments and Markers
(a) Placement.
(1) Four (4) monuments shall be set along the right-of-way boundary and two (2) monuments shall be visible from each
other.
(2) Four (4) monuments should be set on subdivision corners along the right-of-way.
(3) Permanent markers shall be placed at each lot corner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/648
(4) Monuments and lot markers shall be set immediately after completion of utility installations and street construction or as
the City Engineer may require.
(b) Requirements.
(1) A monument shall be made of an iron stake one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") long.
(2) A permanent marker shall be eighteen inches (18") long and set with cap and stamp. Longer stakes should be used in
softer soils.
(c) Requirements for Subdivision Monuments.
(1) Subdivisions less than five (5) acres shall have at least two (2) monuments installed.
(2) Subdivisions between five (5) and ten (10) acres shall have at least four (4) monuments installed.
(3) Any subdivision greater than ten (10) acres shall have more than four (4) monuments installed along the right-of-way
boundary for the subdivision as determined by the City Engineer.
(4) The location of all monuments is subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Chapter 4: Site Development Regulations
Effective: June 1, 2010
Article 1 - Development Procedures and Requirements
Division 1 - Improvements Required Upon Expansion
Section 4.1.1.1 Purpose and Applicability
(a) Purpose. This Section outlines when an expansion to an existing, developed property shall result in the required improvements of
this LDC being met.
(b) Applicability - Existing, Developed Property. Submission and approval of a Site Plan in accordance with Article 1, Division 1
[Division 2] of this Chapter 4 shall be required when an expansion to an existing, developed property trigger[s] the required
improvements of this LDC.
(c) Non-Applicability - New Development. Nothing in this division shall preclude a new development occurring on previously
undeveloped property from having to comply with the required improvements within this division or in any other portion of this LDC.
(d) Special Exceptions. For nonconforming existing developments to comply with improvements addressed within this division, there
may also be special exceptions granted by the Board of Adjustment, as outlined in Chapter 2, Article 7 [Article 6] of this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.1.1.2 Improvements and Related Triggers
(a) Required Improvements. The following improvements required by this LDC shall be adhered to when a substantial improvement or
expansion triggers such improvements:
(1) Landscaping: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 2 of this chapter.
(2) Tree Preservation: As required within Article 2, Division 3 of this chapter.
(3) Screening & Buffering: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 4 of
this chapter.
(4) Outside Storage: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 5 of this
chapter.
(5) Fencing: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 4 of this chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/648
(6) Urban Design: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 6 of this
chapter.
(7) Lighting: As required within the applicable zoning district (Chapter 2) and/or in Article 2, Division 7 of this chapter.
(b) Triggers. Expansions to an existing property that meet any of the following criteria shall trigger the requirement for a site plan and
all of the improvements outlined in subsection (a) above, unless otherwise specified:
(1) New Structure or Expansion:
a. Construction of a new principal structure; or
b. The expansion of a principal structure that is equal to or more than thirty percent (30%) of the floor area; or
c. The expansion of a principal structure that is equal to or more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
d. Expansion of a principal structure greater than 30% where the total floor area of the structure, including the
expansion, does not exceed more than 2,500 square feet shall be exempt from this trigger.
(2) Parking Spaces Increase: An increase in the number of parking spaces or surface area equal to or more than thirty
percent (30%) or five thousand (5,000) square feet. In this case, facade material requirements shall not be required. Parking
lots of ten (10) parking spaces or less shall be exempt from this trigger.
(3) Residential Conversion: The conversion of a residential use or structure to a nonresidential use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 57-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-24-13; Ord. No. 14-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A, 1), 3-12-15)
Division 2 - Site Plan
Section 4.1.2.1 Purpose and Applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Site Plan is to ensure that a development project is in compliance with all applicable City ordinances and
guidelines prior to commencement of construction.
(b) Applicability. Approval of a Site Plan is required prior to site construction. Approval of a Site Plan is required prior to site
construction for any non-exempt development of land within the City limits.
(c) Requirement. Approval of a Site Plan shall be required for the following:
(1) All development (see exceptions below) in the following zoning districts:
a. Residential Medium Density (MD) District
b. Residential Townhome (TH) District
c. Residential Multiple-Family-2 (MF) District
d. Manufactured/Mobile Home (MH) District
e. College & University (CU) District
f. Neighborhood Office (NO) District
g. Office (O) District
h. Neighborhood Retail (NR) District
i. General Retail (GR) District
j. Medical Use (MU) District
k. Central Business (CB) District
l. Mixed Use (MX) District
m. General Commercial (GC) District
n. Heavy Commercial (HC) District
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/648
o. Light Industrial (LI) District
p. Heavy Industrial (HI) District
q. Corridor Overlay (COR) District
r. Pine Street Overlay District
(2) All nonresidential development (including churches, schools, etc.) within residential areas or districts.
(3) All development requiring a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) (refer to Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 3 [Chapter 1, Article
4, Division 3]).
(4) All development integrating a use that specifically requires a Site Plan as prescribed in Chapter 2, Article 5 [Article 4],
Division 3.
(d) Minor Site Plan.
(1) A site plan is minor if it meets one of the following:
a. Accessory use which is incidental to an established commercial development and which results in:
1. No change in use, and
2. No increased traffic or business activity or is only used for storage and/or warehousing, and
3. No violation of height and placement standards contained within the Land Development Code, and
4. Proposed structure must be less than fifty (50) percent of the area of existing structures, and
5. No more than 5,000 square feet of new impervious surface may be created.
b. Construction of covered parking where parking already exists on hard surface. Said construction must result in no
violation of height and placement standards contained in the Land Development Code.
(2) Minor site plans will be subject to review by the DRC but will generally be exempt from any requirement to bring
unassociated site elements into conformance with current standards. Specific items from which the minor site plan will be
exempted shall include:
a. Construction of curb and gutter along an existing street.
b. Modification of existing driveways or access unless additional access is proposed.
c. Additional parking as long as the proposed improvement does not result in a shortage of required parking[.]
(e) Exceptions.
(1) Site Plan review and approval shall not be required for single-family detached or two-family residential developments,
unless the proposed subdivision will include a private amenity or facility comprised of one or more buildings (such as a
private recreation/swimming facility, guard house, covered parking, clubhouse, etc.) or a golf course. In these instances, Site
Plan submission and approval will be required for the private amenity or facility, the golf course clubhouse/hospitality area,
and the gated (restricted access) entrances.
(2) Site Plan review and approval shall not be required for the expansion or the remodel of an existing building unless
triggered per Article 1, Division 1, Section 2 of this chapter. In such case, only a Building Permit for the expansion shall be
required.
(f) Extent of Area That Should Be Included In a Site Plan. When the overall development project is to be developed in phases, the Site
Plan area shall include only the portion of the overall property that is to be developed/constructed. However, any excluded area must be
separately developable as a stand-alone site in the future. This provision shall not be interpreted to allow portions of a property to be
excluded so as to avoid development standards, other requirements, or otherwise required improvements to the site.
(g) Submittal and Timing. A Site Plan shall be submitted prior to or in conjunction with a building permit application. No building
permit shall be issued until a Site Plan, if required, and all other required engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. No
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all construction and development conforms to the Site Plan and engineering/construction
plans, as approved by the City.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/648
Section 4.1.2.2 Submission and Contents
(a) Procedures & Submission Requirements For Site Plan Approval: Submission of an application for Site Plan approval may be
preceded by a pre-application conference with the City (see Section 1.2.1.5). To ensure the submission of adequate information, the City
is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements for Site Plan review applications. All applications
and related contents shall be submitted consistent with these requirements, a checklist of which shall be supplied by the Planning
Department. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.1.2.3 Review, Approval, Appeal and Revisions
(a) Responsible Official & Approval Body. The Planning Director shall be the responsible official for processing of a Site Plan. The
Development Review Committee (DRC) shall be the responsible body for reviewing and providing comments on a Site Plan. The
Planning Director shall be the initial decision-maker of a Site Plan.
(b) Review & Approval of a Site Plan:
(1) Initial Filing: The applicant shall file with the Planning Director or his designee 3 copies of the Site Plan; such filing
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1.2 and any other applicable provisions of Chapter 1, Article 2,
Division 1.
(2) The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall meet within thirteen (13) working days after submission of a Site
Plan application to review such application for compliance with these and other applicable City regulations.
(3) The DRC may postpone review of a Site Plan until adequate information for its review is provided by the applicant.
Resubmission of a Site Plan, in this instance, shall not require an additional application fee.
(4) After completing its review of a Site Plan and determining that a recommendation for approval is the appropriate action,
the DRC shall return the Site Plan and all pertinent data, together with a written list of conditions that the Site Plan shall meet
as part of such recommendation (if applicable), to the Planning Director or his designee.
(5) The applicant shall record with the Planning Director, plus five (5) paper copies of the approved Site Plan with all
conditions and modifications shown or attached.
(6) Before the Site Plan is officially approved and recorded, the Planning Director, or designee, shall review the Site Plan to
ensure compliance with the conditions imposed by the DRC and with any other conditions he/she deems necessary to ensure
compliance with City regulations. If the Planning Director deems the Site Plan to be approved, the Site Plan shall then be
dated for recording by the Director of Planning.
(7) The Director of Planning may approve issuance of permits following Site Plan approval when it is deemed that the
required corrections to the Site Plan are minor in nature.
(c) Review & Approval of a Site Plan for CUP. Site Plans for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) will be processed according to the
procedures prescribed for those applications in Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 3 [Chapter 1, Article 4, Division 3].
(d) Appeal of Planning Director Decision. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Director to the Planning and Zoning
Commission by filing a written notice of appeal in the office of the Planning Director no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date
upon which the Planning Director denied the application.
(1) The notice of appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar
days after the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine final approval or denial of a Site Plan application in the case of
an appeal.
(e) Revisions to the Approved Site Plan:
(1) Minor Revisions/Amendments: It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design may necessitate minor
changes in the approved Site Plan. In such cases, the Director of Planning, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to
approve minor modifications to an approved Site Plan. Such minor modifications shall be shown on an “amended Site Plan.”
If modifications are such that the Planning Director decides that the DRC needs to review the modifications, a new Site Plan
as described in Subsection (d)(2) [(e)(2)] below shall be deemed necessary. For a revision/amendment to be considered minor,
the changes shall not cause any of the following circumstances to occur:
(a) A change in the character of the development;
(b) An increase in the ratio of the gross floor areas in structures to the area of any lot;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/648
(c) An increase in the intensity of use;
(d) A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings;
(e) An increase in the problems of circulation, safety, and utilities;
(f) An increase in the external effects on adjacent property;
(g) A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines;
(h) An increase in ground coverage by structures;
(i) A reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space to gross floor area in the structures.
(j) A change in the subject, size, lighting, flashing animation or orientation of originally approved signs.
(2) Major Revisions/Amendments: In the event of revisions that are more extensive in nature, a new Site Plan must be
submitted, reviewed, and approved by the DRC.
(f) Standards for Site Plan Review & Evaluation: The Planning Director shall review the Site Plan for compliance with all applicable
City ordinances with respect to the following:
(1) The plan's compliance with all provisions of this LDC, and other applicable ordinances.
(2) The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious design, facade treatment, setbacks, building
materials, maintenance of property values, and any possible negative impacts.
(3) The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system (driveways, etc.).
(4) The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely
and conveniently arranged.
(5) The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to
provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
(6) The coordination of streets so as to arrange a convenient system consistent with the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan,
as amended.
(7) The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement, or activities from
adjacent properties when necessary.
(8) Exterior lighting to ensure safe movement and for security purposes, which shall be arranged so as to minimize glare
and reflection upon adjacent properties.
(9) Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas that are subject to flooding.
(10) The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, solid waste disposal, and other utilities necessary for essential
services to residents and occupants.
(g) Effect of Review/Approval: Approval of a Site Plan shall be considered authorization to proceed with application for a building
permit for the site.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 4.1.2.4 Expiration and Extension
(a) Validity & Lapse of Site Plan Approval:
(1) The approved Site Plan shall be valid for a period of two (2) years in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 5.
An application for a building permit must be submitted within the two (2) year period for the Site Plan to remain valid.
(2) Extension & Reinstatement Procedure: Prior to the lapse of approval for a Site Plan, the applicant may petition the City
(in writing) to extend the Site Plan approval in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 5. If no petition for extension of
Site Plan approval is submitted and granted, then the Site Plan shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and
void. Any new request for Site Plan approval shall be submitted with a new application form, with a new filing fee, and with
new plans and materials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/648
Section 4.1.2.5 Compliance
(a) Duties and Responsible Parties.
(1) It shall be incumbent upon the Building Official to make all inspections and certifications necessary to ensure that a
structure is built in accordance with the approved Site Plan as recorded.
(2) In the event that the Building Official finds that a condition or modification of the approved Site Plan or a provision of
this LDC has not been met, he/she shall issue a stop work order.
a. It shall be incumbent upon the contractor or developer to correct those items that are in violation of the Site Plan or
LDC regulation before construction may resume.
b. In the event that the structure has been completed, a Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued by the Building
Official until the conditions of the Site Plan or provisions of this LDC, as applicable, have been substantially fulfilled.
c. All action required in order to bring a structure into substantial compliance with the approved Site Plan shall be at
the builder's or contractor's expense.
(3) Following issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, it shall be the continuing duty of the owner and occupant of the site
or their successors in interest to maintain compliance with the approved Site Plan and amendments thereto. Failure to maintain
compliance shall constitute a violation of this Land Development Code and expiration of Certificate of Occupancy.
(4) Any site that is not subject to an approved site plan or is governed by a pre-existing site plan that does not conform to
the current standards of this Chapter must maintain compliance with the standards within this Chapter to the extent that the
site currently complies with those standards.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 14-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A, 2), 3-12-15)
Division 3 - Construction Permits
Section 4.1.3.1 General Provisions
(a) Terminology. The terms “construction permit,” “demolition permit,” or “building permit” refer to any authorization to construct,
alter or place a structure on a lot, tract or parcel. The terms exclude an authorization to construct a capital improvement to be dedicated to
the public in support of a proposed land use, the grading of land, the removal of vegetation, and other activities authorized to prepare a
development site for construction of a structure.
(b) Effect. Approval of a construction permit authorizes the property owner to place or construct the structure on the lot, tract or parcel
in accordance with the terms of the permit. Approval of a construction permit confirms that the application conforms to all requirements
of this Land Development Code pertaining to the construction of the proposed structure.
(c) Rules of Priority Among Construction Permits. The following rules of priority apply among construction permits.
(1) A Floodway Development Permit, where applicable, shall be approved prior to a building permit.
(2) A Building Permit shall be approved prior to a Certificate of Occupancy.
(d) Prior Approvals. An application for a construction permit is the last step in the development process. All zoning approvals,
subdivision plats and site preparation permits needed for development shall be approved before an application for a construction permit
may be approved.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.1.3.2 Site Preparation Permit
(a) Purpose, Applicability, Exceptions and Effect.
(1) Purpose: The purpose of a Site Preparation Permit shall be to assure that preparatory construction activities on the
development site will meet City standards prior to soil disturbance, construction or placement of any increase in impervious
cover (such as a concrete or asphalt for a parking area) or of a structure on the tract, parcel or lot.
(2) Applicability: Approval of a Site Preparation Permit is required prior to any non-exempt development of land within the
City limits or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(3) Exemptions: The requirements of a Site Preparation Permit do not apply in whole or in part to the following activities or
land uses:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/648
a. Clearing that is necessary only for surveying purposes and that does not alter the natural grade of the parcel.
b. Construction or placement of a single-family dwelling, duplex dwelling or industrialized home on a legally platted
lot, except for the following:
1. Landscaping, open space and tree preservation standards;
2. Public facilities standards related to subsurface sewage disposal; or
3. Floodplain improvement standards.
c. Infrastructure or lot improvements authorized under approved construction plans for a finally platted subdivision or
development plat, provided that no soil disturbance or construction activities occur prior to approval of such plans.
d. Agricultural uses.
(4) Effect: Approval of a Site Preparation Permit authorizes site preparatory activities other than any increase in impervious
cover or placement of a structure on the land, subject to the terms of the permit and for the duration of the permit. Approval of
a Site Preparation Permit also authorizes the property owner to apply for a building permit.
(b) Application Requirements.
(1) Responsible Official: The Building Official shall be the responsible official for a Site Preparation Permit.
(2) Submittal: All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Building Inspections Department with the
required information as stated on the application form. A Site Preparation Permit application may consist of a series of
schematic drawings designed to satisfy one or more criteria (see Subsection (d) below) governing the decision on the permit.
(3) Prior Approvals:
a. Inside City limits, the property subject to the Site Preparation Permit shall be appropriately zoned for the intended
use prior to approval of the Site Preparation Permit.
b. A Final Plat shall be approved for the land prior to approval of the Site Preparation Permit.
(4) Accompanying Applications: A Site Preparation Permit may be accompanied by an application for a building permit for
the same land, provided that the Site Preparation Permit shall be decided first.
(c) Processing of Application & Decision.
(1) Decision: The Building Official shall initially approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a Site
Preparation Permit, subject to appeal as provided in Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 1 of this LDC.
(2) Notification: The Building Official shall notify the applicant of his/her decision in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
1.2.2.4 [1.2.2.5] of this LDC.
(3) Time for Decision: The application for a Site Preparation Permit shall be decided within thirty (30) working days of the
official filing date.
(4) Revised Permit Application: If the conditions of approval require revision to the Site Preparation Permit application, a
properly revised application shall be submitted to the Building Official within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice of
decision. The Building Official shall have an additional twenty (20) working days to approve or deny the revised Site
Preparation Permit application.
(d) Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a Site Preparation Permit shall
be approved, approved with conditions, or denied:
(1) The Site Preparation Permit is consistent with the approved construction plans.
(2) The Site Preparation Permit is consistent with any approved petitions or applications for the same property;
(3) Where not exempted or satisfied through approval of prior development applications, the following standards in the
LDC and the City Code of Ordinances have been satisfied:
a. Any embankment and excavation standards in the City's adopted regulations have been met;
b. Any erosion and sedimentation standards in the City's adopted regulations have been met; and
c. Drainage and stormwater standards.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/648
(e) Appeals & Relief Procedures.
(1) Appeal: The applicant for a Site Preparation Permit or any interested person may appeal the decision of the Building
Official to the City Manager in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 1 of this LDC. The City Manager may sustain,
modify or reverse the Building Official decision.
(2) Waiver Petition: A petition seeking to vary standards applicable to the Site Preparation Permit shall be filed, processed
and decided by the Building Official in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 1, Section 1.2.1.3 of this LDC prior to
the decision on the Site Preparation Permit.
(3) Vested Rights Petition: Where an applicant claims exemption from one or more requirements applicable to a Site
Preparation Permit under this Land Development Code on grounds of vested rights, the applicant may submit a vested rights
petition to the Building Official prepared, and appealed if applicable, in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 3 of
this LDC.
(f) Expiration & Extension.
(1) Time of Expiration: A Site Preparation Permit expires if development authorized by the permit has not commenced on
the property subject to the permit within one (1) year after final approval of the permit. The Site Preparation Permit may be
revoked if a building permit or other permit authorizing construction of a structure on the property has not been issued within
one (1) year after the date of approval of the permit, or, if no permit is required, construction of a structure has not commenced
on the development site within such period.
(2) Extension: A Site Preparation Permit may be extended for a period not to exceed an additional one (1) year period by
the responsible official, within which development authorized by the permit on the property subject to the permit must be
commenced. The date for issuance of a construction permit or commencement of construction of a structure may be extended
by the responsible official for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 4.1.3.3 Building Permit
(a) Applicability. An application for a building permit or demolition permit is required within the City limits, or where provided for in
a development agreement, in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, prior to placement, construction or alteration of a building or structure.
(b) Effect. Approval of an application for a building permit authorizes the property owner to construct, alter or place a structure on the
lot, tract or parcel. Approval of an application for a building permit also authorizes the property owner, upon completion of a structure
intended for human occupancy, to make application for a Certificate of Occupancy.
(c) Application Requirements.
(1) Responsible Official: The Building Official shall be the responsible official for a building permit.
(2) Contents: All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Building Official's office with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(d) Decision. The Building Official shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a building permit.
(e) Appeals. The applicant may appeal the Building Official's decision on the building permit.
(f) Reference. Refer to the City's adopted Building Code for further information.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.1.3.4 Certificates of Occupancy
(a) Applicability. An application for a Certificate of Occupancy is required within the City limits, or where authorized by a
development agreement, in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, after the construction, alteration or placement of a structure on a lot,
tract or parcel and prior to habitation or any nonresidential use of the structure, or any occupation of a multifamily structure. A Certificate
of Occupancy also is required prior to a change in the use of any structure if the use is a different use based upon the land uses listed in
Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 of Chapter 2 (Land Use Matrix).
(b) Effect. Approval of a Certificate of Occupancy authorizes habitation or other occupancy of the structure in accordance with the
terms of the certificate.
(c) Application Requirements.
(1) Responsible Official: The Building Official shall be the responsible official for a Certificate of Occupancy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/648
(2) Contents: All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Building Official's office with the required
information as stated on the application form.
(d) Decision. The Building Official shall approve or deny the application for a Certificate of Occupancy.
(e) Reference. Refer to the City's adopted Building Code for further information.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.1.3.5 Floodway Development Permit
(a) Reference. Refer to Chapter 3, Article 2, Division 11, and specifically to Section 3.2.11.5. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-
10)
Section 4.1.3.6 Sign Permit (Reserved)
Article 2 - Development Standards
Division 1 - Parking, Stacking and Loading
Section 4.2.1.1 Applicability, Review and Approval
(a) Applicability. Parking, stacking and loading requirements shall apply to all development within the City limits, or where provided
for in a development agreement, in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, prior to placement, construction or alteration of a building or
structure.
(b) Review and Approval.
(1) Review by Director of Traffic and Transportation: Off-street parking, stacking, and loading provisions, including ingress
and egress to such areas, for more than five (5) vehicles shall be reviewed by the Director of Traffic and Transportation for
compliance with traffic regulations prior to approval of a Site Plan by the Planning Director.
(2) Site Plan: Compliance with the requirements of this division shall be shown as part of the Site Plan, which shall be
reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 4.1.1.3 [4.1.2.3] of this Chapter 4.
(c) Parking Lot Permit.
(1) When Required: A parking lot permit shall be required for the addition of 5,000 square feet or more of parking lot area,
or the addition of 20 spaces or more, when a site plan would not otherwise be required.
(2) Site Exhibit: Compliance with the requirements of this Article shall be shown as part of a Site Exhibit, which shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Director, or designee. Compliance shall only be required for the new parking area.
Existing parking areas may remain in their existing design.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 14-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A, 3), 3-12-15)
Section 4.2.1.2 General Parking and Loading Requirements
(a) Provision and Timing.
(1) In all zoning districts, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this division
and of the Land Use Matrix, Chapter 2, Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2, at the time any building or structure is erected or
structurally altered, or whenever there is a change to a new use with respect to the standards of this division.
(2) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued, no use shall be established or changed, and no structure shall be erected,
enlarged, or reconstructed unless the off-street parking and loading spaces are provided in the minimum amount and
maintained in the manner specified in these regulations, provided, however:
a. For the enlargement of a structure or for the expansion for a use of a structure or land there shall be required only
the number of off-street loading spaces as would be required if such enlargement or expansion were a separate new
structure or use; and
b. For a change in the use of a structure or land, the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required shall be
equal to the number required for the new use.
c. Site design of parking, loading, and maneuvering areas shall be designed to minimize negative impacts to traffic
flow on adjacent streets.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/648
(b) Limit on Activities and Certain Vehicles.
(1) In all zoning districts, parking and loading areas shall not be used for refuse containers, for the sale, repair, storage,
dismantling, or servicing of vehicles or equipment, for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with
the designated parking and loading areas.
(2) The following vehicles are prohibited from being parked or stored on any lot in a residential district, including
commercial vehicles of over one and one-half (1-1/2) ton manufactured capacity, truck tractor, road tractors and special mobile
equipment as defined by the Texas Motor Vehicle Laws Uniform Act.
(3) This provision shall not apply to and shall not prohibit the parking or storing of church and school buses and recreational
equipment in residential areas.
(c) Development Within the CB District. Development within the Central Business (CB) district is unique in terms of parking and
therefore shall be required to comply with the following.
(1) In the case of re-use of an existing building, parking shall not be required.
(2) In the case of new building construction, a combination of on-street, off-street and shared parking may be utilized to
meet the parking requirements for the particular use. The Planning Director as part of Site Plan approval may approve a
reduction in the required parking of up to fifty percent (50%) in the case of shared parking.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.1.3 Off-Street Parking - Minimum Requirements and Standards
(a) Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking. Requirements are as follows:
(1) Parking on grass or other non-paved area in any zoning district is prohibited except in the AO or Rural Residential
districts for parking related to a private single-family detached residence. All required parking shall be on a paved surface.
(2) In any multiple-family, duplex, or townhome dwelling unit or condominium development for which leasing offices are
provided on the site:
a. Visitor parking shall be provided according to the “Office, Professional and General Business” parking
requirements within the Land Use Matrix, based on the square footage of the leasing office.
b. Where clubhouses are provided on the site, off-street parking shall be provided according to the “Retail Business,
General” parking requirements within the Land Use Matrix, based on the square footage of the clubhouse facility.
(3) For residence halls, fraternity buildings, and sorority buildings, additional parking spaces may be required by the DRC
for fraternity and sorority buildings as a condition of the Site Plan approval where the building does not provide permanent
sleeping facilities for all members of the organization.
(4) The requirements for schools within the Land Use Matrix shall not apply to private schools which do not permit students
to bring motor vehicles to the institution; however, the educational institution shall be required to provide adequate off-street
parking for faculty, administrative personnel, and athletic events including visiting of parents or other personnel. Such
requirements will be calculated based on the applicable parking requirements for the individual uses.
(5) For any restaurant, eating and/or drinking establishment where permanent outdoor seating areas including decks, patios,
or other unenclosed spaces are provided, those areas shall be included in the calculation of gross floor area and total number of
seats. Establishments having only outdoor dining consisting of fewer than sixteen (16) seats shall provide a minimum of four
(4) parking spaces.
(6) In addition to required parking spaces, a center-based child day-care center or pre-elementary school shall provide a
driveway with separate points of ingress and egress to the premises and having a length sufficient for temporary parking of at
least three (3) vehicles whereby the temporary parking spaces do not block access to the other required off-street parking
spaces.
(7) Parking requirements for recreation and amusement facilities that have any combination of the outdoor uses listed in the
Land Use Matrix on the same premises shall be calculated based on the sum of the minimum requirements for the individual
uses proportionate to the indoor and outdoor areas allocated for each use.
(8) For a multi-purpose building, such as within a mixed use development, the total required parking spaces shall generally
be the sum of spaces necessary for individual uses included.
(9) Where open land is used for manufacturing, storage, or other operations in a manner similar to indoor operations, such
open land shall be added to floor space in determining the number of parking spaces required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/648
(b) New or Unclassified Uses. When a proposed land use is not classified in the Land Use Matrix, the parking requirements will be
based on the minimum standard which applies to a specified use which is most closely related to the proposed land use, as determined by
the Planning Director[.]
(c) Parking Location.
(1) Except as otherwise provided within this Section:
a. All required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot or tract as the principal use being served by the
parking area.
b. All required off-street parking shall be within the same zoning classification required of the use which the parking
area supports (i.e., a parking lot serving a particular commercial activity must be located in a zoning district where that
activity being served is also allowed).
c. Site design of parking, loading, and maneuvering areas shall be designed to minimize negative impacts to traffic
flow on adjacent streets.
(2) For any use, building or structure, where the required off-street parking cannot be provided on the premises because of
the size or location of lot, as evidenced by and approved in relation to the Site Plan, such parking may be provided on other
property not more than four hundred feet (400') from the building site. In such cases where parking is permitted to be located
on a separate lot, such parking shall be conveniently usable without unreasonable:
a. Hazard to pedestrians;
b. Hazard to vehicular traffic;
c. Traffic congestion; or,
d. Detriment to the appropriate use of other properties in the vicinity;
(d) Off-site Parking. To allow off-site parking where all or part of the minimum number of parking spaces required in Chapter 4,
Article 2, Division 1 of this LDC are located within three hundred feet (300') on a lot or tract of land that is legally separate from the
property containing the principal use served by the parking area, provided that:
a. Both lots or tracts are under the same ownership; or
b. It can be established that two or more uses, applying jointly and concurrently for the special exception, will be sharing a
parking area that may be on property that is not under the same ownership as one or more of the uses to be served by the
parking, where the shared parking area has a capacity of at least the minimum number of spaces for the use having the greatest
minimum requirement, where all uses have their primary need for parking during offsetting periods so that the parking area
will be utilized by only one principal use at a time, and where the arrangement is documented through a long-term lease or
other written agreement.
c. Adequate accessible pedestrian connections are provided connecting the parking area and the principal use.
(e) Collective Parking Facilities.
(1) No requirement set forth in this division shall be construed to prevent collective utilization of any off-street parking
facility for two (2) or more buildings or uses, providing, however, that the total number of off-street parking spaces shall not
be less than the sum of the requirements for the particular individual uses computed separately in accordance with the
applicable regulations for off-street parking spaces.
(2) A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the City Attorney and executed by all parties concerned,
including the owner/agent of the principal use utilizing the parking and the owner/agent of the lot on which the parking is to
be provided. Such written agreement shall assure the continued availability of and access to (i.e., via an easement, etc.) the offstreet
parking area for the principal use it is intended to serve.
(f) Alternative Parking Plan.
(1) The Director of Traffic and Transportation, or designee, may approve an Alternative Parking Plan which shows a
reduced need for parking based on the unique characteristics of a particular use or location, shared parking such as projected
transit use, high percentage non-motorized customer traffic, or as part of pedestrian-oriented mixed-use development.
(2) Denial of an Alternative Parking Plan may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment under the procedures for an Appeal
of a Responsible Official's Decision.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 19-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 8-12-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/648
Section 4.2.1.4 Off-Street Parking - Design and Construction Standards
(a) Public Street Parking. A public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use.
On-street parking may be permitted to be calculated as part of the required off-street parking requirement if approved by the Planning
Director as part of Site Plan approval for uses within the CB District.
(b) Truck or Bus Parking Areas. Parking spaces used for the parking of trucks or buses shall not be counted toward meeting the
requirements of this section.
(c) Fractional Spaces Resulting from Parking Calculations. When the computation for the number of parking spaces required under this
LDC results in the requirements of a fractional space, the fractional space requirement shall be satisfied by adding one (1) additional
space to the whole space total.
(d) Maneuvering Area. All off-street parking spaces shall be accompanied by adequate automobile maneuvering area permitting full
and direct ingress and egress to such parking spaces. For each off-street parking space together with three (3) or more parking spaces, the
maneuvering area thereto shall be located entirely upon private property, except that the unobstructed width of an abutting alley may be
considered for maneuvering area except in industrial areas.
(e) Nonresidential Driveway Access. For all off-street parking spaces, there shall be adequate provisions for driveway connection with
the street system or a paved alley that is at least fifteen feet (15') in width. All connections from a parking area to the street system shall
be by a paved driveway or alley reviewed by the Director of Traffic and Transportation as part of the DRC Site Plan review process. All
entrances or exits to a parking area shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 3, Article 2, Division 9 (Driveways).
(f) Shelter Building. An off-street parking area shall not have more than one (1) attendant shelter building for every fifty (50) parking
spaces. The shelter shall conform to all setback requirements for structures and, in residential districts shall not contain not more than
fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area.
(g) Barriers. All off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be separated from the pedestrian ways by a barrier, curb, or tire stop
reviewed by the Director of Traffic and Transportation as part of the DRC Site Plan review process. The barrier shall be constructed or
arranged to end twenty-four inches (24") from the pedestrian ways.
(h) Paving of Parking Areas for Permanent, Principal Uses. All required or provided parking areas for permanent, principal uses shall
be paved according to City standards and specifications for all-weather surfaces as provided in this LDC and/or in other applicable City
codes.
(1) For single-family and two-family dwellings existing as of the effective date of this LDC, the all-weather surface may be
composed of gravel, per City design standards. (However, the driveway extending from the street to the private property
boundary shall be paved the same as all other parking areas.)
(2) For all other parking ingress, egress, and loading areas, the all-weather surface shall be composed of asphaltic or
Portland cement bind pavement or other pavement material approved by the City Engineer, so as to provide a durable and
dustless surface. The off-street parking area shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated
within the area, and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide the orderly and safe loading or unloading, parking and
storage of vehicles.
(3) Parking lines in parking lots must be clearly marked by paint, buttons, or other approved material, except that areas used
solely for display of vehicles for sale or rental are not required to have marked parking lanes. Vehicle storage areas which are
fenced or screened, and are not open to the public, are exempt from these requirements.
(i) Pedestrian Lanes. When a parking area is designed to accommodate more than one hundred (100) vehicles, and where a majority of
the parking spaces are not located next to a building walkway at the perimeter of the building, there shall be provided separate, marked
pedestrian walkways to enable pedestrians to safely transit the parking area with minimum hazard. Such walkways shall have a clear
width of not less than four feet (4'), exclusive of any vehicle overhang where head-in parking adjoins the walkways.
(j) Dead-Ends and Turnaround Space. No parking area serving a use other than single-family or duplex dwellings shall be designed or
constructed which ends in a dead-end, unless turnaround space of at least nine feet (9') in depth is provided.
(k) Off-Street Parking Facilities Not Required Herein. When off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of minimum amounts
specified in this division, or when off-street parking facilities are provided, but not required by this chapter, the off-street parking
facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space specified in this division.
(l) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be designed and constructed so as to be reflected
downward and away from any adjoining property or street.
(m) Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Any use of property existing at the time of adoption of these regulations and standards that
does not conform to the regulations and standards prescribed in this division shall be deemed a nonconforming use and subject to the
terms and conditions of Chapter 2, Article 7 [Article 6] of this Code. When any nonconforming structure is structurally altered, as stated
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/648
in Section 4.1.1.1, adequate parking spaces which meet the requirements of the regulations and standards adopted in this section shall be
required for the entire structure and use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 4.2.1.5 Off-Street Parking - Dimensional Standards
(a) Dimensional Standards. All required or provided off-street parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the following
dimensional standards:
(1) Standard Parking Spaces: Standard parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 4-1.
TABLE 4-1: REQUIRED PARKING DIMENSIONS
Parking
Angle
(degrees)
Stall Width
(feet)
Aisle Length
Per Stall
(feet)
Depth of Stall
Perpendicular
to Aisle (feet)
Aisle Width (feet)
One-Way Two-Way
0 parallel 8.0 23.0 8.0 12.0 24.0
30 9.0 18.0 16.8 12.0 19.0
45 9.0 12.7 19.1 12.0 19.0
60 9.0 10.4 20.1 18.0 20.0
90 9.0 9.0 18.0 24.0 24.0
(b) Accessible Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabilities.
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be reserved for the physically disabled in an amount not less than that required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the Texas Accessibility Standards accessibility guidelines.
(2) Each parking space reserved for the physically disabled shall conform to the identification requirements of the state
department of licensing and regulation promulgated under state law, and the design specifications enumerated in the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the Texas Accessibility Standards accessibility guidelines.
(3) Current copies of both the state and federal regulations are available in the Traffic and Transportation Division.
(4) State law offenses for improper use of parking spaces reserved for the disabled upon private property shall apply within
the City. Any peace officer and the designated City official enforcing parking regulations may issue citations for improper use.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.1.6 Off-Street Stacking Spaces Required
(a) Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Stacking. A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet (8') by twenty feet
(20') with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other
circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities shall be as follows.
(1) Financial Institutions with Drive-Through Facilities: For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller
window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces.
(2) Retail Operations Generally: For retail operations, other than restaurants and kiosks that provide drive-up service,
including pharmacy and dry cleaners, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/648
(3) Full-Service Car Wash: For a full-service car wash, each vacuum or gas pump lane shall be provided with a minimum of
four (4) stacking spaces. For the finish and drying area, adequate vehicle stacking and storage space must be provided to keep
finished vehicles out of circulation aisles, access easements, fire lanes and streets.
(4) Self-Service Car Wash:
a. For each automated self-service car wash bay, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay
itself, shall be provided. One stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and
other detailing.
b. For each wand-type self-service car wash bay, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay
itself, shall be provided. One stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and
other detailing, unless a separate area and shade structure is provided, outside of circulation aisles, for these activities.
(5) Automobile Quick-Lube Type Facilities: For automobile quick-lube type facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking
spaces shall be provided for each service bay in addition to the service bay(s) itself.
(6) Restaurants with Drive-Through Service: For restaurants with drive-through service, a minimum of five (5) stacking
spaces shall be provided for the first (or only) window, and if applicable, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces for each
subsequent window.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.1.7 Off-Street Loading Required
(a) Off-Street Loading Requirements. In all districts, for every nonresidential building or part thereof hereafter erected with a minimum
gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least
one (1) off-street loading space plus additional off-street loading spaces as follows in Table 4-2.
TABLE 4-2: REQUIRED LOADING BERTHS
Associated Uses Required Number of Berths
Manufacturing, Storage, Warehouse, Goods
Display, Retail Store, Wholesale Store,
Market and other similar Commercial or
Industrial Uses
1 additional loading space for each
additional 20,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof
For Hospitals, Schools, and Other Similar
Institutional Uses
1 additional loading space for each
additional 40,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof
For Hotels, Offices and Other Similar Uses
1 additional loading space for each
additional 60,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof
(b) Dimensions. Each loading space shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width, thirty feet (30') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in
height. There shall be sufficient space to ensure that all maneuvering required to utilize the loading space will not include street right-ofway.
(c) Location in Relation to Residential Districts. No loading space shall be located nearer than fifty feet (50') to any lot in any
residential district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless effectively screened on each side which faces said
districts by a wall of [or] opaque fence or [of] not less than seven feet (7') in height.
(d) Alternative Design. Where the specific use proposed for the property does not require a full loading space, as approved by the
Planning Director upon recommendation of the Development Review Committee, this requirement may be waived or an alternative
design for accommodating such loading space may be approved, recognizing that future use of the subject site may be limited by such
action.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/648
Division 2 - Landscaping
Section 4.2.2.1 Landscaping
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for landscaping, screening, buffering, and outdoor
storage and display to achieve the following objectives:
(1) Improve the quality of life for those living, working, and visiting the City by enhancing the appearance of properties as
viewed by the public.
(2) Enhance and maintain property values by ensuring a minimum level of quality of new development and redevelopment.
(3) Increase pervious ground cover as a means of controlling stormwater runoff and water quality.
(4) Limit water use, while allowing attractive landscaping, through the use of xeriscaping and proper irrigation.
(5) Assist in maintaining adequate air quality in the region and reduce the localized heating caused by large areas of
buildings and pavements.
(6) Provide easy to understand, enforceable standards to ensure compliance with these requirements.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 4.2.2.2 Applicability
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply to any development or redevelopment within the corporate limits of the City of Abilene
resulting in an increase of 20,000 square feet, or 50% or more, of the gross floor area of buildings on a site, whichever is less, including
the construction of any buildings on a vacant or cleared site.
(b) No new or amended site plan may be approved for any property unless the applicable provisions of this section are met, per an
approved General Landscaping Plan.
(c) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any property unless the applicable requirements of this section are met, per an
approved Final Landscaping Plan.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to single-family or two-family residential development, except for Section 4.2.2.3
below.
(e) The applicant may define a “development lot,” smaller than the entire parcel, for which these requirements will apply. The
development lot may exclude any areas on which no development activity will occur as part of the site plan, as determined by the
Planning Director.
(f) These standards may be varied through an adopted neighborhood plan, corridor plan, or other small area plan.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.2.3 General Landscape Requirements
(a) Grass or other vegetative cover is generally required for all required landscape areas. A maximum of 15% of the required landscape
area may include non-vegetative pervious cover, such as landscaping rocks, pervious pavers, or similar, excluding sidewalks or paths.
(b) Sidewalks or paths within a landscape area shall be included in the landscape area calculation and shall not count against the
impervious cover limit.
(c) The parkway must remain landscaped except for authorized improvements, such as driveways, sidewalks, or other public
infrastructure, including for single-family and two-family residential development.
(d) A minimum 10-foot-wide landscape area shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to a street, except within the Central
Business district or other areas where the building setback is less than 10 feet, in which case the building setback area shall be
landscaped.
(e) Required trees and shrubs:
(1) One tree plus three shrubs are required per 500 square feet of required landscape area, rounded up to the nearest whole
tree or shrub.
(2) Street trees are required at a rate of 1 per 40 feet of street frontage along Enhancement Corridors, as designated in the
City's Comprehensive Plan, and 1 per 60 feet of street frontage along other arterials and collectors. Placement of trees may be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/648
varied, but may not result in fewer than the required number of trees for a property.
(f) Any landscape area within the public right-of-way shall not count toward any landscape area requirements. However, plantings,
such as street trees and shrubs, within the parkway shall count toward the general landscaping requirement for a site.
(g) Landscaping or screening shall not interfere with vision clearance at street or driveway intersections.
(h) Landscape Irrigation:
(1) To ensure long-term viability, required landscape areas shall be irrigated by one, or a combination of, the following
methods:
a. An automatic underground system
b. A drip irrigation system
c. An accessible water source located within 100 feet of each landscaping area
(2) No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees or shrubs.
(3) Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed per applicable state law and City ordinance.
(i) Installation and Maintenance:
(1) All landscape materials shall be installed according to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) standards.
(2) All landscaping shall be maintained and kept in a healthy and growing condition.
(3) Trees must be 2" caliper at planting, measured 12 inches above ground level. Shrubs must be minimum of one-gallon
container size at planting.
(j) Xeriscaping principles (low water, drought-tolerant) must be used for required landscaping.
(k) Trees and shrubs used to meet the requirements of this section must be listed as recommended on the “Recommended Trees and
Shrubs” list maintained by the Planning Director.
(l) Parking is not allowed within required landscape areas.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10)
Section 4.2.2.4 Landscaping Plan
(a) Landscaping plans shall be provided as indicated below.
(1) A General Landscaping Plan shall be provided as part of the site plan review process, which shall include the following:
a. Delineation of all required landscape areas with dimensions.
b. Location, size, and species of trees to be preserved for landscaping credit.
c. Calculation of the landscape area as a percentage of the total site, where applicable.
d. Calculation of the landscape area between the building and the right-of-way as a percentage of the total area
between the building and the right-of-way, where applicable.
e. Statement on the plan noting that any required irrigation system will be provided.
f. Statement on the plan noting the number of required trees and shrubs to be provided.
(2) A Final Landscaping Plan shall be provided and approved prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, which
shall include the following:
a. Delineation of all required landscape areas with dimensions.
b. Location, size, and species of trees preserved for landscaping credit.
c. Irrigation plan for any required irrigation system.
d. Calculation of the landscape area as a percentage of the total site, where applicable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/648
e. Calculation of the landscape area between the building and the right-of-way as a percentage of the total area
between the building and the right-of-way, where applicable.
f. Calculation of the landscape area within the parking lots as a percentage of the total parking lot area, where
applicable.
g. Location, planting height, container size, and species of shrubs to be provided.
h. Location, planting height, mature height, planting caliper size, and species of trees to be provided.
i. Summary table showing amount of landscaping required and the amount provided.
j. Other details as necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards.
(3) All required landscaping must be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. When seasonal conditions
warrant, the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for up to six months pending completion of
landscaping.
(4) No landscaping plan shall be required for single-family or two-family residential development.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.2.5 Required Landscape Area
(a) A minimum percentage of the area of a site located between the building facade and the adjacent street right-of-way must be
landscape area, which varies by zoning district based on the following:
(1) 15% of the site for residential multifamily (MD and MF) and neighborhood (NO, NR, and MX) districts.
(2) 5% of the site for commercial or office (O, CU, MU, GR, GC, and HC) districts.
(3) 0% of the site for the central business (CB) district and industrial (LI and HI) districts.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.2.6 Alternative Landscape Plan
(a) An Alternative Landscaping Plan may be submitted allowing deviation from the standards of this section based on existing site
characteristics such as existing buildings, parking areas, and other site features that make it difficult to comply with these requirements.
The Alternative Landscaping Plan must meet the requirements of this section to the extent possible and must use appropriate alternatives
to ensure that the objectives of this section are met. The Alternative Landscaping Plan must be approved by the Planning Director. An
unfavorable decision by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment for final determination. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt.
1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.2.7 Definitions
(a) Landscape Area is an area on a site specifically designated for landscaping.
(b) Landscaping is any combination of living plants (such as grass, groundcover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees).
(c) Non-opaque means a chain-link fence or other fence in which vertical or horizontal members are a minimum of four inches apart.
(d) Pedestrian way is a sidewalk or pathway physically separated from traffic, parking areas, and driving aisles.
(e) Street trees are trees that are planted within the parkway or on private property within 10 feet of the property line adjacent to a
street. Street trees are commonly placed in the parkway between the curb and the sidewalk.
(f) Street Yard is an area on a site adjacent to a street that is subject to a building setback.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 3 - Tree Preservation
Section 4.2.3.1 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this section is to establish regulations to provide incentives for the preservation and/or replacement of existing trees
within the city of Abilene and to provide requirements for the protection of trees during construction, development, or redevelopment.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/648
Section 4.2.3.2 Tree Preservation Credits
(a) This paragraph applies only to nonresidential and multifamily development. For every premium tree preserved, the developer shall
be given credit for two trees as required by this ordinance, for trees in applicable locations. Only trees in good condition, having been
protected in accordance with the tree protection requirements, shall be considered for credit. A maximum credit of one hundred percent
(100%) of the required trees shall be allowed per site. Determination of credits shall be made by the Planning Director upon completion
of site improvements. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.3.3 Requirements for Tree Protection During Construction
(a) In order to qualify for tree preservation credit, developers shall adhere to the following tree protection measures on all construction
sites.
(1) Prior to grading, brush removal, or construction, the developer shall clearly tag or mark all trees to be preserved.
(2) The developer shall erect a plastic mesh fence, or other approved fencing material, a minimum of four feet in height
around each tree or group of trees to prevent the placement of debris or fill within the drip line.
(3) During the construction phase of development, the developer shall prohibit cleaning, parking, or storage of equipment or
materials under the canopy of any tree or group of trees being preserved. The developer shall not allow the disposal of any
waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc. in the canopy area.
(4) No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any tree.
(5) No fill or excavation may occur within the drip line of a tree to be preserved unless there is a specific approved plan for
use of tree wells or retaining walls. Major changes of grade (six inches or greater) will require additional measures to maintain
proper oxygen and water exchange with the roots. In addition, the developer should adhere to the following guidelines to
protect the trees to be preserved:
a. With grade changes, a reinforced retaining wall or tree well of a design approved by the city should be constructed
around the tree no closer than half the distance between the trunk and the drip line. The retaining wall should be
constructed so as to maintain the existing grades around a tree or group of trees.
b. At no time should a wall, pavement, or porous pavement be placed closer than five feet or one foot for every two
inches in caliper, whichever is greater, to the trunk of the tree.
c. Root pruning may be necessary when the critical root zone is to be disturbed.
d. If a patio, sidewalk, drive, parking lot, or other paved surface must be placed within the drip line of an existing tree,
material such as a porous pavement or other approved construction method that will allow the passage of water and
oxygen may be required.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.3.4 Definitions
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following terms are defined:
(1) Drip Line means a vertical line run through the outermost portion of the crown of a tree and extending to the ground.
(2) Premium Tree means any of the trees noted as such on the “Recommended Trees and Shrubs” list maintained by the
Planning Director with a trunk diameter of at least 6 caliper inches.
(3) Caliper of a tree means the diameter of the tree as measured at four feet above ground level.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 4 - Screening, Buffering and Fencing
Section 4.2.4.1 Fences, Walls and Hedges
(a) Opaque Fences, Walls and Hedges in Residential Zoning Districts. Opaque fences, walls and hedges are permitted in the required
front yard of any lot in all residential zoning districts, except MF zoning, only if the height of such fence, wall or hedge does not exceed
the height represented by a line connecting a height of seven feet (7') at the building line with a height of two and one-half feet (2-1/2') at
the front property line. No such fence, wall or hedge may exceed two and one-half feet along the front property line.
(b) Non-Opaque Fences, Walls and Hedges in Residential Zoning Districts. Non-opaque fences in all residential zoning districts, except
MF zoning, shall not exceed a line connecting a height not to exceed seven feet (7') at the building line with a height of four feet (4') at a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/648
setback of seven feet (7') from the front property line. The four-foot (4'), non-opaque fence may extend to the front property line. Nonopaque
shall be defined as a chain-link fence or other fence in which vertical or horizontal members are a minimum of four inches apart.
(c) Fences, Walls and Hedges in Rear, Interior and Exterior Yards in Residential Zoning Districts. Fences, walls and hedges are
permitted in all residential zoning districts, except MF zoning, in rear yards, interior yards, and exterior yards, and shall not exceed seven
feet (7') in height between the property line and the building setback line. Reverse (or double) frontage lots and lots having a street on
more than two (2) sides shall meet the same requirements on each yard adjoining a street as those lots facing said street. This shall not
apply to lots backing up to an arterial street or freeway.
(d) Fences, Walls and Hedges in Multifamily and Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Fences, walls and hedges in nonresidential zoning
and MF zoning districts shall have a maximum height of ten feet (10').
(e) Location. All fences, walls or hedges must be located on private property and shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the curb or
edge of pavement, whichever is closer, of all streets.
(f) Gates for Vehicular Access. Gates for vehicular access adjacent to a street, not including alleys, must be set back from the curb or
edge of pavement by a minimum distance as specified in the Driveways and Access Management Division in Chapter 3.
(g) Fencing Materials Prohibited. Razor wire, barbed wire, and similar fencing materials are:
(1) Prohibited within residential zoning, except for agricultural or related uses.
(2) Prohibited within nonresidential zoning within the front yard setback and in side or rear setbacks where adjacent to
residential zoning, except for agricultural related uses or in Heavy Commercial or industrial zoning districts.
(h) Additional Regulations.
(1) Where a fence is adjacent to or visible from the public right-of-way, except an alley, the “finished” side of the fence
should face the right-of-way.
(2) Where screening walls or fences exist or are required, openings to ensure adequate pedestrian connectivity shall be
provided where appropriate.
(3) Fences, walls, and hedges must be maintained in a safe and attractive manner.
(4) New or replacement fences must be constructed of standard fencing materials and may not be constructed of scrap
metal, plywood, or other non-standard fencing materials.
(5) Existing nonconforming fences, walls, and hedges may continue in good condition.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 55-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-1-12; Ord. No.
14-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A, 4), 3-12-15)
Section 4.2.4.2 Land Use Buffers
(a) Buffer yards consisting of a minimum width landscaping area, landscape plantings, and/or walls or fencing are required between
land uses of different intensities for the purpose of mitigating negative impacts such as noise, trash, light, and visual appearance.
(1) Type A Buffer is required between Residential Multifamily (MD and MF), Office (NO and O), College-University (CU),
Medical Use (MU), or Neighborhood Retail (NR) districts and any lower intensity residential district. A Type A Buffer shall
consist of a 5-foot wide buffer yard plus at least 15 points based on the points listed in subsection (3) below.
(2) Type B Buffer is required between Heavy Commercial (HC), General Commercial (GC), or General Retail (GR)
districts and a residential district or between any Industrial district and any other non-industrial district other than Heavy
Commercial (HC) and General Commercial (GC). A Type B Buffer shall consist of a 5-foot wide buffer yard plus at least 25
points based on the points listed in subsection (3) below.
(3) Points.
a. Opaque masonry wall with 6 foot minimum height = 15 points.
b. Opaque fence with 6 foot minimum height = 5 points.
c. An existing, continuous fence or wall on the adjacent property = 1/2 the points of a fence or wall on the subject
property.
d. Each additional 5 feet of buffer yard = 5 points (maximum of 15 points).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/648
e. One tree with a mature height of at least 20 feet and height of at least 8 feet at time of planting per 25 lineal feet of
buffer yard = 10 points.
f. Three smaller trees per 25 lineal feet of buffer yard = 10 points.
(b) Buffer yards are required between adjacent uses as indicated. For purposes of this section adjacent includes properties separated by
an alley, but does not include properties separated by a street.
(c) Parking lots, driving lanes, loading areas, or other similar areas of vehicular access shall be screened from residentially zoned
property, whether adjacent or across a street, by a continuous hedge, fence, wall, berm, or combination of these, with a minimum height
of 36 inches. This requirement shall not be required on expressways and major arterial roads.
(d) Open space in buffer yards shall be planted in grass or other vegetative ground cover, except for authorized driveways across the
buffer yard or approved pedestrian facilities.
(e) Alternative buffering may be allowed through the site plan review process as long as the buffering and aesthetic intent of these
requirements are met.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 14-2015, pt. 1 (Exh. A, 4), 3-12-15)
Division 5 - Outside Storage and Outdoor Display
Section 4.2.5.1 General Standards
(a) Mechanical equipment, excluding roof-mounted equipment, must be screened from view from streets, parking lots, parks, and
residential districts with materials consistent with the principal structure.
(b) Loading docks must be located on the side or rear of the building and screened from streets and residentially zoned property by a
landscape buffer per Section 8 [sic] below or by an opaque fence or wall at least 7 feet in height.
(c) Waste containers must meet the following requirements:
(1) Must be screened from streets and residentially zoned property by a landscape buffer per Section 8 [sic] below or by an
opaque fence or wall at least 7 feet in height.
(2) With the exception of those located in alleys, waste containers must be located on private property.
(3) Placement and screening of waste containers must be shown on an approved site plan and must be consistent with all
applicable [sic]
(d) Outdoor storage of materials not displayed for sale is subject to the following requirements:
(1) Where allowed and required to be screened, outdoor storage must be screened to a minimum height of 6 feet, up to 8
feet where the stored materials are greater than 6 feet in height, through a combination of landscaping, fences/walls, and/or
berms.
(2) Not allowed within 5 feet of a property line.
(3) In Industrial or Agricultural/Open Space districts, outdoor storage is allowed and must be screened from residential
districts
(4) In Heavy Commercial (HC) districts, outdoor storage:
a. is allowed only as an accessory use,
b. is allowed only in rear yards and side yards not adjacent to a street, and
c. must be screened from adjacent rights-of-way and less-intensive zoning districts
(5) Not allowed in Neighborhood Office (NO), Office (O), Neighborhood Retail (NR), General Retail (GR), General
Commercial (GC), Central Business (CB), College-University (CU), or Medical Use (MU) districts.
(e) Outdoor display of merchandise for sale is subject to the following requirements:
(1) Outdoor display does not include operable vehicles and recreational vehicles displayed for sale.
(2) Not allowed within 10 feet of a property line adjacent to a street.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/648
(3) In Industrial (HI, LI, PI), Agricultural/Open Space (AO), or Heavy Commercial (HC) districts, outdoor display is
allowed.
(4) In General Commercial (GC) and General Retail (GR) districts, outdoor display is:
a. limited to 5% of the total site area, up to 15% if any excess over 5% is completely screened from view from rightsof-
way and adjacent properties;
b. limited to rear or interior side yards or within 20 feet of the front of the principal building;
c. only allowed as accessory use.
(5) In Neighborhood Office (NO), Neighborhood Retail (NR), Office (O), and Central Business (CB) districts, outdoor
display is allowed only within 10 feet of the front of a principal building
(6) In College-University (CU) and Medical Use (MU) districts, outdoor display is prohibited
(f) Designated areas for outdoor storage and/or display must be shown on the site plan.
(g) All outdoor storage or display must be located on private property.
(h) Outdoor storage or display may not be located within required landscape areas or required parking spaces and may not impede
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 6 - Urban Design
Section 4.2.6.1 Urban Design Standards
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for urban design to ensure high-quality attractive
development that meets the community appearance goals of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Applicability
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to development within the corporate limits of the City of Abilene.
(2) No Building Permit may be issued for a new building unless the applicable provisions of this section are met.
(3) No Site Plan or Utility Plan shall be approved for any property unless the applicable requirements of this section are
met.
(c) Building Materials: The following standards apply only within the Central Business District and along Enhancement Corridors, as
designated in the City's Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Metal siding and standard concrete block (CMU) are prohibited on exterior facades visible from a street or a parking lot,
except in Industrial or Heavy Commercial districts.
(2) Existing nonconforming structures are grandfathered and allowed to continue and, unless completely replaced, to be
maintained or repaired with like materials if damaged.
(3) Prohibited materials may be used subject to a waiver granted by the Planning Director based on established guidelines.
The use of these otherwise prohibited materials must be part of an overall architectural design that meets the aesthetic
objectives of this section and the City's Comprehensive Plan. An unfavorable decision by the Planning Director may be
appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission Design Review Subcommittee, appointed by the Chair, for final
determination.
(d) Standards for Large Developments The following provisions apply to any single building with a gross floor area of 50,000 square
feet or greater or multiple buildings on a single site with a total gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or greater:
(1) Architectural Style. The architectural style of a development shall be coordinated to create visual cohesiveness and
avoid blank, monotonous walls through variations in height, depth, color, or texture of a building. Examples of features used
to create visual interest include arcades, display windows, awnings, facade articulation and other similar design elements.
[(2) Reserved]
(3) If utilizing a parapet roof, construction shall be of complementary materials and design as the building concealing flat
roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/648
(4) Facade offsets shall be shown on a site plan and approved as part of the site plan review process.
(5) Building elevations with enough detail to ensure compliance with these requirements shall be submitted and approved
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(6) Alternatives to these standards may be approved subject to approval by the Planning Director. Variations to these
standards must be part of an overall architectural design that meets the aesthetic objectives of this section and the City's
Comprehensive Plan. An unfavorable decision by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission Design Review Subcommittee for final determination.
(e) Utilities Utility lines providing individual service to a site, such as electric, telephone, and cable, shall be installed underground or
in rear alleys or easements for all new nonresidential development.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 7 - Lighting/Exterior Illumination
Section 4.2.7.1 Lighting
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for adequate and safe lighting of private property, while limiting light
spillover and glare onto adjacent properties and public streets. Such limitations are intended to prevent the creation of nuisances, promote
traffic safety, conserve energy, and preserve the area's dark sky.
(b) Applicability. This subsection shall be applied to the installation of all new private outdoor lighting fixtures. Outdoor lighting
fixtures legally installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to comply with these outdoor lighting standards
and may be replaced with like fixtures unless all similar lighting is being replaced.
(c) Lighting Plan. A lighting plan is required to be submitted and approved prior to a Certificate of Occupancy. Such plan shall provide
details to ensure that the standards of this subsection are met. If a lighting plan is not submitted as part of the site plan approval process,
the site plan shall include a note indicating that all requirements of this Division shall be met.
(d) Exempt Lighting. The following luminaires and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements:
(1) Internally illuminated signs.
(2) Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, and performance areas.
(3) Lighting in swimming pools and other water features governed by Article 680 of the National Electrical Code.
(4) Code required exit signs.
(5) Code required lighting for stairs and ramps.
(6) Temporary holiday lighting provided that individual lamps are 10 watts or less.
(7) Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state agency.
(8) Interior lighting.
(e) Exterior lighting for outdoor recreational uses. Ball diamonds, playing fields, golf driving ranges, tennis courts, parks, and similar
outdoor recreational uses may be exempted from one or more of the outdoor lighting standards of this section if approved by the
Development Review Committee. A denial by the Development Review Committee may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
(f) Lighting Standards:
(1) Use of fully shielded light fixtures.
a. In order to avoid undue glare and light trespass, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded except
incandescent fixtures of one hundred fifty watts or less or other sources of seventy watts or less.
b. Canopy lighting must be fully shielded.
c. In no instance shall a commercial outdoor lighting fixture be mounted or oriented such that the lighting element is
visible from a property in a residential district.
(2) No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/648
(3) The Board of Adjustment may agree to allow variations from these standards by granting a Special Exception, which
may contain conditions, based on specific and reasonable written justification provided by the applicant showing that the
purposes and intent of these requirements are met through alternative means.
(g) Definitions
Glare means light that causes visual discomfort or disability, or a loss of visual performance.
Light fixture, fully shielded means an outdoor lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below
the horizontal.
Luminaire means the complete lighting assembly (including the lamp, housing, reflectors, lenses and shields), less the support assembly
(pole or mounting bracket) for a light fixture.
Outdoor light fixture means an outdoor artificial illuminating device, either permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.7.2 Performance Standards Regulating Glare
(a) Within all districts, with the exception of HI, no direct or reflected glare shall be visible at the lot line.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 8 - Sign Regulations
Section 4.2.8.1 Goals
In order to assure continuity and effectiveness in the regulation of signs, the City of Abilene has adopted the following goals to be
attained by these regulations:
(a) Sign regulation in the City of Abilene will recognize and appreciate the value of advertising and signage to a successful
business climate.
(b) Sign regulation in Abilene will address contemporary and future needs of Abilene by responding to:
1. Public safety;
2. New patterns of growth;
3. More flexible zoning and land use practices;
4. The quality of the visual environment.
(c) Sign regulation in Abilene will be understandable to the public in order to encourage maximum voluntary compliance.
(d) Sign regulation in Abilene will be simplified to the greatest extent possible so as to improve enforcement and
compliance.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.2 General Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this subpart to further those goals of the City of Abilene set forth in section 4.2.8.1 and to provide uniform sign
standards which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony, and pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability of
Abilene's business, cultural, and residential areas. Objectives to be pursued in applying specific standards are as follows:
(a) To protect the public welfare and enhance the appearance and economic value of the cityscape by requiring signs that do
not create a nuisance to contiguous or adjacent occupancies or to persons using the public right-of-way.[;]
(b) To assure that the size, scale, height, and location of all signs are directly related to the size and character of the sites
upon which the signs are located; and
(c) To assure that all signs, sign supports, and sign bases shall be so constructed and designed to provide for safety.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/648
Section 4.2.8.3 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this division. In the event a word or term is not defined
in this section but is defined elsewhere in this Division, the definition set forth in this Division shall be deemed controlling. In the event
of conflict between the definition of a word or term set forth in this section and the definition of the same word or term set forth in this
Division, the definition set forth in this section shall be deemed controlling as to the interpretation and enforcement of this article.
Area: The area shall be considered to be the entire area within any geometric figure, including, but not limited to, all elements of the
matter displayed but not including blank masking, frames, or structured elements outside the sign bearing no advertising or graphic
matter.
Business entity: Any person, corporation or group of persons associated for the common purposes of engaging in a commercial or
mercantile activity legally permissible under federal, state, and local laws.
Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle which is used on a regular basis during working hours to transport persons, goods, or services for the
purpose of engaging in business activities.
Crown of street: The highest point of grade elevation of a cross section of a street, usually at a point approximately on the center line of a
street.
Development site: A parcel or abutting parcels of land that have definite boundaries, which is improved or that is to be improved as a
single unit of use.
Electronic message sign: A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electrically
illuminated segments, including LED (light emitting diode) signs, television screens, plasma screens, video boards, or other digital signs.
Height: Height shall be considered to be the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is
higher, and that point on the crown of the street which is nearest to the point on the sign which is used to establish the setback of the sign,
as setback is hereinafter defined. For signs located two hundred (200) feet or further from a street, height shall be considered to be the
vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the highest adjacent grade.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the structural support of the
sign.
Mansard roof: A roof having two (2) slopes on all sides, with the lower slope steeper than the upper slope.
Primary use or service: A use or service that is the principal activity on a site.
Secondary use or service: A use or service that is subordinate and incidental to and serves a principal use or service.
Setback: A line parallel to, and the required distance from, the lot frontage adjacent to any street abutting the lot or tract in question, or a
line parallel to and the required distance from any lot abutting the side of the lot or tract in question. For purposes of determining the
requirements of this section, no portion of any sign or its support shall project or extend beyond the required setback line.
Sign: Any words, numbers, figures, devices, designs, trademarks, or other symbols, which attract attention to or make known such things
as an individual, firm, profession, business, commodity, or service, and which are visible from any public street. This definition of “sign”
shall include any structure designed to be used for said display. House numbers are not included within the definition of a sign.
Sign, damaged: Any sign which has become deteriorated or damaged and requires reconditioning to restore it to an average, normal state
of repair, when such conditioning requires the replacement of broken or damaged glass or other materials, or the straightening of any sign
support or other portion of the sign when the sign structure is leaning to such a degree as to be in danger of falling or collapse. A sign
shall only be considered damaged whenever the cost of repairing such damage is equal to or greater than sixty (60) percent of the cost,
excluding sign supports, of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location.
Sign, electrical: Any illuminated sign or sign utilizing any electrical devices.
Sign, freestanding: Any sign permanently affixed to the ground and which is not affixed to a building and which is not used for offpremises
advertising.
Sign, freestanding (monument): A sign with a display surface that is an integral part of the support structure, which in turn is affixed or
permanently fixed in the ground, as contrasted to any other freestanding sign that has separate support or supports attached to the display
surface. For the purposes of interpretation in this subpart, “freestanding signs” shall include monument signs, but “freestanding
monument signs” shall not include other types of freestanding signs.
Sign, institutional: Any freestanding or monument sign near or in close proximity to a main entrance way to a church, non-profit
institution, or educational institution.
Sign, moving message: Any sign which has automatically changing advertising or which has any moving message.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/648
Sign, neighborhood entrance: A monument sign located near or in close proximity to the entrance of a residential neighborhood.
Sign, nonportable: A sign designed or manufactured to be anchored or affixed to the ground, buildings or other structures in a manner
restricting easy movement from place to place. Nonportable signs do not include portable signs which have had wheels removed or have
been modified in such a way as to be anchored to the ground or other structures by means of chains, cables, stakes, or similar devices
unless such modifications will prohibit removal of the sign and reinstallation at another location. Nonportable signs may, however,
include signs utilizing posts, poles, beams, and similar structural components that may be affixed to the ground in a temporary fashion.
Nonportable signs may also include signs utilizing braces, hangers, wall anchors and similar structural components that may be affixed to
buildings or other structures in a temporary fashion. In either case, nonportable signs will conform to the Uniform Building Code.
Sign, off-site advertising or billboard: A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event,
place, service and/or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises upon which the sign is located.
Also referred to as off-premises sign.
Sign, on-site business and/or identification: A sign identifying or advertising a business, person, organization, activity, service, and/or
product which is installed and maintained on the same premises as the subject it advertises. Also referred to as an On-Premises Sign.
Sign, portable: A sign which is not designed or manufactured to be permanently anchored or affixed to the ground, building or other
structure, but rather is designed or primarily used as a sign which is movable from place to place and which includes but is not limited to
signs affixed to a trailer or other portable structure and “A” frame or sandwich signs.
Sign, structural: A nonportable sign other than wall signs.
Sign, temporary: A sign, banner, pennant, valance or other device constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other
like materials, with or without a frame, and any type of sign that is not permanently attached to the ground, wall or building, and which is
intended to be displayed for a short period of time (i.e., changeable; not permanent).
Sign, wall: Any sign affixed flat against and parallel to a building wall. For the purpose of this definition, wall shall include window
areas.
Visibility triangle: A triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through two (2) points on the two (2) curblines or edge of pavement
line thirty (30) feet from the street corner intersection.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 7-1991, pt. 1, 2-14-91; Ord. No. 57-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-23-08; Ordinance 65-2018, pt
2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.4 General Provisions
All signs, other than address identification signs, shall pertain to the identification of the primary uses, by name of the occupant or
business, and/or primary services provided or primary products sold on the premises. All other signs may be considered off-site
advertising (or billboards) signs, other noncommercial, and private instructional signs as hereinafter provided.
Where applicable, a sign shall, at the time the sign is permitted, meet all requirements of Chapter 8 of this Code of Ordinances and any
other applicable requirements of said Code.
Where commercial, advertising or business signs are allowed, then non-commercial speech shall be automatically allowed subject to the
same regulation applicable to advertising or business signs.
All signs, including those painted on the walls of buildings, shall be permanently maintained in a safe, structurally sound condition, and
in good repair including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of
said sign. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frames and fastenings shall be free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot or loosening.
All signs shall further be maintained in compliance with any additional requirements for signs as are specified in Chapter 8 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Abilene and other applicable requirements of said Code.
No sign in any zoning district shall project into the public right-of-way of any street or alley except in the central business district. In a
central business district, no sign shall extend outward from any building face into the public right-of-way for a distance of more than
within two (2) feet of the street curb, nor shall be erected so as to overhang a sidewalk or public right-of-way at a height of less than eight
(8) feet.
(1) Exception: Waiting benches and other items providing a public service have advertising affixed to them shall be
considered signs and allowed in the public right-of-way, subject to the approval of the city council, to include issuance of a
street use license, and all other conditions deemed appropriate to ensure the public safety.
Every business location shall be adequately identified by a street address, i.e. street numbers and/or street name, which is clearly visible
from the street adjacent to the front entrance of such business. However, the area of a sign which is erected for the sole purpose of
providing such street address identification shall not be subtracted from or count against the total allowable sign area requirements for the
several districts as hereinafter specified in this subpart. Further, such street address identification may be incorporated into any sign
permitted under the terms and provisions of this subpart so long as such street address identification does not increase the maximum
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 599/648
allowable sign area of any sign by more than ten (10) percent. The incorporation of such street address identification shall not change the
height or setback requirements from the maximums or minimums allowable for such sign prior to incorporation thereof.
All lighting shall be so shielded as to prevent intensive light or glare on adjacent property and roadways.
Fees and charges for services provided by the city shall be determined by city council and placed on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 7-1991, pt. 1, 2-14-91; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.5 Permits Required
Except as provided in section 4.2.8.6, a permit shall be obtained from the city for a proposed sign.
(a) Structural signs. For purposes of design of structural members on signs, the current Uniform Building Code of the city
shall be utilized.
(b) Electrical signs. All illuminated signs or signs utilizing any electrical devices shall require an electrical permit and shall
be wired in accordance with the electrical code of the city.
(c) Permit to enlarge, alter, repair, etc. No sign shall be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, replaced or relocated, nor shall
sign faces be renewed or neon tubing be rearranged when the values of such work exceeds sixty (60) percent of the cost of
erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, except upon the issuance of a permit, and all work done under such
permit shall be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter.
The changing of movable parts of signs which are designed for changing, or the repainting of display matter or the
repairing of damaged neon tubing while a sign is in place shall not be deemed to be alterations for the purpose of this
section.
(d) Construction time limitations. Construction activities pertaining to permanent off-site signs must commence within
thirty (30) days of the date of the sign application permit as filed with the city. Construction will be completed within fortyfive
(45) days of the above date. Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the revocation of the permit application.
In addition, the same applicant may not reapply for another sign permit at the location concerned for a period of six (6)
months.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 47-1988, pt. 1, 9-22-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.6 Signs Exempted From Permit Requirements
No permit shall be required to erect any of the signs set forth in this section:
(1) Non-illuminated signs located on private property that are no greater than six (6) square feet in area;
(2) Temporary signs;
(3) Signs in residential zoning;
(4) Non-illuminated temporary signs placed in or on windows of structures, except as provided in section 4.2.8.10, special
regulations for portable signs;
Signs related to an event or occurrence on a specific date must be removed no later than fourteen (14) days subsequent to such event or
occurrence.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.7 Prohibited Signs
The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:
(a) Signs or posters, not otherwise regulated, which are tacked, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to trees, poles, posts,
fences or other structures in rights-of-way or easements;
(b) Banners, pennants, searchlights, twirling signs or any other sign of a similar nature, located upon the sidewalk, curb or
right-of-way;
(c) Flags, banners, or pennants which obstruct the view of traffic;
(d) Any signs which resemble official traffic-control signs, signals or devices, which bear the words, “Stop,” “Go Slow,”
“Caution,” “Danger,” “Warning,” or similar words;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 600/648
(e) Signs which, by reason of their size, location, content, coloring, manner of illumination, or devices causing motion or
movement may be confused with or construed as traffic-control signs, signals or devices, or the lights of an emergency or road
equipment vehicle, or which hide from view any traffic-control or street signs, signals or devices; or any sign which may, in
the opinion of the city manager or his or her designee, create or cause a hazard;
(f) Any sign or device attached to or located on any vehicle or trailer parked on a public right-of-way or public property.
(1) Exception: This subsection shall not be construed so as to prohibit typical vehicular signage such as is lettered on a
commercial vehicle;
(g) Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, or visible matter.
(h) No person shall place any sign on any utility, telephone or electric light pole located on any street, alley sidewalk or park
or parkway within the city. Furthermore, signs in any residential area shall not:
(1) Be placed or erected within any public right-of-way;
(2) Exceed a size of six (6) square feet;
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.8 Bonding
Performance guarantee. No permit for the installation, erection, and/or maintenance of signs shall be issued to any person or entity until a
performance guarantee has been filed with the City of Abilene to guarantee performance. Said guarantee shall be in the form of a bond
issued by a corporate surety, licensed to do business in the State of Texas, or an individual bond, or any other acceptable financial
guarantee (such as a letter of credit or cashiers check) shall be approved by the city manager or his or her designee and be in the sum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Said guarantee shall insure that the permittee shall install, erect, repair, and/or demolish signs in
accordance with the provisions of this and all other applicable ordinances of the city in a good and workmanlike manner and in
accordance with the prevailing standards of the trade. Upon final approval of sign installation, erection, repair and/or demolition, the
permittee shall be released from the obligation of the performance guarantee.
(1) Exception: Wall signs shall be exempted from bonding requirements.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.9 Area, Height, Placement and Number
(a) All nonportable signs not specifically exempted from permits (by the terms of section 4.2.8.6) shall be permitted only for the
purposes identified in this section and within the limitations prescribed by this section.
(b) Area shall be considered to be the entire area within any geometric figure, including, but not limited to, all elements of the matter
displayed, but not including blank masking, frames, or structured elements outside the sign bearing no advertising or graphic matter.
(c) Height shall be considered to be the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is
higher, and that point on the crown of the street which is nearest to the point on the sign which is used to establish the setback of the sign,
as setback is herein defined. For signs located two hundred (200) feet or further from a street, height shall be considered to be the vertical
distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the highest adjacent grade. Highest
adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the structural support of the sign.
(d) Setback shall be considered to mean a line parallel to, and the required distance from, the lot frontage adjacent to any street abutting
the lot or tract in question, or a line parallel to and the required distance from any lot abutting the side of the lot or tract in question. For
purposes of determining the requirements of this section, no portion of any sign or its support shall project or extend beyond the required
setback line.
(e) Visibility triangle shall be considered to mean a triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through two (2) points on the two (2)
curblines or edge of pavement line thirty (30) feet from the street corner intersection. No sign or supporting structure shall be placed
within the visibility triangle unless there is a minimum height of eight (8) feet from the ground to the lowest point on the sign or structure
projecting over the triangle. In no instance, however, shall such projections extend or project beyond the required setbacks.
(f) Sign standards. Signs shall meet the standards delineated in the following table and the following footnotes referenced in the table:
(1) Off-site advertising signs are prohibited within the city limits of the City of Abilene, except as specifically authorized
below:
(a) Off-site advertising signs are only permitted within the following zoning districts: General Retail (GR), General
Commercial (GC), Heavy Commercial (HC), Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI), and Agricultural-Open Space
(AO). Off-site advertising signs are only permitted within the AO district with a special exception granted by the board
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 601/648
of adjustment. In determining the suitability of a site within the AO district, the board shall consider the proximity of the
proposed location to existing or proposed residential uses as may be indicated on the zoning map of the City of Abilene
or any land use plans that have been approved by either the planning and zoning commission or the city council.
(b) Regulation of Type I signs:
i. Type I signs are those located along and oriented to a thoroughfare designated as a freeway or expressway in
the city's adopted Thoroughfare Plan and are only permitted in the following locations:
Interstate Highway 20;
Loop 322;
US Highway 83.
ii. Type I signs shall have a maximum area of 672 square feet and a maximum height of 42 feet, 6 inches or such
height so that the bottom of the sign face is 8 feet higher than the adjacent main-traveled way, as defined by the
Texas Department of Transportation, whichever is higher.
(c) Regulation of Type II signs:
i. Type II signs are those located along and oriented to a thoroughfare designated as an arterial or collector in the
city's adopted Thoroughfare Plan and are only permitted in the following locations:
Ambler Avenue;
Antilley Road;
Barrow Street;
Buffalo Gap Road;
Catclaw Drive;
East Highway 80;
East South 11th Street;
Grape Street;
Industrial Blvd.;
Judge Ely Blvd;
Leggett Drive;
Mockingbird Lane;
North 10th Street;
North 1st Street;
Pine Street;
Pioneer Drive;
Rebecca Lane;
Ridgemont Drive;
Sayles Blvd;
South 14th Street;
South 1st Street;
South 27th Street;
South 7th Street;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 602/648
Southwest Drive;
Texas Avenue;
Treadaway Blvd/Pine Street (Business 83);
US Highways 83/277;
US Highways 83/84;
Willis Street.
ii. Type II signs shall have a maximum area of 378 square feet and a maximum height of 35 feet.
(2) Spacing and separation of off-site advertising signs shall be based on the following:
(a) Signs shall be separated from other off-site advertising signs on the same side of the street by a minimum distance
of 1,500 feet on interstate and primary highways, as designated by the Texas Department of Transportation.
(b) Signs shall be separated from other off-site advertising signs on the same side of the street by a minimum distance
of 750 feet when not on an interstate or primary highway.
(c) Signs shall be separated from other off-site advertising signs in any direction by a minimum of 250 feet.
(d) No off-site advertising signs shall be permitted less than 135 feet from a lot in a Residential Single-family (RS),
Mobile Home (MH), or Multifamily (MF) district.
(e) No off-site advertising signs shall be permitted less than 400 feet from a lot in a Residential Single-family (RS),
Mobile Home (MH), or Multifamily (MF) district when adjacent to roadways designated as interstate or primary.
Sign
Classification
Permitted
Zoning
Districts
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Setback
Required
Number and/or
Spacing
Limitations
Illumination
Permitted
Motion Permitted Additional
Requirements
OFF
SITE
Type I GR
GC
HC
LI
HI
AO (SE)
(1)
672 sq. ft. 42.5 ft. or
bottom of sign
8 ft. above
primary
roadway
(1), (5), (6)
10 feet if
abutting MD,
CU, or AO
1,500 ft. spacing on
same side of street
250 ft. radial
spacing (2)
Yes Yes Permit Required
(1)
Type II GR
GC
HC
LI
HI
AO (SE)
(1)
378 sq. ft. 35 ft.
(1), (5), (6)
10 feet if
abutting MD,
CU, or AO
750 ft. spacing on
same side of street,
except 1,500 ft. on
interstate or primary
250 ft. radial
spacing (2)
Yes Yes Permit Required
(1)
ON SITE AO 700 sq. ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. from
property line
One per business or
activity
Yes Yes Permit Required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 603/648
(5), (6)
MU
O
36 sq. ft. 12 ft 10 ft. from
property line
One per business or
activity
Yes Yes Permit Required
GR
CB
GC
HC
LI
HI
300 sq. ft. (no
limitation for
wall signs)
50 ft, except in
CB (no
restrictions)
(5), (6)
(4) One freestanding
sign per business
per street frontage
Yes Yes Permit Required
MF,
MD,
MH
CU
20 sq. ft.
(3)
10 ft.
(3)
10 feet from
property line
One per business or
activity per street
frontage
Yes Yes Permit Required
RS
RR
PH
TH
6 sq. ft.
(3)
(3) (4) One per premises
(3)
No
(3)
No
(3)
Footnotes:
(1) No off-site advertising signs shall be permitted less than one hundred thirty-five (135) feet from a lot in a residential single-family or MF district.
No off-site advertising signs shall be permitted less than four hundred (400) feet from a lot in a residential single-family or MF district when
adjacent to interstate or primary road systems.
In AO zoning districts, off-site advertising signs may be permitted upon issuance of special exemption by the board of adjustment after a public
hearing. In determining the suitability of a site for placement of an off-site advertising sign, the board shall consider the proximity of the
proposed location to existing or proposed residential uses as may be indicated on the zoning map of the City of Abilene or any land use plans that
have been approved by either the planning and zoning commission or the city council. Setbacks for off-site advertising signs on
interstate/primary roads shall be established by the State of Texas.
(2) The minimum separation shall be measured from signs on the same side of the street.
(3) Signs on developing property shall be signs on property under current construction or property that is being promoted in advance of sale and
development.
Institutional signs and neighborhood entrance signs located within residential districts are permitted to be up to 80 square feet in area and up to
25 feet in height. In addition, only one wall sign is permitted per street frontage so long as such sign exceeds no more than 100 square feet in
area. Such signs shall be permitted to be illuminated and may be an electronic message sign.
(4) Front setback shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from back of curb or edge of pavement where there is no curb; provided, however, that no sign
shall project into the public right-of-way of any street or alley except in the central business district as provided in section 2.3.3.7. The setback from
street side property lines for monument signs shall be 5 feet from the property line or 15 feet from the curb, whicchever is greater.
Side setbacks shall be ten (10) feet from any side abutting a lot or tract in an AO, RS, RR, PH, TH, MD, MF, MH, or CU district. In all other
cases there shall be no side setback.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 604/648
(5) Freestanding signs shall have a minimum grade clearance of eight (8) feet.
(6) Monument signs shall not exceed a height of 8 feet.
Exception: Freestanding signs (including monument signs) set back a minimum twenty-five (25) feet from all street-side property
boundaries do not need a minimum grade clearance of eight (8) feet. A sign so located may also exceed the forty-two-inch height
limitation, but shall not exceed the maximum area or height of signs allowed.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 34-1997, pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-24-97; Ord. No. 70-2005, pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-15-05; Ord. No. 17-
2007, pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-10-07; Ord. No. 14-2013, pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-11-13; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.10 Special Regulations for Portable Signs
(a) Permits. Portable signs are prohibited in residential areas, including multifamily and mobile home developments. Prior to the use or
placement of any portable sign, a permit must be obtained pursuant to the following terms and conditions. Permits for portable signs may
be issued to persons other than sign contractors, and no bonds are required.
(1) A portable sign permit may be issued for shopping centers, commercial, retail, or office developments; however, only
one (1) portable sign per business location is allowed.
(2) Portable signs shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to the street and a greater distance if necessary to be located
off of the right-of-way. In no case shall the portable sign be located within the public right-of-way. Further, said signs shall not
be located in the area designated as the intersection visibility area.
(3) No portable sign shall be placed so as to project into the public right-of-way of any street or alley.
(4) Portable signs shall permanently display on the sign in easily readable form the name, address, city, zip code and
telephone number of the owner of said sign.
(5) Portable signs may be internally or indirectly lighted. Any accessory lighting, if present, surrounding the message
display area, shall contain only lamps not to exceed sixty (60) watts incandescent or equivalent lumens. All portable signs
utilizing electrical power shall be wired in accordance with the City of Abilene's electrical code. Electrical outlets serving the
sign must be located entirely beneath the frame of the sign and must be equipped with a ground-fault interrupter device.
(6) Unsafe signs listed in subsection (b) shall not be eligible for a permit.
(7) A permit shall be obtained for each portable sign.
(8) If required, each portable sign shall satisfy any permit requirements in the building code and electrical code.
(9) Church and school facilities located in residential areas shall be allowed one (1) portable sign for not more than six (6)
nonconsecutive two-week periods during any calendar year, regardless of street frontage. This provision shall not exempt the
requirements for permitting described herein.
For purposes of this section, residential areas shall be defined as all single-family, multifamily and mobile home zoning
districts.
(10) Portable signs shall be allowed in residential multifamily districts, for purposes other than church or school
identification as provided for above, subject to a special exception being granted by the board of adjustment. As with any
special exception request, the board of adjustment may attach any conditions to its approval deemed necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) Unsafe signs prohibited. It is hereby expressly declared that the following signs are in fact unsafe signs causing immediate danger,
and it shall be the duty of the owner of the sign, the lessee of the sign, the owner of the property on which the sign is located, and the
owner and manager of any business advertised on the sign to immediately remove the sign, or correct the unsafe conditions, and the
refusal to do so will constitute a violation of this section.
(1) Any portable sign erected, placed, used, altered, or maintained in the public right-of-way.
(2) Any portable sign or sign-supporting structure which is located within the area defined as the intersection visibility
triangle.
(3) Any portable sign which becomes damaged, as defined in section 4.2.8.3, or any portable sign which is erected or
maintained in violation of the provisions of the building code or electrical code.
(4) Any portable sign located nearer than ten (10) feet from the street.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 605/648
(5) Any portable sign which is located or constructed so as to interfere with or confuse the control of traffic on the public
streets.
(6) Any portable sign which resembles an official traffic sign or signal or which bears the words “Stop,” “Go Slow,”
“Caution,” “Danger,” “Warning,” or similar words is prohibited.
(c) Enforcement.
(1) Any portable sign erected in violation of this provision shall be an illegal sign pursuant to section 4.2.8.16(a) and may be
removed by the city only in compliance with the provisions of that section.
(2) Any portable sign that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this Division and which existed lawfully on the
date of adoption (i.e., on the effective date) of this Division, or amendment hereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and
may be removed by the city only in compliance with the provisions of section 4.2.8.16(b).
(3) Any on-premises portable sign that no longer advertises or identifies a use/business conducted on the property on which
the sign is erected shall be an abandoned sign and may be removed by the city only in compliance with section 4.2.8.16(c).
(4) If any sign remains unclaimed for a period of sixty (60) days after its removal, or if the removal and storage costs are not
paid within such sixty-day period, the city may sell or otherwise dispose of the sign. In calculating the length of the storage
period and the storage fee, the first working day after the date of the impoundment shall be considered day number one (1);
thereafter, all days including weekends and holidays shall be counted.
(5) The city manager or his or her designee may enter upon private property which is accessible to the public for the
purposes specified in this section to examine signs or their location, obtain information as to the ownership of signs and to
remove or cause the removal of a sign declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this section.
(d) Appeal procedures. Appeals of the provisions of this section shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 4.2.8.17.
(e) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all portable signs in the city, and nonconforming status or rights
will not be granted to existing portable signs.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.11 Special Regulations for Electronic Message Signs
In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, electronic message signs shall adhere to the following requirements:
(a) Operational limitations for on-premises signs over seventy-five (75) square feet in area or any off-premises sign.
(1) Such signs shall contain static messages only and shall not have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of
movement, of any part of the sign or sign structure, including the movement or appearance of movement of any
illumination or the flashing, scintillating, or varying of light intensity.
(2) Minimum display time. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight (8) seconds.
(3) Transition. The transition from one sign message to another must occur within two (2) seconds and may not
include flashing or appearance of motion, with the exception of a fade out or in, dissolve, or scroll that must be
accomplished within the transition period.
(b) Operational limitations for all signs.
(1) Limitations. All such signs shall have no flashing or full motion video.
(2) Unless permitted as an off-premises sign, such signs shall not include off-premises advertising messages.
(c) Sign face limitations.
(1) Each sign structure is limited to not more than two (2) sides with one sign face per side.
(2) The entire sign face must comply with the operation limitations defined above and a sign face may not be
apportioned into separate areas each acting as a separate sign face under these restrictions.
(d) Brightness.
(1) All such signs shall be equipped with light sensing devices or a scheduled dimming timer that will automatically
dim the intensity of the light emitted by the sign during ambient low-light conditions and at night so that the sign does
not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed in this section.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 606/648
(2) Maximum brightness shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) nits when measured from the sign's face at its
maximum brightness during daylight hours and shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) nits when measured from the
sign's face at its maximum brightness at night.
(3) If such sign is located within one hundred (100) feet of a property with residential zoning, the sign must be
oriented such that no portion of the electronic sign face is visible from a residentially-zoned property or the brightness is
reduced to no more than two hundred fifty (250) nits at night.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a permit for such sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign
manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above.
(e) The city may order a sign's brightness reduced, its minimum display time increased, or other operational characteristics
altered if the city manager or his or her designee, finds that it interferes with or poses a traffic safety hazard to the operation of
vehicles. The City may not require an alteration of a sign that would make the sign ineffective for its intended purpose, such as
by substantially impairing visibility of the sign.
(f) All such signs shall be turned off or display a blank screen when malfunctioning.
(Ord. No. 57-2008, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-23-08; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.12 Enforcement Responsibility
The city manager shall designate a member of the city's staff who shall have the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this
subpart. References herein made to the performance of certain functions by the city shall be deemed references to performance by the city
manager's designee. The duties of such designee shall include not only the issuance of permits as required by this subpart, but also the
responsibility of ensuring that all signs conform with this subpart and with any other applicable laws, requirements and regulations of this
Code of Ordinances or of the City of Abilene and that all signs for which permits are required do in fact have permits. The city manager
or his or her designee shall have the authority to adopt regulations and procedures not inconsistent with the terms of this subpart
necessary to implement the provisions of this subpart. (Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.13 Violations
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any
of the provisions of this subpart. The regulations of this subpart are not intended to permit any violation of the provisions of any other
lawful ordinance or regulation of the city. (Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.14 Stop Orders, Revocation of Permit; Repair or Removal Required
The city shall have the power to issue stop orders, to require the repair or removal of certain signs and/or to revoke sign permits, as
provided in this section. In so doing, the city shall comply with all procedural requirements specified in this section for the giving of
notice, the issuance of orders, the removal of signs and storage and/or sale thereof by the city, and the conduct of hearings on permit
revocations.
(a) Stop orders. If the city shall determine that work on any sign is being performed without a permit or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner, upon written notice and issuance of a stop order by the city, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such
notice shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions
under which work may be resumed. However, where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required. Following the
issuance of a stop order, the city shall initiate proceedings to revoke any permit issued for the work covered by such stop order
unless the cause of the stop order is resolved to the city's satisfaction.
(b) Revocation of permit. The city shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and authority to revoke any and all permits
authorized by this Code for violation of the terms and provisions of this Code, subject to the procedural requirements of this
Code for notice and hearing. Permits may be revoked if they were issued in error or as a result of misinformation or
misinterpretation of the facts associated with their issuance.
(c) Signs erected without permit. In the event any sign shall be erected within the city without a permit, when such sign
shall require a permit, the city is authorized to remove said sign and to store and dispose of the same in accordance with the
procedural requirements of this Code.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 7-1991, pt. 1, 2-14-91; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.15 Maintenance of Signs
All signs and sign support structures, including temporary and portable signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and
anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of appearance and preservation. No sign will be allowed to be kept in a
dilapidated, deteriorated, or unsightly condition, including that signs shall be free from cracked or peeling paint, discolored sign structure
or lettering, and missing or damaged parts. Any nonconforming sign which the City determines is in an unacceptable dilapidated,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 607/648
deteriorated, or unsightly condition, to such an extent that the sign is determined to be damaged as defined in Section 4.2.8.3, shall be
repaired or removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land, buildings or structure upon which such sign is
located within forty-five (45) days after written notification to do so. (Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.16 Illegal, Nonconforming, Unsafe, and Abandoned Signs
(a) Illegal Signs:
(1) Should any sign be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this Code, the City
shall give written notice to the owner, lessee, or person responsible for the sign, ordering that the sign be altered so as to
comply with this Code or to remove the sign.
(2) The owner of, or the owner of property with, an illegal (either conforming or nonconforming) sign must apply for a
permit from the City within ten (10) days of notification of non-compliance.
(3) If the owner has not obtained a permit for the illegal sign by the eleventh (11th) day following notification, the owner
may be cited for noncompliance and/or the sign may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner.
(b) Nonconforming Signs: A sign that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this Division and which existed lawfully on the
date of adoption (i.e., on the effective date) of this Division, or amendment hereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming sign. A
nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain as is in the same location wherein it existed on the effective date of this Division subject
to the following conditions.
(1) Minor changes or repair: Changing sign faces or minor repairs that do not change the structure or dimensions of the sign
shall be allowed and shall not affect the nonconforming status of a sign.
(2) Removal: The right to continue all nonconforming signs shall cease and such sign shall be removed within forty-five
(45) days after written notice, or the City may do so, whenever:
a. A sign is altered, moved or relocated without a permit pursuant to the provisions of this Division; or
b. A sign is damaged or destroyed when the cost of repairing the sign is more than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of
erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location; an existing nonconforming sign that is already in a
dilapidated/deteriorated condition or that represents a public safety hazard as of the effective date of this Division of the
Land Development Code, and the cost of repairing the sign is more than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of erecting a
new sign of the same type at the same location, must either be repaired/refinished to a reasonable state of repair or
removed at the owner's expense.
(3) Historic/Architectural Significance: Any sign designated by official action of the City as having special historic or
architectural significance is exempt from the provisions of this Division regarding elimination of nonconforming signs.
However, this in no way should be interpreted to supersede any safety or maintenance requirements.
(c) Abandoned Sign:
(1) Any on-premises sign that no longer advertises or identifies a use/business conducted on the property on which the sign
is erected must have the sign copy covered or removed within 1 year after the business or uses advertised on the sign have
been discontinued, except in the case of a leased property, in which case such a sign shall not be allowed to remain on a
property more than 2 years after the date the most recent tenant ceased to operate on the premises;
(2) Upon failure to comply with these provisions and after 45 days notice by the City, the City is hereby authorized to cause
removal of such sign and/or sign copy, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure,
or property on which the sign is located.
(Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.17 Appeals, Interpretations, Variances
(a) Except as provided in this section, the zoning board of adjustment is authorized to hear and decide appeals related to permit
applications, provide interpretation, and grant variances subject to the rules and procedures for the zoning board of adjustment as set forth
in section Chapter 1, [Article 1,] Division 5, of the City of Abilene, Land Development Code provided however:
(1) The board of adjustment may not grant a variance to the terms of this subpart the effect of which would allow erection or
placement of any sign prohibited by section 4.2.8.7, prohibited signs.
(2) The board of adjustment may not grant a variance to the terms of this subpart the effect of which would allow placement
of any sign in any district where such sign is prohibited in that district.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 608/648
(3) The board of adjustment may not grant a variance which will allow any sign erected in violation of any previous
ordinance in effect at the time of the sign's erection to violate the terms of this subpart.
(4) The board of adjustment may not waive any requirement for any permit, bond, or inspection required under the terms of
this subpart.
(5) The board of adjustment shall not hear any appeal, interpretation, or variance from the provisions of the building code of
the city as they apply to the construction of any sign. In instances where such questions arise, it shall be the responsibility of
the board of building standards of the city to hear and decide those questions in accordance with its rules and procedures.
(6) The board of adjustment shall not hear any appeal, interpretation, or variance from the provisions of the electrical code
of the city as they apply to any electrical aspects of any sign. In instances where such questions arise, it shall be the
responsibility of the board of electrical examiners of the city to hear and decide those questions in accordance with its rules
and procedures.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Section 4.2.8.18 Penalties and Violations
Violations of provisions of this subpart or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with approval of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this subpart or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance with section 1-9, general penalties, of
this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
The owner or occupant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person
who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil
or criminal, incurred prior to the time that the existing ordinance was repealed and such ordinance adopted shall be discharged or affected
by such repeal, but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes presently in
process may be prosecuted in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed.
(Ord. No. 11-1988, pt. 1, 3-10-88; Ordinance 65-2018, pt 2(Exh. B), 11-15-18)
Division 9 - Performance Standards
Section 4.2.9.1 Purpose, Compliance, Violations
(a) Purpose. The purpose of performance standards in the control of land uses in Abilene is:
(1) To permit potential hazards and nuisances to be measured factually and objectively;
(2) To ensure that the community will be protected from hazards and nuisances which can be prevented by processes of
control and nuisance elimination;
(3) To avoid arbitrary exclusion or prosecution based solely on hazards or nuisance produced by any similar type of use in
the past.
(b) Compliance and Enforcement.
(1) After the effective date of this Ordinance, any use established or permitted, even as a special exception, shall comply
with all performance standards herein set forth.
(2) The City's Environmental Health Section, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of all performance
standards specified herein.
(c) Determination of Violation. If the responsible official finds, after making determinations in the manner set forth in this Division 9
of Chapter 4 of this LDC, that a violation exists, he shall act to abate the same.
(1) The responsible official shall give written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person or persons
responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and shall require
abatement of such violation within a prescribed time limit.
(2) Technical determinations, as described in this division, will be made as hereinafter provided. If violations are found, the
costs of such determination shall be charged against those responsible for the violation. If it is determined that no violation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 609/648
exists, such costs will be paid by the City without assessment against the persons or properties involved. The responsible
official may grant an extension if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.9.2 Performance Standards Regulating Noise
(a) Permissible Noise Levels. At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure level exceed the decibel
limits specified in the Octave Band groups designated in the following table:
TABLE 4-3: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE DAYTIME* OCTAVE BAND:
DECIBEL LIMITS AT THE BOUNDING PROPERTY LINE**
Octave Band (cps)
37 75 150 300 600 1200 2400 4800 A
Scale
75 150 300 600 1200 2400 4800 9600
Decibel Band
Limit (db re
0.0002 Microbar)
86 76 70 65 63 58 55 53 65
Note - “A scale” levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and are not applicable to detailed sound analysis.
* “Daytime” shall refer to the hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day.
** “Bounding Property Line” shall be interpreted as being at the near side of any street, alley, stream, or other permanently dedicated
open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When
no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels of property shall be interpreted as the bounding property line.
(b) Adjustments to Table 4-3. The following adjustments shall be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in determining
compliance with the noise level standards.
(1) When noise is present at nighttime, subtract 7db.
(2) When noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive, that is when meter changes at 10 decibels or more
per second, subtract 7db.
(3) When noise is present for not more than the following, add 10db:
a. 1/2 minute in any 30-minute period
b. 5 minutes in any 1-hour period
c. 10 minutes in any 2-hour period
d. 20 minutes in any 4-hour period
(c) Noise Measurements. Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter on [and] octave band analyzer meeting the
standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.
(d) Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations herein specified.
(1) Noises not directly under control of the property user.
(2) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (daytime
hours).
(3) Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves.
(4) Transient noise of moving sources, such as automobiles, trucks, and airplanes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 610/648
(5) Nuisance noises that are not directly related to or inherent to the land use or development, such as people assembling,
music playing, or domestic animal noises (see other City of Abilene ordinances for regulation of nuisance noise).
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.9.3 Smoke and Particulate Matter
(a) Standards. No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three (3) minutes in any one hour of air
contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property:
(1) Are of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in
the standard prescribed by the ASTM, except when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply,
or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the atmosphere;
(2) Exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the plant site;
(3) Exceed four grains of dust or particulate matter per 1,000 cubic feet of air at any boundary line of the tract on which the
use is located, as a result of open storage or open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are
the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter, or operations such as paint spraying, grain handling, sand or
gravel processing or storage or sand blasting.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.9.4 Odorous Matter
(a) Odorous Matter Limited. No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of
operation where the odorous matter is clearly detectable at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or
operation is located.
(b) General Method and Procedures. The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by the responsible
official. In any case where uncertainty may arise, or where the operator or owner of an odor-emitting use disagrees with the responsible
official, or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by the ASTM shall be
utilized.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.9.5 Fire or Explosive Hazard Material
(a) Limits on Manufacture and Storage. No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by
detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small
quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the City Fire Chief.
(b) Storage of Flammable Liquids and Materials. The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics,
nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when the storage or use conforms to the standards and
regulations of the City Fire Prevention Code or are approved by the Fire Marshal.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.9.6 Toxic and Noxious Matter
No operation or use shall emit a concentration of toxic or noxious matter across the bounding property line of the tract on which the
operation or use is located which will exceed ten percent (10%) of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an
industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health Services. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-
22-10)
Section 4.2.9.7 Vibration
No operation or use shall at any time create earthborne vibrations which when measured at the bounding property line of the source
operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified:
TABLE 4-4: VIBRATION LIMITS
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second) Displacement (Inches)
0 to 10 0.001
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 611/648
10 to 20 0.0008
20 to 30 0.0005
30 to 40 0.0004
40 and over 0.0003
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 10 - Manufactured/Mobile Home Park Site Design Standards
Section 4.2.10.1 Applicability
(a) This division is applicable in the City limits. (Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.2 Subdivision Requirements
(a) General. Mobile/manufactured home parks shall be located on land formally subdivided according to the regulations within this
LDC.
(b) Utilities.
(1) Accompanying all applications for subdivision of land to be used for mobile/manufactured home park purposes shall be
two (2) copies of a schematic drawing indicating the placement of all public or private utility lines and other such facilities.
Such schematic must also indicate those utilities adjacent to the park to which hookup and/or extension is proposed.
(2) All water and sewer utilities within mobile/manufactured home parks shall be considered private, unless such utilities
continue through the park to serve, or intended to serve, development beyond it, or if such water lines lie within the park for
the purpose of providing fire protection and suppression, in which case the utilities shall be considered public.
(3) Private water and sewer lines shall be maintained and protected by the park owner/operator.
(4) Public water and sewer lines, and all appurtenances thereto, shall be located in easements of sufficient width and
character as necessary to allow access and inhibit encroachment. Said easements shall be depicted on the Preliminary and/or
Final Plat at the time of plat approval.
(5) All private utilities constructed in mobile/manufactured home parks shall comply with the policies for installation of the
utility provider.
(6) Individual utility connections to mobile/manufactured home units shall be in accordance with requirements of the City
plumbing code, as applicable.
(7) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser when no mobile/manufactured home occupies the space. Surface
drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.
(c) Streets. As described in Section 4.2.9.6 [4.2.10.6] of this division of the LDC, all interior park streets shall be private.
(1) All easements shall be listed on all plats. These may be refuse collection, public access, emergency vehicle access,
utility (public) or drainage easements, and so labeled on the Preliminary and/or Final Plat.
(2) If private streets are to be used as municipal vehicle access easements, a private property refuse collection agreement,
and any other similar agreements formulated after the effective date of this ordinance, must be executed between the
subdivider and the City prior to subdivision approval.
(3) Names for all interior streets shall be depicted on the Preliminary and/or Final Plat.
(4) Such names shall be subject to the same requirements as names of public streets.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 612/648
(d) Lots Created. All mobile/manufactured home spaces must front onto an interior street. Any property intended to allow direct access
from a mobile/manufactured home onto a public street shall be formally subdivided, according to the subdivision regulations of this LDC,
so as to create subdivided lots that have frontage on the public street. Such lots shall conform to the design standards contained within the
subdivision and zoning regulations of this LDC, as applicable, and shall be considered subdivision lots rather than mobile/manufactured
home spaces.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.3 Site Plan Requirements
(a) Site Plan Required. A Site Plan in accordance with Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] of this Chapter shall be required for all
mobile/manufactured home parks.
(b) Site Plan Processing and Approval. A Site Plan for a mobile/manufactured home park shall be processed and approved in
accordance with Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.4 Mobile/Manufactured Home Installation Permit
(a) Site Requirements. Installation of mobile/manufactured homes on individual park spaces shall comply with all applicable state
laws.
(b) Effect of Permit Approval. The placement of individual mobile/manufactured homes on park spaces requires the issuance of a
Mobile/Manufactured Home Installation Permit by the City of Abilene. The permit shall authorize:
(1) Water and sewer connection
(2) Gas utility connection to existing opening
(3) Electrical utility connection to existing meter base with lifeline
(4) Air-conditioning
In addition, permit issuance is dependent on conformance with appropriate building setbacks and addressing of the mobile home.
(c) All new construction of mobile/manufactured home parks, or extensions to them and the placement of mobile/manufactured homes,
accessory structures, sanitary facilities, recreation facilities, and permanent buildings shall comply with all applicable developmentrelated
regulations of the City of Abilene.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.5 Site Design Requirements
(a) Site Requirements. Any mobile/manufactured housing park constructed after the effective date of the LDC from which this section
derives and for any extension or addition to any existing mobile/manufactured housing park shall be done in compliance with the
following site requirements:
(1) Location: A mobile/manufactured housing park within the City limits shall be located only on sites having the
applicable zoning classification as defined in Chapter 2 pertaining to zoning.
(2) Minimum Requirements:
a. Site Size Requirements - The initial development of any mobile/manufactured home park shall not be less than four
(4) acres fully improved, with serviced mobile/manufactured home spaces.
b. Density. The maximum site density shall be eight (8) mobile/manufactured home units per acre for all
mobile/manufactured home parks.
c. Space Requirements - Each mobile home or manufactured home space shall adhere to the following minimum size
standards.
1. Minimum Space Width: Forty-five feet (45')
2. Minimum Space Depth: One hundred feet (100'). Space depth shall be measured from the edge of curb or
easement boundary line, whichever is more restrictive.
d. Space Delineation - Space boundary lines shall be permanently delineated by placement of corner pins or
monuments, or permanent curb designation.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 613/648
e. Yard & Distance Requirements - Mobile/manufactured home minimum setback and spacing requirements shall be
as follows in Table 4-3. In no case shall a variance or other regulatory mechanism permit a mobile/manufactured home
to be less than three feet (3') from any mobile/manufactured home park property line.
TABLE 4-3: YARD AND DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS
Type of Setback or Distances Minimum Setback or
Distances
Minimum distance between mobile/manufactured home units 15'
Minimum distance between mobile/manufactured home units and
permanent structures (excluding individual storage structures, patio
roofs, carports)
15'
Minimum distance between a patio roof or carport of one
mobile/manufactured home unit and another mobile/manufactured
home unit
3'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and
the curb or edge of pavement of interior streets 15'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and
the curb or edge of pavement of cul-de-sac turnarounds 25'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and
the front space line 10'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and
the rear space line 5'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and
interior space lines
3', with a total of 15' for
both sides
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and a
rear property line of the mobile/manufactured home park 15'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and a
side property line of the mobile/manufactured home park 15'
Minimum distance between a mobile/manufactured home unit and a
front property line of the mobile/manufactured home park 15'
f. Height Regulations - The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile/manufactured housing
park shall be 25 feet.
g. Soil and Ground Cover - Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile/manufactured housing park shall be
paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 614/648
h. Drainage - The ground surface in all parts of a mobile/manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to
drain all surface water away from pad sites.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.6 Access, Traffic Circulation, and Parking
(a) General. All mobile/manufactured home spaces shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting streets.
Access to mobile/manufactured home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at park entrances and exits to allow
free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
(b) Internal Streets. Interior streets shall be provided in mobile home parks, be private streets, and shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic and shall meet the following minimum standards:
(1) All interior mobile/manufactured home spaces shall abut a paved interior private street, which ultimately shall connect
with a public street.
(2) All interior private streets shall have a pavement width of not less than thirty-six feet (36'), measured from face-to-face
of curbs.
(3) All interior private streets shall have concrete curbs and gutters. Curbs may be lay-down or stand-up, and shall be
installed according to City of Abilene specifications.
(4) All interior private streets shall be named. Street names shall be posted at all intersections.
(5) Any cul-de-sac street shall be limited to five hundred feet (500') in length, measured from the center of the intersecting
street to the center of the turnaround. A paved cul-de-sac turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty feet
(80') shall be provided. The maximum number of mobile/manufactured home spaces along a cul-de-sac street shall be twentyfive
(25).
(c) Internal Street Construction and Maintenance. All internal streets shall be constructed and maintained by the owner or agent. All
internal streets shall be free of cracks, holes and other hazards. Internal streets shall be constructed on hard-surfaced, all-weather material
and shall be constructed to City of Abilene specifications.
(d) Internal Streets - Unobstructed Access. Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least two hundred feet (200') of
any portion of each mobile/manufactured home, in order to ensure that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the
mobile/manufactured home park. Speed bumps constructed to maintain safe speed of vehicles moving within the mobile/manufactured
housing park shall not be considered as obstructions. Speed bumps shall be constructed to City of Abilene specifications.
(e) Parking Requirements. Two off-street spaces per mobile/manufactured home space shall be provided for parking, and each parking
space shall be paved with all-weather material. Each space shall be located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided
for other mobile/manufactured homes and for public parking in the park. The maneuvering area for and the driveway connection from the
parking space to the street shall also be paved.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.7 Connections to the Public Street System
(a) General. The private interior street system of the mobile home park shall connect with the public street system via one or more
mobile/manufactured home park entrance streets. The number of entrance streets and their relationship to the private street system shall
be such that a single blockage on the private street system shall not eliminate access to/from the public street system for more than
twenty-five (25) mobile/manufactured home spaces.
(b) Private Entrance Street Connections to Public System. Private entrance street connections to the public street system shall conform
to the following standards:
(1) Entrance street connections shall be at ninety (90) degrees, plus or minus fifteen (15) degrees.
(2) Entrance streets shall have a pavement width measured face-to-face of curbs at least forty feet (40') and no more than
sixty feet (60').
(3) The intersection return radius to a public street shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') except for connections to
arterial streets, which shall be a minimum of thirty-five feet (35').
(4) All mobile/manufactured home park entrance streets shall employ, on each side of the entrance street, a minimum
fifteen-foot (15') parkway or permanent open area not part of any mobile/manufactured home space. This parkway area shall
be located between the curb and any mobile/manufactured home space boundary line. This parkway shall extend for the first
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 615/648
one hundred feet (100') of the street, from the public street, whichever is greater. Placement of structures within this parkway
is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.8 Street Lighting
(a) Lighting Within the Park. Street lighting within the mobile home or manufactured housing park shall be provided by the developer
along internal streets. Street lighting shall meet the following design criteria:
(1) Average pole spacing depending on wattage:
a. Two hundred and fifty feet (250') or less with three hundred feet (300') maximum spacing between poles for seventy
(70) watt high pressure sodium or one hundred seventy-five (175) watt mercury vapor streetlight luminaries;
b. Two hundred and fifty feet (250') or less with two hundred and fifty feet (250') maximum spacing between poles for
one hundred seventy-five (175) watt mercury vapor guard lights (measurements are straight line within the streets); or
c. Any lighting configuration that produces on the street an average lighting intensity of at least 0.22 footcandles and a
minimum lighting intensity of 0.01 footcandles.
(2) Lights shall be located at as many intersections (including “L” intersections) as possible within the constraints of the
overall layout.
(3) There shall be a balanced lighting layout for the overall development. In making adjustments, preference (in terms of
uniformity and intensity) is to be given to streets in order of their importance from a traffic function.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.9 Recreational Area
(a) All mobile home or manufactured housing parks shall have a recreational area amounting to five percent (5%) total area of the park.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.10 Accessory Buildings
(a) Compliance with All City Regulations. The following accessory buildings shall be permitted in mobile/manufactured home parks,
provided that they comply with all regulations of the City of Abilene, including building codes, this LDC, and any other applicable code
or ordinance. Permitted accessory buildings are the following:
(1) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
(2) Sanitary facilities;
(3) Laundry facilities; and
(4) Indoor recreation areas.
(b) Individual Accessory Buildings. Buildings accessory to individual mobile/manufactured homes, such as individual storage
buildings, shall be located in a mobile/manufactured home space in accordance with Chapter 2 of this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.11 Register of Occupancy
(a) Maintenance of a Register. The owner or agent of a mobile/manufactured housing park shall maintain a register of park occupancy
which shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and park address of mobile/manufactured housing park residents.
(2) Dates of arrival and departure.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 4.2.10.12 Miscellaneous
(a) Skirting. Skirting shall be required for each mobile/manufactured home in a mobile/manufactured housing park. Skirting and other
additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 616/648
(b) Fencing. Where off-street parking areas, not located on individual, occupied mobile/manufactured home spaces, for more than five
(5) vehicles are located closer than fifty feet (50') from a residential zoning district, said parking area shall be visually screened by an
opaque fence or wall at least six feet (6') in height.
(c) Patio Roofs and Carports. Mobile/manufactured home park spaces may have patio roofs and carports constructed of materials
consistent with applicable Building Codes. Also see Division 4 [of Article 4] of Chapter 2 for other accessory use standards.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Division 11 - Vacation Travel Trailer/Recreational Vehicle Parks
Section 4.2.11.1 Applicability and Approvals Required
(a) Applicability. This division is applicable in the City limits.
(b) Land Use Matrix. For locations within the City limits, vacation travel trailer parks shall be permitted as outlined in the Land Use
Matrix, Chapter 2, Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2.
(c) Site Plan Required. For locations within the City limits, development of a vacation travel trailer park shall require submittal and
approval of a Site Plan depicting the information described in Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2] of this chapter.
(d) Subdivision Required. Vacation travel trailer parks shall be located on land formally subdivided according to the subdivision
regulations within this LDC, specifically within Chapter 3.
(e) Annual Licensing Required. Vacation travel trailer parks shall be required to meet annual licensing requirements with the Building
Inspection Department. Issuance of the required license shall be dependent upon compliance with all applicable health, fire, building, and
other City of Abilene Codes and Ordinances to ensure the safe operation of the park. The license shall be conspicuously posted in the
park office.
(f) Conformance to Other Codes. All facilities at vacation travel trailer parks shall conform and comply with City of Abilene health,
fire, building and other such codes.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 58-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Section 4.2.11.2 Size, Density, Location, Setbacks
(a) Maximum Site Density. The maximum site density for vacation travel trailer parks shall be twelve (12) units per acre.
(b) Minimum Site Size. The initial development of any vacation travel trailer park shall not be less than two (2) acres fully developed.
(c) Site Location. Vacation travel trailer parks shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residential zoning district.
(1) No vacation travel trailer shall be placed or erected closer than five feet (5') from the property line separating the
recreational vehicle park from adjoining property, measuring from the nearest point of the vacation travel trailer.
(d) Size, Marking and Separation of Individual Sites. Each individual site within the vacation travel trailer park that is reserved for the
accommodation of any vacation travel trailer shall have an area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, or forty feet (40') by
twenty-five feet (25'), to provide adequate space for a recreational vehicle, a car, and a picnic table/grill. Each individual site shall be
defined clearly by proper markers at each corner, shall be level, paved, and well drained.
(1) Trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and permanent structures by ten feet (10').
(e) Setback Requirements for Vacation Travel Trailers. Setback requirements for vacation travel trailers shall be as outlined in Table 4-
4.
TABLE 4-4: REQUIRED SETBACKS FOR TRAVEL TRAILERS
Element From Which Setback Is Measured Required Setback
The edge of cul-de-sac streets 20 feet
The edge of other interior streets 10 feet
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 617/648
The front property line of the vacation travel trailer park 25 feet
The rear and side (exterior and interior) property lines of the
vacation travel trailer park
15 feet
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 58-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Section 4.2.11.3 Ingress and Egress
(a) Public Street. All vacation travel trailer parks shall be directly linked by an entranceway with a public street.
(b) Width and Radius. The entranceway shall be at least forty feet (40') in pavement width with a twenty-foot (20') curb radius on
collector and arterial streets and fifteen feet (15') on local streets.
(c) Connection to Construction Standards. The connection of the entranceway with the public street shall be constructed according to
municipal construction standards.
(d) Paving. The entrance roadway from the public street to the main office plus the parking for the office and all uses accessible by the
general public shall be paved. All other surfaces intended for regular vehicular use shall have a durable surface, such as compacted base
material.
(e) Private Streets. Entranceways and interior streets shall be considered private streets.
(f) No Access Through Residential Zoning Districts. There shall be no entrance or exit from the vacation travel trailer park through a
residential zoning district.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 58-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Section 4.2.11.4 Miscellaneous Requirements
(a) Infrastructure Systems. Vacation travel trailer parks shall have the option of connecting to municipal water and sewage systems or
of seeking appropriate waivers and installing private systems. Private sanitation facilities shall meet all State and City of Abilene health
standards and regulations.
(b) Refuse Containers or Areas. Refuse containers or collection sites shall be conveniently located for park residents. A central refuse
collection site for the park as a whole shall be provided. Such a container shall be water tight and rodent proof. If refuse is to be collected
by the City of Abilene, central refuse collection areas shall be located in conformance with City standards.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses such as an office, recreation facilities, toilets, dumping stations, laundries, etc., shall be permitted,
subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent
(10%) of the gross area of the park.
(2) The structures housing such facilities shall not be located closer than fifty feet (50') to any public street.
(d) Duration of Stay.
[(1)] Up to seventy-five percent (75%) of trailer sites may be allowed as long-term stay. Long-term stay trailers may be
allowed for up to 12 months and must leave for a minimum of 60 days prior to returning.
[(2)] Twenty-five percent (25%) of trailer sites must be designated as short-term stay. Short-term stay trailers may be
allowed for up to 3 months and must leave for a minimum of 60 days prior to returning.
(e) Sanitary Facilities.
(1) Requirements: Each recreational vehicle park upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicles are erected or placed
and where private conveniences for each site are not provided shall provide, at locations described in this section, toilets,
urinals, washbasins, slop basins, showers or baths, water faucets or spigots in accordance with the following:
a. One (1) toilet, sink, and shower for each sex per twenty (20) travel trailer sites or fraction thereof.
b. All toilets, basins and showers shall be placed in properly constructed buildings located not more than three hundred
feet (300') from any recreational vehicle unit served.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 618/648
c. Buildings shall be well lighted at all times, day or night, well ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of
moisture-proof material to permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing.
d. The floors shall be of concrete or other impervious material, elevated not less than four inches above grade, and
each room shall be provided with floor drains.
e. Slop sinks or basins with water supply shall be provided to serve each four units and shall be constructed in
accordance with design, size and material approved by the health officer.
(2) Toilet and Bathing Facilities: Toilet and bathing facilities shall be in separate rooms or partitioned apart in any manner
as to provide privacy and promote cleanliness. Each toilet provided in a community toilet house shall be partitioned apart from
any other toilet in the same room. The floor surface around the commode shall not drain onto the shower floor.
(f) Register of Guests. A register containing the name and address of each occupant of all the park, as well as the date of
arrival and departure, the make, model, year, and the license number and state, of vehicles shall be kept and available for
periodic inspection.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 58-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 10-24-13)
Chapter 5: Definitions
Article 1 - Definitions
Division 1 - Definitions
Section 5.1.1.1 Usage and Interpretation
(a) Usage. The following definitions are intended to provide descriptions for words and terms used within this LDC. Absent any
conflict, words and terms used in this LDC shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in this Chapter 5.
(b) Conflicts. When words and terms are defined herein, and are also defined in other ordinance(s) of the City, shall be read in harmony
unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in which case the definition contained in this Chapter 5 shall control.
(c) Present and Past Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number,
and words used in the plural number include the singular number.
(d) Specific Word Usage. The word shall is mandatory and not directory. The word building includes the word structure[.]
(e) Words Not Defined. For any definition not listed in this Chapter 5 of this LDC, the definition found within the latest edition of
Webster's Dictionary shall be used.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 5.1.1.2 Definitions in Other Locations Within the LDC
(a) For the purpose of this LDC, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined within the articles, divisions, or
sections of this LDC wherein they apply to certain regulations. These sections include:
(1) Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 3, Dormant Projects, specifically within Section 1.3.3.8.
(2) Chapter 3, Article 1 [2], Division 11, Stormwater Management Requirements, specifically within Section 3.2.11.1.
(3) Chapter 2, Airport Zoning
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)
Section 5.1.1.3 Land Use Definitions
(a) Land Use Definitions & Matrix Correlation. The symbol “{x}” denotes that the definition is reflected as a use in the Land Use
Matrix in Chapter 2, Article 4, Division 2.
Land Use Definitions - A
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 619/648
(1) ACCESSORY DWELLING: {x} A subordinate building that is detached from the primary on-site structure, is used as a
residence, is incidental to the main structure (i.e., the building area must be significantly less than that of the main structure),
and is not involved in the conduct of a business.
(2) ACCESSORY SHELTER: A housing shelter in an accessory building 1) located on the same site as a principal building,
or 2) located on a site owned and operated by religious, civic, fraternal, social, institutional or governmental agency providing
free accessory lodging for indigent individuals and/or families with no regular home or residential address. An accessory
shelter may house no more than 15 individuals at any one time and operates up to a maximum of two (2) days/nights per
week.
(3) ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A subordinate building that is detached from the primary on-site building and is clearly
secondary and incidental to the main use.
(4) ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISE: Any business activity whether in public, semi-public or private premises,
which offers the opportunity to feel, handle, touch, paint, be in the presence of, or be entertained by the unclothed body or the
unclothed portion of the body of another person, or to observe, view, or photograph any such activity. Except as specifically
provided otherwise herein, nothing in this section is intended to regulate:
a. Any business operated by or employing psychologists, physical therapists, athletic trainers, licensed masseuse,
cosmetologists, or barbers, licensed by the State of Texas, performing functions authorized under the licenses held.
b. Any business operated by or employing physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors or nurses, licensed by the State of
Texas, engaged in practicing the healing arts.
c. Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customer.
Adult Entertainment Enterprises furthermore include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Adult Bookstore/Film Store. An establishment or commercial enterprise having 10% or more of its stock in trade;
videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished by a predominant
emphasis on matter(s) depicting, describing, or relating to “specific sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as
defined below.
b. Movie Arcade. Any business wherein is operated a film or videotape viewing device. A film or videotape viewing
device or booth subject to these provisions is defined as:
1. Viewing Booths/Arcades - An establishment or commercial enterprise which has within its structure any
electrical or mechanical device, which projects or displays any film, videotape or reproduction into a viewing area
obscured by a curtain, door, or wall, or other enclosure which is designed for occupancy by no more than five
persons, and is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by
five (5) or fewer persons.
2. Adult Motion Picture Theater - An establishment or commercial enterprise which has an enclosed building
with a capacity of more than five (5) persons and is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by a
predominant emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” for observation by patrons.
c. Adult Cabaret. An establishment whose portion of business is the offering to customers of live entertainment which
is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, including but not limited to dancing,
posing, modeling, acting, and which is distinguished by or characterized by a predominant emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities,” or “specified anatomical areas.”
d. Adult Encounter Parlor. An establishment whose business consists of premises where customers either congregate,
associate, or consort with employees who engage in “specified sexual activities” with or in the presence of such
customers, or who display “specified anatomical areas” in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers.
e. Adult Lounge. An “adult cabaret” as defined above which is permitted or licensed pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Code where alcoholic beverages may be served or sold.
f. Adult Drive-In Theater. A drive-in theater used for presenting motion picture films, videocassettes, cable television,
or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
g. Adult Retail Store. This is a retail establishment in which:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 620/648
1. Ten percent or more of the “stock in trade” consists of items, products or equipment distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
2. Any person is excluded by virtue of age from all or part of the premises generally held open to the public
where products or equipment [is displayed] distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
h. Specified Sexual Activities. For the purpose of defining Adult Entertainment Enterprise, the following shall be
considered specified sexual activities:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, acts of bestiality;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
i. Specified Anatomical Areas. For the purpose of defining Adult Entertainment Enterprise, the following shall be
considered specified anatomical areas:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals, pubic region
(b) Buttock
(c) Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(d) Human genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
j. Stock in Trade. For the purpose of defining Adult Entertainment Enterprise, Stock in Trade shall be defined as
the total volume or number of items, products or equipment available for purchase, rental, viewing or use by
patrons of the establishment, excluding material located in any storeroom or other portion of the premises not
regularly open to patrons.
(5) AIRCRAFT AND ACCESSORIES: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or designed for
navigation or flight in the air and accessories with such aircraft.
(6) AIRPORT, HELIPORT: {x} An area reserved or improved for the landing or take-off of aircraft, including rotary wing
aircraft, which may include fueling or servicing facilities for such craft.
(7) AMBULANCE SERVICE: {x} Provision of private (not operated by the City of Abilene) emergency transportation
which may include mobile medical care, and the storage and maintenance of vehicles.
(8) AMENITIZED DETENTION/RETENTION POND: An area that is designed to capture, store and release stormwater
and that is designed as a site amenity by being aesthetically pleasing, by providing recreational or aesthetic value, and by
being constructed to seem natural (i.e., without visible concrete). Such areas have a natural edge and are designed to resemble
a naturally created lake or pond. Also refer to the definition of Amenity below.
(9) AMUSEMENT FACILITY, PERMANENT: {x} An amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to
the general public for a fee or charge, wherein portions of the activity may take place in or out of doors, including a bowling
alley, ice skating rink, racquetball/handball club, indoor tennis courts/club, indoor swimming pool or scuba diving facility, and
billiard parlor, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, batting cages, go-cart tracks, and amusement park.
(10) AMUSEMENT FACILITY, TEMPORARY: {x} An amusement enterprise that is in operation on a temporary basis
(i.e., one (1) month or less) offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge. Activity may take
place in or out of doors. Examples include a carnival, circus, or haunted house.
(11) ANIMAL LOT: {x} Any area for quartering any ungulated or hoofed (even-toed and odd-toed) animals including
horses, cows, sheep, goats, etc. This may also include a facility for the keeping of such animals, such as a stable.
(12) ANTIQUE SHOP: {x} A business which sells items whose value is greater than original purchase price because of age
or extrinsic value.
(13) APARTMENT: See Dwelling - Multifamily.
(14) ART GALLERY: {x} Where objects of art are created or displayed for the public enrichment or where said objects of
art are displayed for sale (including the teaching of both painting and sculpting).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 621/648
(15) ARTS SCHOOL: Schools providing teaching and training in the performing arts, fine arts, and martial arts.
(16) ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: {x} A type of Personal Care Facility (see definition) in which four (4) or more
elderly (over 55 years of age) persons, regardless of legal relationship, live and who need limited assistance with daily living
activities. A limited number of support services such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, social/recreational
activities, hairdressing, etc. may be provided or associated with the assisted living facility. Units may be attached or detached,
single- or double-occupancy, and may include limited or full kitchen facilities. Full-time medical or nursing care is not
provided by the facility, but may be privately arranged for by individual residents on a part-time or temporary basis (e.g.,
visiting nurses, etc.).
(17) ATM, SELF-SERVICE KIOSK AND SIMILAR FACILITIES: Various self-service facilities where a product or
service is dispensed through a machine. Such uses have no employees on the site except to periodically maintain and restock
the machines. These facilities may be walk-up or drive-up in nature. Examples include fuel stations and ATMs.
(18) AUTOMOBILE PARTS AND SUPPLIES (RETAIL SALES ONLY): {x} The use of any building or other premises
for the primary inside display and sale of new or used accessories and/or parts, including tires, for automobiles, panel trucks or
vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. This definition expressly does not include a “Wrecking or Salvage Yard”; this is
separately defined herein.
(19) AUTOMOBILE AND SMALL TRUCK RENTAL AND LEASING: {x} A business establishment that provides for
the renting of automobiles and light trucks on a short-term basis (differentiated from leasing, which is on a long-term basis).
This may also involve the incidental storage of the automobiles and light trucks being rented.
(20) AUTOMOBILE AND SMALL TRUCK REPAIR (MAJOR): {x} General repair or reconditioning of engines, airconditioning
systems and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision repair services including body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rustproofing; those uses listed
under Automobile Repair (Minor); and other similar uses.
(21) AUTOMOBILE AND SMALL TRUCK REPAIR (MINOR): {x} Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes and
batteries; diagnostic services; minor maintenance services such as grease, oil, spark plug and filter changing; tune-ups;
emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses and brake parts; automobile washing and polishing;
performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air-conditioning
systems; and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not including any operation
named under Automobile Repair (Major) or any other similar use.
(22) AUTOMOBILE AND SMALL TRUCK SALES AND/OR SERVICE: {x} A paved area for the display for sale of
motorized and non-motorized vehicles accompanied by an on-site office with staffing during normal business hours, which
may include the service of vehicles on-site.
(23) AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOT OR STRUCTURE (Commercial): {x} An area, enclosed or unenclosed, used for the
parking or storage of motor vehicles as a business enterprise. A fee may be charged to users of the parking area.
(24) AUTOMOBILE WASH, FULL-SERVICE: {x} Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks where
the employees of the establishment wash, dry, wax and/or detail vehicles for a fee.
(25) AUTOMOBILE WASH, SELF-SERVICE: {x} Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks where
the owner of the vehicle causes the vehicle to become washed. One type of unattended car wash facility utilizes automated
self-service (drive-through/rollover) wash bays and apparatus in which the vehicle owner inserts money or tokens into a
machine, drives the vehicle into the wash bay, and waits in the vehicle while it is being washed. The other type of unattended
facility is comprised of wand-type self-service (open) wash bays in which the vehicle owner drives the vehicle into the wash
bay, gets out of the vehicle, and hand washes the vehicle with a wand-type apparatus by depositing coins or tokens into a
machine.
Land Use Definitions - B
(26) BAKERY, RETAIL TRADE: {x} Includes only those bakeries that produce on the premises some or all of the products
sold on premises, primarily for retail distribution, or those which do not produce on the premises the bakery goods which are
sold.
(27) BAKERY, WHOLESALE TRADE: {x} Include only those bakeries that manufacture bakery goods primarily for
wholesale distribution.
(28) BANKING SERVICES: {x} An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange and/or issue of money, the extension of
credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, examples of which include banks, saving and loans, and credit unions. The
establishment may or may not have the ability to provide services via a drive-up window, also known as motor bank services.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 622/648
(29) BANKING SERVICES, REMOTE AUTOMATIC: {x} An automated device that performs banking or financial
functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution.
(30) BED AND BREAKFAST: {x} A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided in not more than five (5)
rooms for transient guests and one (1) or more meals are provided (for guests only), both for compensation. Guest rooms do
not have kitchen facilities. The period during which accommodations and breakfast are provided generally does not exceed
seven (7) days.
(31) BLUEPRINTING AND/OR PHOTOCOPYING SERVICE: {x} An establishment which primarily reproduces, in
printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization. Offset, letterpress,
and duplicating equipment are used, but no rotary presses or linotype equipment are used. Related services might include
faxing, digitizing, graphic reproducing, and report assembling.
(32) BOARDING AND/OR ROOMING HOUSE: {x} An establishment where lodging is provided for compensation: a) by
prearrangement, b) in rooms without kitchen facilities, c) for four (4) to nineteen (19) roomers or boarders, d) for periods of
one week or longer and e) with or without meals, available for guests only.
(33) BROADCAST STUDIO: An establishment containing one or more broadcasting studios for over-the-air, cable, or
satellite delivery of radio or television programs or studios for the audio or video recording of musical performances, radio or
television programs or motion pictures. This term does not include an antenna tower.
Land Use Definitions - C
(34) CAMPGROUND: Any area of land on which is located a cabin, tent or other type of shelter suitable and intended for
use in a temporary, seasonal manner. Also see Vacation Travel Trailer Park.
(35) CEMETERY[,] CREMATORIUM, AND MAUSOLEUM: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and funeral establishments, or any
combination thereof.
(36) CHILD DAY-CARE OPERATION: This is a general definition that means the care, supervision, training, or education
of an unrelated child or children under fourteen (14) years old for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day that occurs in a
place other than the child's own home. This definition includes child day-care provided to school-age children before and/or
after the customary school day. This definition also encompasses each of the following two separate categories of use, for the
purpose of Zoning Regulations:
a. Day-Care Operation - Center Based. An operation providing care for children under 14 years of age, for less than 24
hours per day, and at a location other than the caregivers' or permit holder's home.
b. Day-Care Operation - Home Based. An operation providing care for children under 14 years of age, for less than 24
hours per day, and at the caregiver's home.
For additional reference, see Texas State law, Chapter 745, Licensing, Subchapter B.
(37) CHURCH or PLACE OF WORSHIP: {x} A building for regular assembly for religious public worship which is used
primarily for and designed for such purpose, along with accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, such
as a place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises, and that is tax exempt as defined by State law. For
the purposes of this ordinance, Bible study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not
apply to this definition.
(38) CIVIC, SOCIAL & FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. {x} Any association, club, organization, unincorporated, not
required to be licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and organized for the purpose of social, civic, fraternal
or recreational purposes.
(39) CONTRACTOR SERVICES: Businesses that construct and repair buildings, roads and other pavement; install
landscaping, fences, swimming pools, and other structures; as well as what are often referred to as subcontractors that do
installation, service repair such as electrical, plumbing, and mechanical.
(40) COMMERCIAL STABLE: A structure and/or land use in or on which large animals are kept for one or more of the
following purposes: sale, hire, breeding, boarding, or training. Also see Stable.
(41) COMMERCIAL TRADE SCHOOL: {x} A for-profit business that offers vocational instruction and training in trades
such as the computer industry, welding, brick laying, machinery operation/repair, cosmetology, beauty/barber school and
similar trades.
(42) COMMERCIAL USE: A type of nonresidential land use that has one or more of the following characteristics: 1) the
use is service-oriented; 2) the use does not primarily sell retail items; 3) the use sells goods or products on a wholesale basis;
or 4) the use has or has the need for open storage areas or warehouses its products. Such uses include motels, auto dealerships,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 623/648
welding shops, manufactured home sales, self-storage units, funeral homes, automobile repair shops, and air-conditioning
and/or heating services.
(43) COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water in combination with land, within a site
designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents and owners belonging to an association as defined herein.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the
benefit and enjoyment of residents and owners belonging to an association. Also may be referred to as Common Area.
(44) COMMUNITY HOME: {x} A place where not more than six (6) physically or mentally impaired or handicapped
persons (regardless of legal relationship) are provided room and board, as well as supervised care and rehabilitation by not
more than two (2) persons. Such home and the persons that reside therein shall meet all the specifications and requirements of
the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Disabilities Act, Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code. Also may be
referred to as a Family Home (refer to Chapter 202 of the Texas Property Code).
(45) CORRECTION, DETENTION OR PENAL FACILITIES: A facility housing persons awaiting trial or persons serving
a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense.
(46) COURTYARD: An open space bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of a building.
(47) CULTURAL FACILITIES: Nonprofit, institutional, and governmental uses located within buildings that provide
educational, cultural fine arts and performing arts to patrons. Examples of such uses include galleries, live theaters for
performing arts, museums, studios for the arts, and libraries.
Land Use Definitions - D
(48) DEPARTMENT STORE: {x} A store selling a wide variety of goods, which are arranged into departments.
(49) DETENTION/RETENTION POND: As defined within the City of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction
(ASSC).
(50) DISASTER SHELTER: A shelter facility that provides temporary housing to people and/or families during times of
severe life-threatening weather conditions (including, but not limited to hurricanes, natural disasters, extreme temperatures) or
other emergency conditions.
(51) DORMITORY: {x} Any structure specifically designed to house student tenants associated with a university, college
or school, public or private. Rooming units do not have individual kitchen facilities. A dormitory may contain common food
preparation and eating facilities primarily for the use of the occupants of these buildings.
(52) DRAG STRIP or COMMERCIAL RACING: {x} An establishment where a pre-established race course, including
courses for mini-bikes and motorcycles, of at least 1/4 mile in length is located.
(53) DRIVE-IN THEATER: {x} An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion
pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles.
(54) DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: A building opening, including windows, doors, or mechanical devices attached to or
detached from the building, through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive or obtain a product or service.
(55) DWELLING/DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential
purposes by one family for living, sanitary, and sleeping purposes.
(56) DWELLING - DUPLEX: {x} A residential building on a single lot containing two attached dwelling units, each
designed to be occupied by one family (i.e., the building is occupied by not more than two families) and each having a
separate entrance.
(57) DWELLING - INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING UNIT: {x} (Also called Modular Prefabricated Structure or Modular
Home.) A structure that is manufactured at a location other than the homesite, utilizing assembly-line type production
techniques or other construction methods unique to the manufacturing process. The structure or modules are transported from
the manufacturing plant in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device and designed to be used as
a permanent dwelling when installed on a permanent foundation. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning,
and electrical systems contained in the structure. All modules shall bear a permanently affixed “decal” issued by the Texas
Department of Labor and Standards and indicating compliance with the standards, rules and regulations established by the
Department for modular homes. The term shall not include nor apply to the following:
a. “Sectional” or “panelized” housing where the basic components assembled at the homesite are not at least threesided
modules,
b. A home which is singly and separately constructed for relocation, and built to the city building code,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 624/648
c. Modules incorporating concrete or masonry as primary structural component,
d. A HUD-Code manufactured home as defined in this LDC.
e. A mobile home as defined herein this LDC.
(58) DWELLING - INSTITUTIONAL: Residential development designed to accommodate institutional residential uses
such as retirement homes, nursing homes, convents, dormitories, and sorority & fraternity houses.
(59) DWELLING - MANUFACTURED HOME (HUD-CODE): {x} A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976,
according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
when erected on-site, is three hundred and twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
(60) DWELLING - MOBILE HOME: {x} A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length,
or when erected on-site is three hundred and twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
(61) DWELLING - MULTIPLE-FAMILY: {x} A residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling units that are
designed for occupancy by three or more families, with the number of families not to exceed the number of dwelling units.
The residential building contains dwelling units that are designed to be occupied by families living independently of one
another. The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, and the like. For the purpose of these regulations,
regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental periods less than
one (1) week shall be considered a hotel or motel.
(62) DWELLING - PATIO HOME: {x} A type of detached, single-family dwelling on a separately platted lot which is
designed such that one side yard is reduced to zero feet, and which permits the construction of a detached single-family
dwelling with one side (i.e., wall) of such dwelling placed on the side property line.
(63) DWELLING - SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building, other than a mobile home, designed for occupancy by one
family or individual. The term is general and includes such specialized types such as single-family detached, single-family
attached (townhomes), and patio homes. For regulatory purposes, the term shall not be construed to mean manufactured
homes, mobile homes, industrialized homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents, or
other forms of portable or temporary housing.
(64) DWELLING - SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: {x} A single-family dwelling unit with no attached wall(s) or
dwelling unit(s) that is designed for occupancy by one family or individual and that is entirely separated from structures on
adjacent lots.
(65) DWELLING - TOWNHOME: {x} One of a group of no less than three (3) nor more than twelve (12) attached
dwelling units, separated by a fire-rated wall[.]
Land Use Definitions - E
(66) EDUCATIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH: Research, development, and testing laboratories that do not
involve the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing or sale of products.
(67) ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE REPAIR: {x} The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances that are customarily used
in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens
and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, etc., but not including appliances/equipment which have internal
combustion engines.
(68) EXTENDED STAY HOTEL/MOTEL: {x} A multi-unit, extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units or
suites with complete kitchen facilities and which is suitable for long-term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linens
and housekeeping, telephones, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting rooms, club house, and recreational
facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted.
Land Use Definitions - F
(69) FAIRGROUNDS/RODEO: An indoor or outdoor area used for agricultural related offices, animal shows and judging,
carnivals, circuses, concerts, food booths and stands, games, rides, and rodeos.
(70) FARM, AGRICULTURAL: {x} An area used for the production thereon of farm crops such as vegetables, fruit trees,
cotton, or grain, and the storage of such crops.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 625/648
(71) FARM, RANCHING AND LIVESTOCK: {x} An area used for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as
horses, chickens, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing animals on the
premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of
husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
(72) FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL: {x} Confined areas where cattle or other livestock are held for extended periods of time
for the purpose of weight increase by feeding of high percentage grain feed.
(73) FIELD OFFICE OR CONSTRUCTION OFFICE (temporary): A mobile home or temporary building used to provide
on-site office space at an active construction site.
(74) FLEA MARKET: A periodic market held in an open area or within a structure, where groups of individual sellers offer
their goods for sale to the public. Flea markets are typically characterized by no long-term lease arrangements between
individual sellers and flea market operators.
(75) FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE: {x} A building other than a hotel/motel or a boarding/rooming house that is
occupied only by individuals enrolled in a college or university located within the City and persons to attend the house and
supervise activities of the fraternity or sorority. Except for the attendants, each resident is a member of a fraternity or sorority
that is recognized by the college or university and chartered by a state or national organization.
(76) FREIGHT CONTAINER: {x} Any structure or storage receptacle designed or built and generally intended for the
shipment or transportation of products or goods; however, shall not include trucks, trailers, or rail cars.
(77) FUEL SALES: The retail sale of flammable liquids, combustible liquids, liquid flammable gas, or flammable gas,
where such fuel is dispensed into tanks for motor vehicles.
(78) FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY: {x} A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation,
which may also be used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Land Use Definitions - G
(79) GARAGE SALE: {x} An occasional market open to the public and conducted on a residential premise for the purpose
of disposing of personal property. The term includes, but is not limited to all sales entitled “lawn,” “yard,” “room,”
“backyard,” “patio” or “rummage.” The term does not include a situation where no more than three (3) specific items are
offered for sale and all advertisements of such sale specifically name those products to be sold.
(80) GOLF COURSE: {x} An area of twenty (20) acres or more improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which
may include clubhouses, and which is owned and operated by a public or private entity.
(81) GROCERY STORE, CONVENIENCE-TYPE: {x} Retail establishment selling food for off-premises consumption and
a limited selection of groceries and sundries, including possibly gasoline, if pumps are provided. Does not include or offer any
automobile repair services.
(82) GROCERY STORE, SUPERMARKET: {x} A retail market primarily selling consumable goods that are not to be
eaten on the premises. Prepared food and other items and/or services may be sold only in limited quantities as a secondary or
accessory use.
(83) GROUP HOME: {x} A residential arrangement, other than a residential care facility, operated by the Texas
Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation or a community center (as defined in the referenced Health & Safety
Code) in which not more than fifteen (15) persons with mental retardation voluntarily live and, under appropriate supervision,
may share responsibilities for the operation of the living unit. This definition shall include foster homes, halfway houses, and
day-care facilities for persons with mental retardation. Such home and the persons that reside therein shall meet all the
specifications and requirements of the Persons with Mental Retardation Act, Chapter 591 of the Texas Health & Safety Code.
Land Use Definitions - H
(84) HALFWAY HOUSE: A facility owned or operated by an agency or an individual authorized to provide housing, food,
treatment or supportive services for individuals on supervised release from the criminal justice system and who have been
assigned by a court to a residential home in lieu of placement in a correctional institution; or for individuals who have been
institutionalized and released from the criminal justice system or who have had alcohol or drug problems which make
operation in society difficult and who require the protection of a supervised group setting.
(85) HARDWARE STORE: {x} A store in which the primary items offered for sale are wares such as fittings, tools,
machinery, utensils and other similar objects.
(86) HEAD SHOP: Any retail establishment open to the public that presents, displays, or offers for sale paraphernalia,
items, equipment, or products commonly used, intended to be used, or commonly known to be used, for the ingestion,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 626/648
inhalation, preparation, or injection of illegal substances, to include any device which has been fabricated, constructed, altered,
adjusted, or marked especially for use in the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, cocaine, methamphetamine, any
other “controlled substance,” “controlled substance analogue,” “synthetic controlled substance,” or substance or chemical that
mimics the effect of THC such as synthetic cannabinoids or other controlled substances, or any other substance that violates
local, State, or Federal law, and is adapted to that purpose by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features
associated with drug paraphernalia, notwithstanding that it might also be possible to use the device for some other purpose.
(87) HOBBY SHOP: {x} An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited specialty items for hobbies and other
similar activities that may include: antiques, art objects and supplies, ceramic supplies, books, camera and photo supplies,
candy, florist, gifts, greeting cards, framing, stamps and coins, stationery, and tobacco.
(88) HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER: {x} The sale of building materials, lumber, tools, and/or hardware customarily
used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage of materials for retail sales.
(89) HOME OCCUPATION: {x} An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit and which is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the premises for residential purposes.
(90) HOMELESS SHELTER: A facility that provides free lodging to one or more of the following supportive services for
indigent individuals and/or families with no regular home or residential address, on a nonprofit basis. Supportive services
include, but are not limited to: provision of meals; assistance in obtaining permanent housing; medical counseling, treatment,
and/or supervision; psychological counseling, treatment, and/or supervision; assistance in recuperating from the effects of or
refraining from, the use of drugs and/or alcohol; nutritional counseling; employment counseling; job training and placement;
and child care.
(91) HOSPITAL: {x} A building or portion thereof, used or designed for the housing or treatment of sick or injured patients
where they are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is licensed
by the State of Texas. This definition does not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, or apartment hotel not
ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons.
(92) HOTEL/MOTEL: {x} A facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guest rooms on a daily rate to the
general public and possibly providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, housekeeping service and
recreational facilities, on an accessory use basis. Guest rooms may have individual outside entrances. For the purposes of this
definition, a guest room shall be defined as a room designed for the overnight lodging of hotel guests for an established rate or
fee. (For establishments providing lodging one week or longer, see Extended Stay Hotel/Motel and Boarding House and/or
Rooming House.)
Land Use Definitions - I
(93) ITINERANT BUSINESS: {x} Establishment of any business on a temporary basis where the business does not occur
in a permanent structure, in a structure for which a temporary permit has been obtained, or in association with another
temporary use such as a carnival, fair, parade or festival. The term further does not apply to garage sales, businesses that are
operated or owned by the same person or entity that owns the property, or businesses that hold a lease term on the property of
at least one (1) year.
Land Use Definitions - J
(None included.)
Land Use Definitions - K
(94) KENNEL (WITHOUT OUTDOOR PENS): {x} A commercial establishment in which four (4) domestic animals over
the age of ten (10) weeks (such as dogs and cats) are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, sold, or provided other health
and well-being related services, for a fee or compensation. This term along with the parenthetical phrase “without outdoor
pens” means that all of the establishment's activities occur indoors, except outdoor exercise under supervision for a limited
period of time (e.g., one-half to one hour at a time).
(95) KENNEL (WITH OUTDOOR PENS): {x} A commercial establishment in which four (4) domestic animals over the
age of ten (10) weeks (such as dogs and cats) are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, sold, or provided other health and
well-being related services, for a fee or compensation. This term along with the parenthetical phrase “with outdoor pens”
means that any of the establishment's activities may occur outdoors for an extended period of time.
(96) KINDERGARTEN OR CHILD CARE CENTER: See Child Day-Care Center, Center-Based Operations.
Land Use Definitions - L
(97) LABORATORY: See Medical and Dental Laboratory.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 627/648
(98) LAUNDRY, DRY CLEANING, DYEING AND LINEN SERVICE: {x} An industrial commercial facility where
fabrics are laundered or cleaned with solvents and/or pressed on a commercial or wholesale basis. Alterations and garment
repair may also be offered in relation to this use. Retail customers do not frequent this use.
(99) LAUNDRY/DRY CLEANING SERVICES & FACILITIES: Retail and customer oriented services providing
laundering, dry-cleaning, pressing, and other similar service. This also includes self-service laundry facilities typically referred
to as Laundromats.
(100) LIQUOR STORE: {x} Any entity selling alcohol or required to be licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, and which may be classified as one of the following:
a. Liquor Store On-Premise Consumption means an establishment selling alcohol for, or having a license permitting,
any consumption of alcohol at or on the premises.
b. Liquor Store Off-Premise Consumption Unrestricted means an establishment conducting, or having a license
permitting, retail sales of all types of alcohol but prohibiting any consumption of alcohol on or at the premises.
c. Liquor Store Off-Premise Consumption, Beer and Wine means an establishment conducting, or having a license
restricting, the retail sale of alcohol to beer and/or wine but prohibiting any consumption of alcohol on or at the
premises.
d. Liquor Store Off-Premises Consumption Manufacturer means an establishment conducting or having a license
allowing the manufacturing of alcohol, except as may be allowed by the holder of a brewpub license (from the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission) and at a Restaurant, Brewpub as defined herein this code.
(101) LIQUOR WHOLESALE/DISTRIBUTION: A liquor store (off premises consumption) where liquor is sold in bulk to
retailers or other wholesalers.
(102) LIVESTOCK AUCTION: A facility for the auctioning of cattle or other livestock where confinement of animals is
normally for a period of less than one (1) week and where feed of a filler-type is primarily provided. Animal turnover is
expected to be continuous. ({x} Shown within the Land Use Matrix in Chapter 2 under Stockyards, Livestock Auctions, and
Livestock Hauling.)
(103) LIVESTOCK HAULING: A business expressly involved with the transportation of cattle and other livestock, where
the temporary confinement of animals may be necessary. If confinement is not required, this use will be interpreted to be a
freight-hauling service. ({x} Shown within the Land Use Matrix in Chapter 2 under Stockyards, Livestock Auctions, and
Livestock Hauling.)
Land Use Definitions - M
(104) MANUFACTURED HOME: See Dwelling - Manufactured Home (HUD-Code).
(105) MANUFACTURED HOME, CAMPING, AND/OR TRAVEL TRAILER SALES: {x} The offering for sale of new or
previously owned (i.e., used) manufactured housing units (e.g., mobile homes/trailers, HUD-Code homes, industrialized
homes), camping trailers, and/or vacation travel trailers on a parcel of land, but excluding the use of such facilities as
dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis.
(106) MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK: Any tract of land, four (4) acres or more, under single ownership,
where accommodation is provided for nontransient manufactured/mobile home use.
(107) MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A tract of land, laid out in accordance with this LDC of the
City of Abilene, intended for the specific purpose of providing individual lots for the placement of manufactured/mobile
homes.
(108) Manufacturing (heavy): The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or
equipment, where one or more of the following characteristics exists: (1) activities other than loading are conducted outside of
an enclosed building; (2) detection of nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation are more than negligible at
the property lines; or (3) activities that may pose a significant safety hazard, such as danger of explosion.
(109) Manufacturing (incidental): An establishment where Manufacturing (light) uses are conducted exclusively indoors
and are incidental to a principal land use such as retail sales on the same site. In no case shall such use exceed 15% of the
building square footage and the manufactured product should be primarily sold on the same site.
(110) MANUFACTURING (light): The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of
goods or equipment, where (1) all activities except loading are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; (2) detection of
nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation are negligible at the property lines; and (3) activities do not pose a
significant safety hazard, such as danger of explosion.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 628/648
(111) MEDICAL and DENTAL CLINIC or OFFICE: {x} Establishments not enclosed within a hospital structure, primarily
engaged in furnishing direct medical services to human outpatients, including an office or group of offices for one or more
physicians or dentists for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted persons, but not including facilities providing
surgical services requiring general anesthesia and/or a period of post-operative observation to patients whose admission for an
overnight stay is not anticipated to be medically necessary.
(112) MEDICAL and DENTAL LABORATORY: {x} A facility operated for the primary purpose of performing medical,
dental or optical research, testing, and analytical work having a direct relationship to the provision of health services.
(113) MILITARY BASE AND RESERVATION: {x} The installations used by both the active military as well as the
Reserve and the National Guard.
(114) MINING: The extraction of mineral including: solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; gases
such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and
floatation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site or as part of a mining activity.
(115) MOBILE HOME: See Dwelling - Mobile Home.
(116) Manufactured Home or Temporary Office Building (office for sales and service): A manufactured home or other
temporary building used as an incidental sales or service office to a manufactured home sales business.
(117) MANUFACTURED HOME (permanent security residence): A manufactured home used as an accessory dwelling on
a permanent basis that is incidental to a nonresidential use where there is outdoor storage of equipment or merchandise.
(118) MANUFACTURED HOME (temporary security residence): A manufactured home used as an accessory dwelling on
a temporary basis during active construction on the same site.
(119) MOTORIZED RACING: A place where motorized vehicles (including cars, trucks and motorcycles) race on a
defined course and which may include facilities such as grandstands, concessions, restrooms, offices, and other functions
typical to racing facilities. This definition does not include go-cart tracks where patrons can drive go-carts for recreational
purposes (see Outdoor Recreation (active) for recreational go-carts)
Land Use Definitions - N
(120) NURSING HOME: {x} An extended care facility licensed to provide full-time, convalescent or chronic care,
including lodging and meals for three (3) or more individuals who, by reason of infirmity, are unable to care for themselves
and who need ongoing health supervision but not hospitalization.
Land Use Definitions - O
(121) OFFICE (general, professional, financial): An exclusively indoor use where information is handled, administrative
tasks are conducted, and professional services are provided including, medical, dental, financial, and investments.
(122) OPEN SPACE: Property designated for recreational use, including a private park, play lot, plaza or ornamental area
intended for use or enjoyment by people. Open space does not include streets, alleys, utility easements, public parks or
required setbacks; an area that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices and eaves.
(123) OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Private property under common ownership designated for recreational use, including a
private park, play lot, plaza or ornamental area intended for use or enjoyment of property owners within a subdivision. Open
space does not include streets, alleys, utility easements, public parks or required setbacks.
(124) OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: The same as Open Space, Private, except that the property is owned by or dedicated to the
City.
(125) OPEN SPACE (USABLE): An open area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor,
active or passive, recreation purposes. An area of usable open space has a slope that does not exceed ten percent (10%), and no
dimension of less than ten feet (10'). An area of usable open space may also include landscaping elements (e.g., trees, ground
cover), trails, recreational facilities, water features and decorative objects such as art or fountains.
(126) OUTSIDE DISPLAY: Any use of a premises whereon goods, materials, or merchandise is displayed for the purpose
of sale on a temporary basis for not more than twenty-four (24) hours.
(127) OUTSIDE STORAGE: The keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials, merchandise
or equipment on a lot or tract on a generally permanent basis for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
Land Use Definitions - P
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 629/648
(128) PARK AND/OR PLAYGROUND: {x} A publicly or privately operated recreation facility, including any land area,
which is designed to serve the recreation needs of Abilene citizens. Such park or playground may be private, used for the
exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests and not for use by the general public. Such park or
playground may be public, used by the general public without membership or affiliation.
(129) PASSENGER GROUND TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL: An establishment or business location where
passengers can switch from one mode of transportation to another and where customers can obtain tickets and route
information, board and depart a vehicle, and where incidental services are provided such as waiting areas, food service and
indoor retail sales of products. Such terminals may include bus, train, taxi and other surface transportation services, but not
any type of air transportation.
(130) PAWNSHOP: {x} An establishment where articles are traded in exchange for money plus a right to redeem such
articles within a given amount of time upon repayment of such money with interest. The establishment may also be involved
in the retail sale of primarily used items is also allowed [sic], provided that the sale of such items complies with local, State
and Federal regulations.
(131) PERSONAL CARE FACILITY: {x} An establishment that furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to
four (4) or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment, and provides personal care services. For the
purposes of this definition, personal care services means:
a. Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other personal needs or maintenance;
b. The administration of medication by a person licensed to administer medication or the assistance with or
supervision of medication; or
c. General supervision or oversight of the physical and mental well-being of a person who needs assistance to
maintain a private and independent residence in a personal care facility or who needs assistance to manage the person's
personal life, regardless of whether a guardian has been appointed for the person.
Such facility and the persons that reside therein shall meet all the specifications and requirements of the Personal
Care Facility Licensing Act, Chapter 247 of the Texas Health & Safety Code.
(132) PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments that provide services to individuals, usually on an appointment basis, not
otherwise listed as a permitted use in this ordinance. Personal Services includes uses such as barber/beauty shops, travel
arranging, tailoring, massage therapy, fortune-telling, portrait studios, etc.
(133) PETROLEUM OR GAS WELL: The drilling, extraction and transportation of subterranean fossil gas and petroleum,
and necessary attendant uses and structures, but excluding refining, processing or manufacturing.
(134) POST OFFICE: An entity that provides retail packaging and mail services, and provides mailboxes for lease.
(135) PRINTING, COPYING, REPRODUCTION, PUBLISHING: An establishment where sound recordings, video
recordings, literature, graphics, and other printed materials may be created, published, printed, copied, or reproduced.
(136) PROPANE SALES (RETAIL): {x} Retail sales of gaseous substances commonly used for household purposes such as
propane or butane; does not include the storage, sale or distribution of other types of combustible substances or alternative
fuels such as containerized natural gas, liquid propane, etc.
(137) PROTECTIVE SHELTER: A shelter or facility that provides temporary housing, protection, counseling, and preplacement
to people and/or families during times of abuse.
(138) PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY: Facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, other firefighting and
fire prevention facilities, and police and sheriff stations and headquarters.
(139) PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY: A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-public utility agency to store,
distribute, or pump a utility service such as electricity, natural gas, telecommunications, water or sewer. This use does not
include facilities to generate, treat, or produce such utilities.
Land Use Definitions - Q
(None included.)
Land Use Definitions - R
(140) RAILROAD SWITCHING AND MARSHALLING YARD: An area of land, a portion of which is covered by a
system of tracks, that provides for the making up of trains by one or more railroads, or private industry concerns. Functions
include but are not limited to the classifying, switching, storing, assembling, distributing, consolidating, moving, repairing,
weighing, or transferring of cars, trains, engines, locomotives and rolling stock.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 630/648
(141) RECREATION - OUTDOORS (active): Recreational activities that take place outdoors and use athletic fields (such
as baseball diamonds), play courts (such as tennis courts), swimming pools, carnival-type games and rides, go-carts, golfing
facilities, campgrounds and other similar uses. These may include accessory structures for restrooms, concessions, dressing,
offices, and associated ticket/equipment purchase or rental.
(142) RECREATION - OUTDOORS (passive): Recreational activities that are passive in nature including hiking trails,
bicycle trails, picnic areas (including picnic shelters), gardens, fishing areas, and other open spaces not associated with active
recreational uses.
(143) RECREATION AND COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT - INDOOR: An establishment where commercial
recreational and entertainment uses occur entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of such uses include roller rinks,
bowling alleys, pool halls, theaters, arcades, and physical fitness businesses.
(144) RECYCLING COLLECTION AND PROCESSING CENTER: {x} A facility that is not a salvage yard and in which
recoverable resources, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, are collected, stored, flattened, crushed or bundled,
essentially by hand or machine.
(145) RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT: {x} Any accessory use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for the
temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items occurs in relation to this use. Such a facility would
be generally located in an easily accessed area where no reduction in any required parking would result. Such a facility would
be reasonably free from noxious odors, rodents, insects and refuse.
(146) REHABILITATION FACILITY: {x} A residential facility that is operated by an agency of the State, a political
subdivision of the State, or a private vendor operating under a contract with an agency of the State or a political subdivision of
the State and that houses persons convicted of misdemeanors or felonies or houses children found to have engaged in
delinquent conduct, regardless of whether the persons are housed in the residential facility:
a. While serving a sentence of confinement following conviction of an offense;
b. As a condition of probation, parole, or mandatory supervision; or
c. Under a court order for out-of-home placement under Title 3, Family Code, other than in a foster home operated
under contract with the juvenile board of the county in which the foster home is located or under a contract with the
Texas Youth Commission.
Such facility and the persons that reside therein shall meet all the specifications and requirements of Chapter 244 of
the Texas Local Government Code.
(147) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES (indoor): Land uses which perform maintenance and repair services
where all operations are contained entirely within an enclosed building. This definition shall not include maintenance and
repair of motor vehicles.
(148) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES (outdoors): Land uses which perform maintenance and repair services
where all or any portion of the operations are located outside of an enclosed building. This definition shall not include
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles.
(149) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES (truck and other large motor vehicles): All types of repair, maintenance
and reconditioning of trucks, buses, RVs, and other large vehicles.
(150) RESIDENTIAL USE: A dwelling unit or group of dwelling units; includes dwelling units within the upper story or
stories of a building wherein other parts of the building are used for a nonresidential purpose or purposes, such as a retail
establishment or office.
(150.5) RESTAURANT, BREWPUB: {x} Any establishment defined by all the following characteristics:
a. a principal business is selling food and beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and where customers
(normally provided with an individual menu) are served food and beverages by a restaurant employee at same table or
counter where said items are consumed, or in a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are
consumed within the restaurant building; and
b. where the holder of a brewpub license from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and specifically for those
premises may manufacture, brew, bottle, can, package and label malt liquor, ale or beer; and
c. where the holder of that brewpub license may sell or offer without charge, on the premises of the brewpub and to
ultimate consumers for consumption on or off those premises, malt liquor, ale or beer produced by the holder, in or from
a lawful container, to the extent the sales or offers are allowed under the holder's other permits or licenses from the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 631/648
(151) RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: {x} Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design, method of operation, or any portion of whose
business includes one or both of the following characteristics:
a. Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle either by a carhop or by
other means which eliminate the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle.
b. The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at
other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is encouraged or permitted.
(152) RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: {x} Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts,
or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out
with consumption off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes two (2) or more of the
following characteristics:
a. Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers.
b. The restaurants are self-service. Customers wait on themselves.
c. The menu is posted rather than printed.
d. Customers are encouraged, if not required, to order prepared food and either take it out or eat it quickly.
e. Customers are encouraged, if not required, to do the bussing.
(153) RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD (DRIVE-THROUGH ONLY): {x} Any establishment whose principal business is the
sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for off-premise consumption only and
whose design, method of operation of any portion of whose business includes all of the following:
a. Foods, frozen desserts or beverages which are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle through a service
window or similar means.
b. No on-site interior or exterior seating shall be provided.
(154) RESTAURANT, STANDARD: {x} Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts,
or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or
both of the following characteristics:
a. Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods, frozen desserts, or beverages by a
restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed.
b. A cafeteria-type operation where foods, frozen desserts, or beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant
building.
(155) RETAIL BUSINESS, GENERAL: {x} The sale of commodities to consumers that is not otherwise regulated or
defined within this LDC, including the sale of cameras and photographic supplies, tableware, clothing and apparel accessories,
dairy products, and eyewear.
(156) RETAIL SALES/RENTAL (automobile/small truck): {x} A paved area for the display for sale, rental or lease of
automobiles and light trucks accompanied by an on-site office with staffing during normal business hours, which may include
the service of vehicles on-site.
(157) RETAIL SALES/RENTAL (indoor): Land uses that conduct the sale, lease, or rental of merchandise or equipment
entirely within an enclosed building with the exception of “outdoor display” as specifically permitted in certain zoning
districts. A land use with outdoor display exceeding 15% of the total sales area of the building shall be considered Retail
Sales/Rental (outdoors).
(158) RETAIL SALES/RENTAL (outdoors, non-vehicle): Land uses that conduct the sale, lease, or rental of merchandise
that does not otherwise qualify as Retail Sales/Rental (indoors) or any other listed land use.
(159) RETAIL SALES/RENTAL (trucks and other large vehicles and equipment): A paved area for the display for sale,
rental or lease of trucks, mobile homes, RVs, and motorized heavy equipment accompanied by an on-site office with staffing
during normal business hours, which may include the service of vehicles on-site.
Land Use Definitions - S
(160) SANITARY LANDFILL: The disposal and burial of non-hazardous and non-medical, farm, residential, commercial,
institutional, or industrial waste.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 632/648
(161) SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device, which at its widest dimension exceeds 36 inches, is used to transmit or
receive signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources.
(162) SCALES (public): A facility where trucks, trailers and other large equipment are weighed.
(163) SCHOOL, PUBLIC, PRIVATE, OR DENOMINATIONAL: {x} A learning facility for enrolled students that is owned
and operated by a public school district or that is under the sponsorship of a private agency or corporation, including a
religious agency, which offers elementary, secondary, or high school curriculum for the purpose of educating pupils generally
between the ages of five (5) and eighteen (18).
(164) SCRAP AND WASTE MATERIAL: A place where discarded or salvaged materials are stored, sold, exchanged,
baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for storage of salvaged
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment. Any manufactured articles or parts rejected or discarded and
useful only as material for reprocessing. The term shall not include pawnshops and other establishments for the sale or storage
of used furniture and household equipment when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, or the sale of used
cars in operable conditions.
(165) SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE STORE: {x} The term shall include surplus stores, rummage shops and flea
markets.
(166) SHELTER FOR HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS: {x} A supervised private facility that provides temporary living
accommodations for homeless individuals. Such facility and the persons that reside or stay therein shall meet all the
specifications and requirements of Chapter 244 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(167) SHOPPING CENTER: {x} A commercial development such as a strip center, mall, or multi-tenant retail building, in
which two (2) or more separate retail businesses occupy a single or multiple structures which share on-site parking and
common driveways.
(168) SOCIAL SERVICE FACILITY: A nonprofit facility intended to provide basic needs to individuals and families
including job training, food, and temporary shelter.
(169) SOCIAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION FACILITY: A facility operated by an organization which provides services
such as training, counseling, health, or the distribution of food or clothing. This term includes but is not limited to a facility
offering life skills training, substance abuse counseling, housing services, or a neighborhood recovery center. This term does
not include any use which provides for housing.
(170) SPECIAL EDUCATION AND REHABILITATION CENTER: {x} Any facility in which persons live while receiving
therapy, training and/or counseling, on or off premises, for any of the following purposes or combination of purposes:
a. To assist them in recuperating from the effects of drugs or alcohol.
b. To assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder, mental retardation or physical
disability.
c. Housing under supervision as an alternative to institutionalization including, but not limited to pre-release, work
release and probationary programs.
(171) STABLE: A structure with a capacity for more than four (4) horses or mules. Also see Commercial Stable.
(172) STOCKYARDS: Confined areas where cattle or other livestock are held for short periods of time, are fed filler-type
feed, and are generally awaiting transport. ({x} under Stockyards, Livestock Auctions, and Livestock Hauling)
(173) STORAGE, SELF-SERVICE UNITS: {x} Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the
storage of items, such as motor vehicles, trailers, boats, bulky household goods, and sundry personal property. There is no
conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units.
(174) SUBDIVISION SALES OFFICE (temporary): A structure used to sale [sell] real estate that is located within the same
subdivision as the real estate being sold. Such office must be removed when 90% of the real property is leased or sold, or
when the associated temporary permit expires.
(175) SURGICAL CENTER: {x} A facility not enclosed within a hospital structure, providing surgical services requiring
anesthesia and/or a period of post-operative observation for patients whose admission for overnight stay is not anticipated to
be medically necessary. Generally excluded are surgical services ordinarily performed by physicians in their private offices or
in a hospital's outpatient or emergency department.
(176) SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: {x} A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a onefamily,
two-family or multiple-family subdivision and located, fenced and built in accordance with all applicable standards of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 633/648
the City of Abilene. A private swimming pool is not operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or
obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
(177) SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC: {x} A swimming pool constructed for use by the general public, including those
operated as a business and those constructed and maintained by the City or county, and which is fenced and built in
accordance with all applicable standards of the City of Abilene.
Land Use Definitions - T
(178) TATTOO PARLOR: {x} Any room or space where tattooing is practiced, or where the business of tattooing is
conducted, except when tattooing is an accessory use, it shall not be considered a tattoo parlor and shall fall under the zoning
regulations pertaining to the primary use to which it is accessory.
(179) TENNIS COURT, PRIVATE (accessory to residential use): See LDC definition of Swimming Pool (acc to res use)
and insert tennis court in place of swimming pool.
(180) THEATER or PLAYHOUSE (INDOOR): {x} An indoor establishment charging admission to the general public for
the privilege of observing a live, televised, or motion picture performance.
(181) TRADE/BUSINESS SCHOOL: Schools that provide teaching and training in business, technical and other trades.
(182) TRAILER COURT: A vacation travel trailer park (see definition).
(183) TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: A housing shelter that provides free lodging and limited supportive services for
indigent individuals and/or families with no regular home or residential address, on a nonprofit basis. The shelter provides
services for an extended period, often as long as 18 months, and is generally integrated with other social services and
counseling programs to assist in the transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of a stable income and permanent
housing. A transitional housing shelter serves as a transition from a homeless shelter to permanent housing and does not
provide for a full range of services and programs
(184) TRAVEL ARRANGING AND TICKET SERVICE: {x} The ticket office of any transportation system when such
office is a separate and distinct activity, not located within a transportation terminal.
(185) TRAVEL TRAILERS (accessory to hospitals): Recreational vehicles used for temporary living quarters at hospitals
exclusively for nonresident visitors to Abilene with family members under the care of the hospital.
Land Use Definitions - U
(186) UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE: A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees
and may also have research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees.
(187) URBAN GARDEN: {x} A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, herbs, or ornamental
plants.
(188) USE: The classification of the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designated, arranged, intended,
occupied or maintained.
(189) USE, RESIDENTIAL: See Residential Use.
(190) UTILITY: A business that provides an essential commodity or service, such as electric, gas transmission, and local
telephone, and that is generally under government regulations.
(191) UTILITY GENERATION, PRODUCTION, TREATMENT: A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-public
utility agency to generate, produce or treat a utility such as electricity, natural gas, water or sanitary sewer.
Land Use Definitions - V
(192) VACATION TRAVEL TRAILER (OR MOTOR HOME): {x} A vehicular portable structure designed for temporary
or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation uses. Such a vehicle is also typically:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
(b) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary or short-term occupancy as living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 634/648
Such a vehicle shall include vacation travel trailer, pickup camper, motor home, converted bus, tent trailer, or small
device used for temporary portable housing. The term shall be used interchangeably with the term Recreational
Vehicle or (RV).
(193) VACATION TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: {x} Any tract of land under single ownership, two (2) or more acres in size
where accommodation is provided for transient residence in vacation travel trailers. For the purpose of this definition,
“transient residence” means a maximum three (3) month time period of consistent stay, with at least two (2) weeks in between
stays.
(194) VARIETY STORE: {x} A retail store that sells a variety of merchandise. Such merchandise is generally similar in
nature to, but lower in value and smaller in selection than, that found in department stores.
(195) VETERINARY SERVICE, ALL SIZE ANIMALS: {x} A place where a veterinarian maintains treatment facilities for
the medical or surgical treatment of diseased or injured animals, including boarding facilities.
(196) VETERINARY SERVICE, SMALL ANIMAL: {x} A place where a veterinarian maintains treatment facilities for the
medical or surgical treatment of diseased or injured animals, including boarding facilities. All operations occur indoors. For
the purpose of this definition, small animal shall be defined as any animal that is no larger than the largest breed of dogs,
including fish, birds, and mammals.
Land Use Definitions - W
(197) WATER STORAGE: {x} Impounded surface water areas or surface tanks used for storage.
(198) WHOLESALE TRADE: An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the selling and/or distributing
merchandise in quantity to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or engaged in acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals
or companies.
a. Wholesale Trade, General - Group 1: {x} Group 1 shall be defined as including the following specific uses:
1. Candy and related products
2. Clothing and apparel accessories
3. Drugs, druggist supplies, and sundries
4. Fabric
5. Furniture and home furnishings
6. Groceries and related products
7. Petroleum and related products (not to exceed 100,000 gallons storage capacity)
8. Textiles and textile products
b. Wholesale Trade, General - Group 2: {x} Group 2 shall be defined as including the following specific uses:
1. Electrical appliances (including television and radio)
2. Hardware
3. Heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning equipment
4. Plumbing supplies
c. Wholesale Trade, General - Group 3: {x} Group 3 shall be defined as including the following specific uses:
1. Auction, Wholesale (On-Premises)
2. Automobiles and Other Motor Vehicles
3. Automobiles and Other Motor Vehicle Equipment
4. Electrical Equipment, Wiring Supplies, and Other Similar Construction Material
5. Electronic Parts and Equipment
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 635/648
6. Hardware
7. Lumber and Other Building Materials
8. Oilfield Equipment and Supplies (other than chemicals and tubular goods)
d. Wholesale Trade, General - Group 4: {x} Group 4 shall be defined as including the following specific uses:
1. Commercial and industrial machinery, equipment and supplies
2. Dairy products
3. Farm machinery and equipment
4. Farm products (raw materials)
5. Meat and meat products
6. Paint, varnishes, and related products
7. Produce
(199) WHOLESALING AND STORAGE (indoor): An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the storage
or warehousing of items; and/or engaged in selling or distributing of merchandise in quantity to retailers, industrial,
commercial, institutional, professional business users, or other wholesalers; engaged in acting as agents or brokers buying
merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies; or where merchandise is transferred from one
mode of transportation to another. With the exception of parking and loading areas, all activities related to such an
establishment must take place entirely within an enclosed structure.
(200) WHOLESALING AND STORAGE (outdoors): An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the
storage or warehousing of items; and/or engaged in selling or distributing of merchandise in quantity to retailers, industrial,
commercial, institutional, professional business users, or other wholesalers; engaged in acting as agents or brokers buying
merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies; or where merchandise is transferred from on [one]
mode of transportation to another; where any activity beyond parking and loading takes place outside of an enclosed building.
This does not include any use otherwise specifically permitted by this ordinance.
(201) WRECKER/TOWING: An establishment or place of business engaged in vehicle wrecking and towing, including the
temporary storage of vehicles. However, this use does not include long-term vehicle storage or salvage operations.
Land Use Definitions - X
(None included.)
Land Use Definitions - Y
(None included.)
Land Use Definitions - Z
(202) ZOO: An area, building, or structures which contain wild animal exhibits for view by the public.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. A (Exh. A), 6-10-10; Ord. No. 49-2012, pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-11-12; Ord.
No. 03-2013, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 1-10-13; Ord. No. 23-2013, pt. 1 (Ex. A), 6-13-13; Ord. No. 62-2018, pts. 1–2, 10-9-18)
Section 5.1.1.4 General Definitions
(a) General Definitions. The following general definitions shall be used for wording and interpretation of wording throughout this
LDC.
General Definitions - A
(1) ABANDONMENT: As related to nonconforming uses and structures, having been abandoned as described in Section
2.7.3.6 [2.6.3.6] of this LDC.
(2) ABILENE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Abilene, or any individual element
thereof, as adopted and amended by the Abilene City Council. Also see Comprehensive Plan.
(3) ABUTTING: Having property or district lines in common, or two objects in immediate contact.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 636/648
(4) ACCESS: Means of approaching or entering a property. Includes a right of passage to and from an adjacent street, alley,
or property.
(5) ACCESSORY: Being secondary or subordinate to something else.
(6) ACCESSORY USE: A use that is clearly and customarily incidental and secondary to the permitted and/or principal use
of land or building(s), and that is under the same ownership as and located upon the same lot as the principal use, and which
does not change the character thereof. The land/building area that is used for the accessory use is significantly less than that
used for the primary use.
(7) ADJACENT: Contiguous, abutting or touching, and to be separated only by common property lines or an alley.
(8) ALL-WEATHER SURFACE: Paving material that provides a hard base for automobile use. The all-weather surface
shall be composed of asphaltic or Portland cement bind pavement or other pavement material approved by the City Engineer,
so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.
(9) ALLEY: A public way which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties, and affords only
secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
(10) AMENITY: Aesthetic or other characteristics of a development that increase its desirability visually, desirability to the
City of Abilene, and/or its marketability to the public. Amenities may vary according to the type and nature of development,
but examples include a naturalized retention/detention pond (refer to definition herein), a recreational facility, landscaping, or
large trees.
(11) APPEAL: A request for review of and relief from any decision applying a provision of this Code and which is
authorized pursuant to Chapter 1, Article 3.
(12) ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: See Significant Architectural Feature.
(13) AREA OF LOT: See Lot Size.
(14) AREA REGULATIONS: The regulations controlling minimum lot area, minimum lot depth and width, maximum
building area or coverage, as well as required front, side and rear yards.
(15) ARTICULATION: An interruption/differentiation of the building wall plane with either a recess (concavity) or an
offset (convexity) that projects away from the building wall plane by a measurable distance.
(16) AS-BUILT/RECORD DRAWINGS: A group of drawings that depicts the final configuration of the installed or
constructed improvements of a development, improvements which have been verified by the contractor as their installation or
construction occurs during development. The as-built or record drawings should reflect the construction plans (or working
drawings) used, corrected, and/or clarified in the field. For the purposes of this LDC, the terms “as-built drawing” and “record
drawing” shall be interchangeable.
(17) ASSOCIATION: Usually a homeowners' (HOA) or property owners' association (POA). An incorporated nonprofit
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: (a) each lot owner in a planned development or other
described land area is automatically a member; (b) each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of
expenses for the organization's activities such as maintaining common property, and (c) the charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien
against the property.
General Definitions - B
(18) BARRICADE: An area of undisturbed ground left around an existing tree during construction to help stabilize the root
structure and prevent damage to the bark and limbs. It is suggested that a two inch (2") thick cover of mulch or wood chips are
used to preserve moisture in the barricaded area.
(19) BASEMENT: That portion of a building having one-half (1/2) or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below grade level
and having a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet (6-1/2'). A basement shall not be counted in
computing the number of stories permitted by this LDC.
(20) BLOCK: An area enclosed by streets. A block is determined by the streets along its boundary which surround one or
more lots. The streets used to determine a block shall be through streets, not cul-de-sac streets. A group of lots adjacent to a
cul-de-sac shall not be counted as a block. Refer to the blue-shaded area shown in Figure 5-1.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 637/648
Figure 5-1: Block & Block Length
(21) BLOCK LENGTH: The distance along a side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets[.] If the street is a deadend
type, the distance between the nearest street and the end of such dead-end street. Such distances shall be measured along
the street centerline from one end of a row or group of lots to the other end. Refer to the illustration of block length shown in
Figure 5-1.
(22) BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Abilene, as created by this LDC and appointed
by the City Council. Also may be referred to with the acronym BOA. The composition, powers and duties of the Board of
Adjustment are set forth in Chapter 1, Article 1, Division 5 of this LDC.
(23) BREEZEWAY: A small corridor with a roof, with no structure above it, and that is a maximum of five feet (5') in width
(but may be of any length and height). The corridor provides a walking path between a main building and an accessory
building, usually a garage or carport, and is unenclosed (i.e., is open to the outside).
(24) BUFFER: An area of land that is intended to mitigate negative impacts between land uses and/or along roadways. A
buffer may be landscaped and may also include berms, walls, and/or fences.
(25) BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels or movable property of any
kind and which is affixed to the land. When separated by an absolute fire separation, each portion of such structure so
separated is deemed a separate building. This definition includes structures wholly or partly enclosed with an exterior wall and
roof.
(26) BUILDING - MAIN, PRIMARY, OR PRINCIPAL: A building in which the permitted and/or principal use of the lot on
which such use is situated is conducted.
(27) BUILDING AREA: Area of the building site left to be built upon after the required setbacks and easements have been
provided.
(28) BUILDING CODE: All building regulations adopted under the Abilene Code of Ordinances.
(29) BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from grade at the front of the building to the highest point of a
flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel
roof.
(30) BUILDING LINE: A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance from there,
marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
(31) BUILDING OFFICIAL: That individual that is the head of the Building Inspection Division and who ensures
compliance with the Building Code of the City of Abilene, Texas, and with any applicable regulations within this LDC. This
definition also includes any designee of the Building Official.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 638/648
(32) BUILDING PERMIT: An instrument in writing signed by the Building Official or other designated responsible official
authorizing described construction on a particular lot.
General Definitions - C
(33) CALIPER: Diameter of the tree trunk measured at a specified height above the ground.
(34) CARPORT and PATIO COVERS (RESIDENTIAL and NONRESIDENTIAL): A roofed structure, open on a minimum
of two and three-fourths (2-3/4) sides when attached to the primary structure and open on three (3) sides when detached from
the primary structure. The roof may be supported by posts, columns or piers. Siding may extend down a maximum of two feet
(2') from the roof and still be considered open on that side.
(35) CENTERLINE, STREETS OR ALLEYS: An imaginary line drawn midway between the bounding right-of-way lines
of a street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines are irregular, the centerline is be determined by the City Engineer.
(36) CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A written instrument executed by the Building Official authorizing a described use
of a lot or building as set forth in the Building Code and in this LDC within in Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 4 [Division 3].
(37) CITY: The City of Abilene, Texas.
(38) CITY ENGINEER: The Abilene City Engineer, or an authorized representative.
(39) CITY MANAGER: That person holding the office of City Manager under the terms of the Abilene Charter, or an
authorized representative.
(40) CITY PLANNER: See Director of Planning.
(41) CITY SECRETARY: That person holding the office of City Secretary under the terms of the Abilene Charter, or an
authorized representative.
(42) CITY STANDARDS: All of the City's technical standards and specifications that apply to development, together with
all tables, drawings, and other attachments. All City standards described or referred to in this Land Development Code are
adopted by reference and are a part of this Land Development Code in the same way as if they were set out at length herein.
See also the 2001 City of Abilene Standard Specifications for Construction (ASSC).
(43) CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A method of development for land that permits variation in lot sizes without an increase
in the overall density of population or development.
(44) CO-LOCATION: The use of a single support structure and/or site by more than one communications provider.
(45) COMMENCE(ING) CONSTRUCTION: The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or
excavating activities or other construction or development.
(46) COMMERCIAL or BUSINESS MESSAGE: A message that contains or conveys commercial context or information or
advertising for any business, commodity, service, entertainment, product or other attraction or event.
(47) COMMERCIAL VEHICLE/TRUCK: See Heavy Load Vehicle definition herein.
(48) COMMISSION: The City of Abilene Planning and Zoning Commission.
(49) COMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS (NONCOMMERCIAL/AMATEUR): The transmission, retransmission or
reception of radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals for private or personal use, and not for the purpose of
operating a business and/or for financial gain.
(50) COMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS (COMMERCIAL): The transmission, retransmission, or reception of radio,
television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals primarily for the purpose of operating a business and/or for financial gain.
(51) COMPATIBILITY: The characteristics of different land uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other
in harmony and without conflict.
(52) COMPLETE APPLICATION: An application that meets the standards of Chapter 1, Article 2, Division 1, Section
1.2.1.2 of this LDC, and has been deemed complete by the City in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 245, or successor statute.
(53) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The City of Abilene's long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a
community and including analysis and recommendations concerning the community's population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities and land use. This includes any portion thereof that is separately adopted and any
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 639/648
(54) CONCEPT PLAN: A component of the regulations for a Planned Development District that complies with the
requirements of Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 2 [Chapter 2, Article 3, Division 4] of this Land Development Code that
illustrates elements of the proposed Planned Development District, such as the location and arrangement of uses, the
relationship of such uses to base zoning districts, development phasing, planned public improvements, open space, proposed
amenities and the overall design of the development.
(55) CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP): A permit authorizing the establishment of a use that may be suitable only in
certain locations in a zoning district, or that is allowed only when subject to standards and conditions that assure compatibility
with adjoining uses. Such permit complies with Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 3 [Chapter 1, Article 4, Division 3] of this LDC,
and related regulations of uses are within Chapter 2, Article 5 [Article 4], Division 2 (Land Use Matrix) of this LDC.
(56) CONSERVATION DISTRICT: See Neighborhood Conservation District.
(57) CONSTRUCTION: With respect to a building, construction is the assembly of materials into a structure, or the
rehabilitation or replacement of a structure which has been damaged, altered or removed or which is proposed to be altered or
removed to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the area of the structure at the time of the damage, alteration or
removal. For the purposes of this definition, construction includes the installation of a parking lot.
(58) CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The drawings and technical specifications that conform to Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 8
of this LDC. Construction plans, including bid documents and contract conditions, where applicable, provide a graphic and
written description of the character and scope of the work to be performed in construction of a development.
(59) CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A historic property that is considered to be historically significant by local, State, or
Federal governments that rank historic properties and generally follow the guidelines of the National Park Service,
Department of the Interior, for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
(60) CORNER LOT: See Lot, Corner.
(61) COUNCIL: The City of Abilene City Council.
(62) COVERAGE: The percent of a lot area which is covered by a roof, floor, or other structure, which is not open to the
sky, and which prevents the infiltration of water into the soil.
a. Roof eaves extending two feet (2') and ordinary projections from the building not exceeding twelve inches (12") are
not considered in computing coverage.
b. Wooden decking - planks of wood with gaps (approximately 1/4 inch) in between - is not considered in computing
coverage.
c. Any outside area that is covered with a roof structure, whether fully enclosed or not, are considered in computing
coverage.
d. Typical outdoor surfaces that do not allow for water infiltration, such as exposed aggregate surfacing or concrete
porches, are considered in computing coverage.
e. Swimming pools are not considered in computing coverage.
(63) CUL-DE-SAC: A local street having one (1) inlet/outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a
vehicular turnaround.
General Definitions - D
(64) DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre; the relationship of dwelling units or other buildings to the area of
the lot upon which such dwellings or other buildings are located or erected.
(65) DEPTH OF LOT: See Lot Depth.
(66) DEVELOPED AREA: That portion of a plot or parcel upon which a building, structure, pavement or other
improvements have been placed.
(67) DEVELOPER: An individual, partnership, corporation or governmental entity undertaking the division or
improvement of land and other activities covered by this Land Development Code, including the preparation of a plat showing
the layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. The term “developer” is intended to include the term
“subdivider.”
(68) DEVELOPMENT: Initiation of any activities related to the platting of land or construction of buildings or structures,
the construction of impervious surfaces (e.g., parking lots), the installation of utilities, roadways, drainage facilities or other
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 640/648
infrastructure; or any disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land in preparation for such construction activities,
including without limitation removal of vegetation, grading, clearing, filling, or removal of soil.
(69) DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION: Either a petition for a legislative decision, such as a zoning amendment, or an
application for a development permit, such as a plat.
(70) DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A decision by the Commission, Board or responsible official designated by this LDC,
acting in an administrative or quasi-judicial capacity, that authorizes the holder of the permit to undertake one or more
development activities or to file further applications needed to initiate or continue development activities authorized under the
Land Development Code. The filing of a complete application for a development permit may or may not stay the City from
adopting new standards applicable to the permit or any subordinate permit, depending on the nature of the standards.
(71) DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: All regulations, design standards, requirements and restrictions that apply to a
development.
(72) DIRECTOR OF PLANNING: The Director of the City Department of Planning and Development Services, or an
authorized designee.
(73) DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Director of the City Department of Public Works, or an authorized designee.
(74) DISTRICT: A zoning district under this Land Development Code.
(75) DRIVEWAY: An entranceway serving primarily vehicles that allows for access to a lot or facility.
(76) DUMPSTER: See Refuse Container.
General Definitions - E
(77) EASEMENT: An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally and/or to a private entity.
(78) ENFORCING OFFICER: The designated official of the City of Abilene or his designated representative that ensures
that regulations are adhered to and standards required are met.
(79) ENGINEER: A person duly licensed under the Texas Engineering Practice Act to practice the profession of
engineering.
(80) ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriate, the administrator or other duly authorized official of that agency.
(81) ERECT: To construct, reconstruct, install or build.
(82) ETJ: Extraterritorial jurisdiction. See definition of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction herein.
(83) EXCAVATION: Any digging, trenching, scraping or other activity that disturbs natural soil or rock to a depth of two
feet (2') or more, other than soil disturbance incidental to the removal of trees or vegetation.
(84) EXTERIOR ALTERATION: Any change or addition to the dimensions, materials, configuration, character, or
appearance of [a structure or building] including the floor, exterior walls, columns, porches, doors, or windows of a structure
or building.
(85) EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION: The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality, which is
contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Abilene, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the
corporate limits of the City outward for the distances as may be stipulated in Chapter 42 of the Texas Local Government Code
in accordance with the population of the City of Abilene, and in which area the City may enjoin violation of certain provisions
of this Land Development Code.
General Definitions - F
(86) FACADE: The entire area of a side (the elevation) of a building or structure that extends from ground level to the top
of a parapet, wall or eave(s) and from one corner to another. The area of a facade is defined by the outer limits of all of its
visible exterior elements.
(87) FAMILY: Any number of persons living together as a single housekeeping unit who are related by blood, legal
adoption, or marriage, or not more than three (3) unrelated persons living as a single housekeeping unit, except for the
following instances:
a. Domestic servants, employed on the premises, may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or
families.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 641/648
b. No more than two (2) unrelated individuals may also room and/or board with a family composed wholly of related
individuals.
For four (4) or more roomers, see definition for Boarding and/or Rooming House. The term family shall not be
construed to mean a fraternity, sorority, club or institutional group.
(88) FINAL PLAT: The plat of a subdivision for which platting is required which, when authorized, submitted and
approved as regulated by Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 3 [Division 4] of this Land Development Code, will be recorded in the
official public records.
(89) FLOOR AREA: The square footage of total floor area of all floors (all stories) within a building or buildings on a lot,
measured from the interior face of exterior walls.
(90) FLOOR AREA RATIO: The total floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area. Any
maximum FAR permitted shall be calculated by dividing the gross square footage of the building(s) to the net (after right-ofway
dedication) area of the lot (measured in square feet). Any below-grade mechanical rooms, parking garages, or other nonoccupied
areas shall not be included in the gross square footage of the building(s) for the purposes of this calculation.
(91) FREEWAY: See definition of Street, Freeway.
(92) FRONT (OF A BUILDING): The side of a building on which the main entrance (front door) is located.
(93) FRONTAGE, LOT: The length of street frontage between property lines.
(94) FRONTAGE, STREET: The linear distance of the property line measured along all abutting street rights-of-way; the
length of all property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets measured along the line of the street, or if
the street is a dead-end, then the length of all property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the end of
the dead-end street.
General Definitions - G
(95) GRADE: The average elevation of the highest and lowest elevation measured at the finished surface of the ground at
any of the exterior corners of the building or structure.
(96) GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): Total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use including
basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any; expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions
and from outside wall faces.
(97) GROUNDCOVER: A spreading plant, including sods and grasses less than 18 inches in height, used mainly for
erosion control.
(98) [no text]
General Definitions - H
(99) HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE: A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended Gross Vehicle Weight
(GVW) of greater than 16,000 pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles (originally manufactured as RVs,
not converted), tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term “truck” shall be construed to mean “Heavy
Load Vehicle” unless specifically stated otherwise.
(100) HEIGHT (OF AN ANTENNA OR TOWER): The distance measured from the finished grade of the lot or parcel to
the highest point on the support structure or other structure, including the base pad and any antennae. Also see Chapter 2,
Article 5 [Article 4], Division 6, Telecommunications Towers and Antennas.
(101) HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY: An overlay zoning district that promotes historic preservation in business
districts and neighborhoods. It can be for individual sites, buildings, structures, objects, and districts. Property that has this
zoning may be eligible for a City property tax reduction (refer to the Abilene City Code). Like in any overlay district, the base
zoning regulations remain the same and are enforceable in addition to the Historic District Overlay. Refer to Chapter 2,
Section 2.4.4.3 [2.3.4.4] for specific information on Abilene's Historic Overlay District.
(102) HISTORIC SURVEY: For the purposes of this LDC, this term shall mean a survey initiated and/or approved by
Federal, State or local government to determine what properties from a specific time period or geographic area are considered
historically significant. A survey may rate (high, medium, low priority) a historic property or simply list them. A survey
usually attempts to date buildings or may provide other information.
General Definitions - I
(103) IMPERVIOUS COVER: See Coverage.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 642/648
(104) IMPROVED LOT OR TRACT: A lot or tract that has a structure or other improvement on it that causes an
impervious coverage of the soil under the structure or improvement.
(105) INTERESTED PERSON: A person who is impacted by a final decision of the City to the extent that such impact
exceeds the impact of the decision on a member of the general public. An interested person may include any officer or agency
of the City.
General Definitions - J
(None included.)
General Definitions - K
(None included.)
General Definitions - L
(106) LANDMARK: Any area, site, structure, district, building, or object which has special historical, architectural or
cultural interest, reflects the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the community and which the City Council
determines shall be preserved in the interests of the general welfare of the community.
(107) LANDSCAPING: An area devoted to and maintained predominantly with living plant material including lawn,
groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such
as fountains, paved or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements.
Also may be referred to as Landscaped Area.
(108) LOT: An undivided tract or parcel of land shown and designated with a tract or lot number on a duly recorded
subdivision or development plat. A lot, which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract,
lot number, or symbol in a duly approved plat that has been properly filed of record, is or may be offered for sale, conveyance,
transfer or development.
(109) LOT AREA: The square foot area or the acreage of a lot within the bounding property lines and exclusive of
dedicated streets and alleys, but may include easements.
(110) LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection(s).
(111) LOT COVERAGE: See Coverage.
(112) LOT DEPTH - The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear (the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot line).
(113) LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE: Any lot, not a corner lot, with frontage on two streets that are essentially parallel to
each other or are within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to each other.
(114) LOT, FLAG-SHAPED: An irregularly shaped lot that takes its sole access via a long, narrow strip of land connecting
the principal building site to a public street.
(115) LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
(116) LOT, KEYED: Any lot having an essentially trapezoidal shape, with a rear boundary greater in width than the front
boundary and located on a street curve having a centerline radius less than two hundred and fifty feet (250').
(117) LOT LINE: A property (ownership) boundary of a lot, as defined herein.
(118) LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear of the required front yard.
General Definitions - M
(119) MINOR PLAT: A plat dividing land into no more than four (4) lots that meets the submission and approval
requirements of Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 6 [Division 5] of this Land Development Code.
(120) MOBILE RECREATION EQUIPMENT: Any vacation travel trailer, as defined herein this chapter, as well as any
boat; any trailer designed or intended by its manufacturer primarily for transportation of a boat; and any semi-trailer or selfpropelled
motor vehicle which is designed, constructed and equipped for human habitation as a temporary dwelling place or
sleeping place.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 643/648
General Definitions - N
(121) NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT: A district established to provide a means of preserving an area's
distinctive atmosphere or character by protecting or enhancing its significant architectural or cultural attributes. Refer to
Chapter 2, Section 2.4.4.2 [2.3.4.3] for specific information on Abilene's Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) zoning
district.
(122) NONCONFORMING: A use or structure was lawful at the time it was begun, but could not presently be so begun,
used, or constructed under current LDC regulations.
(123) NONCONFORMING LOT: Any platted lot that does not conform with the regulations of this Code and that is
regulated by Chapter 2, Article 7 [Article 6], Division 2, and specifically Section 2.7.2.3 [2.6.2.3].
(124) NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure, building or physical improvement existing on land which does
not conform to the regulations, relative to its size, height or location, within the zoning district in which it is located.
(125) NONCONFORMING USE: Any activity or use of land which was lawful prior to the enactment of this LDC, which
does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(126) NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A noncontributing property is a property that is considered not to be
historically significant by local, State, or Federal governments that rank historic properties and generally follow the guidelines
of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. A
noncontributing property would not meet one or more to [of] the criteria in Section 2.4.4.3(c) [2.3.4.4(c)] (Historic Overlay
District criteria) of this LDC.
General Definitions - O
(127) OCCUPANCY: Any utilization of real property.
(128) OFFICIAL FILING DATE: The date an applicant delivers the application or plan to the City or deposits the
application or plan with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City with all required fees and
documents as stated on the application form, as described by Section 1.2.1.4 of this LDC. The official filing date is also
subject to complete application provisions within this LDC; see the definition of Complete Application as well as
requirements within Section 1.2.1.2 of this LDC.
(129) OPEN SPACE RATIO/PERCENTAGE: The square foot amount of open space for each square foot of floor area
within lot boundaries. This may be expressed as a percentage of open space within lot boundaries.
(130) OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT: A zoning district that establishes regulations that combine with the regulations of
an underlying (base) zoning district. The purposes of an overlay district shall be to prohibit uses otherwise allowed in the base
district, to establish additional or different conditions for such uses, or to authorize special uses, together with standards for
such uses, not otherwise allowed in the base district. Overlay zones shall be designated in the same manner and are subject to
the same rezoning procedures as any zoning district.
General Definitions - P
(131) PARKING AREA: An area containing multiple parking spaces together with accompanying maneuvering area and
driveway access, usually off-street and always composed of all-weather surface material, for the storage of motor vehicles.
Parking in the area may be free, may be for compensation, or may be provided as an accommodation for clients or customers.
(132) PARKING SPACE: Generally, a storage area or stall for parking of an individual motor vehicle. An off-street parking
space is one not located on a dedicated right-of-way, but is instead characterized by an all-weather surface together with an allweather
driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley. An on-street parking space is one that may be located
along a dedicated right-of-way in a designated location.
(133) PARKWAY: That portion of the public right-of-way lying primarily between the edge of the pavement or curb and the
private property line.
(134) PERMITTED USE: A use specifically allowed in one (1) or more of the various zoning districts by right, meaning
that no zoning amendment is necessary to allow the use within a designated zoning district. This term does not include uses
permitted with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).
(135) PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Standards specified for the operating characteristics of different activities and
related to noise, smoke, airborne particulate matters, odors, toxic and noxious matter, glare, exterior illumination, and
vibration.
(136) PERSON: A human being, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns and also includes a firm, partnership, or
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 644/648
(137) PERSONAL PROPERTY: For the purpose of regulating garage sales, the term shall mean property which is owned,
utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her household and acquired in the normal course of living or
maintaining a residence. The term does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
(138) PETITION FOR A LEGISLATIVE DECISION: A request for approval of an action authorized under this Land
Development Code requiring action by the City Council acting in its legislative capacity.
(139) PETITION FOR CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING STATUS: A request by a property owner to the City of Abilene
Board of Adjustment (BOA) under Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 5 [Chapter 2, Article 6, Division 3] of this Land
Development Code for a change in the status of a nonconforming use or structure to allow for modification to the use or
property owned.
(140) PETITION FOR RELIEF FROM DEDICATION OR CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENT: A request for relief from
a requirement imposed under this Land Development Code to dedicate or construct a public improvement based on
constitutional standards, and that is reviewed and decided under Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 2 of this Land Development
Code.
(141) PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT: A land development project comprehensively planned which permits
flexibility in building siting, mixtures of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant
natural features. Such district adheres to the standards of Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 2 [Chapter 2, Article 3, Division 4] of
this LDC.
(142) PLANNING DIRECTOR: The Director of Planning as stated in Section 85 of the City Charter of Abilene.
(143) PLAT: A map, drawing, chart or plan showing the exact layout and proposed construction of a proposed development
into one or more lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, commercial or industrial sites, easements, alleys and/or any other
elements as required by this Land Development Code and which a subdivider shall submit for approval in accordance with this
Land Development Code.
(144) PORCH: A roofed space open on three (3) sides, one (1) or more stories in height, the roof of which is an extension of
the roof of a building to which the porch is attached. The purpose of such space is to shelter people or objects, not including
vehicles, from the sun, rain and general weather.
(145) PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The initial plat for a subdivision to be developed in phases that delineates
the sequence and timing of development within the proposed subdivision, and that is reviewed and decided under Chapter 3,
Article 1, Division 2 [sic] of this Land Development Code.
(146) PRELIMINARY PLAT: A plat that illustrates and thereby assures the general layout of a proposed subdivision, the
adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the proposed subdivision, and the overall compliance of the land division with
applicable requirements of the Land Development Code and that is reviewed and decided prior to approval of a Final Plat.
This type of plat is authorized under Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 3 of this Land Development Code.
(147) PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land used or intended to be used, wholly or in part, as a public street, alley,
crosswalk way, sidewalk, path or drainageway.
(148) PUBLIC VIEW: Areas that can be seen from any public street.
General Definitions - Q
(None included.)
General Definitions - R
(149) RADIO, TELEVISION OR MICROWAVE TOWER: See “Antenna, Microwave Reflector & Antenna Support
Structure.”
(150) RECORD DRAWINGS: See As-Built/Record Drawings.
(151) RECORDED PLAT: A plat that has been finally approved by the City and that has been filed with the applicable
County after meeting all City requirements for recordation under Chapter 3, Article 1, Division 4 of this Land Development
Code.
(152) RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Refer to Vacation Travel Trailer.
(153) REFUSE CONTAINER: Any container used for the temporary storage of routinely collected waste that is specifically
designed to be emptied by heavy machinery. Also may be referred to as a dumpster or trash receptacle.
(154) REMAINDER TRACT: Land that is part of a larger parcel that is not subject to a subdivision plat affecting the parcel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 645/648
(155) RESIDENCE: A building occupied as the dwelling place of one (1) or more persons in which the use and
management of sleeping quarters, all appliances for cooking, ventilating, heating, or lighting are under one (1) control,
including any type of dwelling defined herein.
(156) RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL: The City staff person who has been designated to accept a type of development
application for filing, to review and make recommendations concerning such applications, and where authorized, to initially
decide such applications, to initiate enforcement actions, and to take all other actions necessary for administration of the
provisions of this Land Development Code with respect to such development applications. Also includes any designee of the
designated City staff person.
(157) RETAIL TRADE: The sale of commodities in relatively small quantities directly to consumers.
General Definitions - S
(158) SCREENING: Fencing, walls, planted berms, or densely planted vegetation which acts as a buffer or visibility.
(159) SERVICE: Activity which involves the provision of useful labor to supply some public demand, but does not produce
a tangible commodity.
(160) SETBACK LINE: A line defining an area on the lot between the property line and the building line within which no
building shall be constructed, encroach or project, except as specifically authorized in an adopted City ordinance or within this
LDC.
a. Exterior Side Setback Line: A side setback adjacent to a street right-of-way line.
b. Front Setback Line: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line which the building takes its primary access from
and faces.
c. Interior Side Setback Line: A side setback that is not adjacent to a street right-of-way.
d. Side Setback Line: A line parallel to an adjacent lot, property line, or street right-of-way on a corner lot, up to
which the building sides.
e. Rear Setback Line: A line parallel to an adjacent lot, alley or street, for double-frontage lots, to which the building
backs up and from which it has its rear or secondary access.
(161) SIGNIFICANT ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: That quality in buildings and structures, or parts thereof, which
represents characteristics of a style or period of design and construction and which reflect, through integrity of location,
design, materials, and workmanship, and the community's heritage, including its historical, architectural and cultural values.
(162) SITE: A tract of property that is the subject of a development application.
(163) SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The final step of the development process within a PD district, if required by the
ordinance adopting the PD. Refer to Section 2.2.2.10 [2.3.4.5] of this LDC.
(164) SITE PLAN: A scaled and detailed drawing that conforms to the requirements of this LDC, specifically Chapter 4,
Article 1, Division 1 [Division 2], and that shows the roads, parking, footprints of all buildings, existing trees, proposed
landscaping, parkland, open space, grading and drainage, and similar features needed to verify compliance with the City's
approved Comprehensive Plan and development standards.
(165) SITE PREPARATION PERMIT: A permit that is issued under Chapter 4, Article 1, Division 2, Section 4.1.2.2
[4.1.3.2] of this Land Development Code, that authorizes site preparatory activities other than construction or placement of a
structure on the land under one or more site plans and that, upon approval, authorizes the property owner to apply for a
construction permit.
(166) SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A modification of zoning standards authorized by the City Board of Adjustment that is
applicable to particular types of development within any zoning district in a manner consistent with the overall intent of the
zoning regulations and for which express standards are prescribed in Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 5, Section 2.2.5.1 [1.4.4.1]
of this LDC.
(167) STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above
it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling.
(168) STREET: The entire width between property lines when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter
of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic. This definition shall include public as well as private streets. An “Alley” is not
considered to be a street, and is separately defined herein.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 646/648
(169) STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, that has a permanent
location on the ground in some definite manner, and that is covered by a roof. Examples include buildings, sheds, cabins,
mobile homes and other similar items. Also see Building.
(170) SUBDIVIDE:
a. Is the following when done for the purpose of sale or building development:
1. The division of any tract of land into two (2) or more tracts or lots; or
2. The assembly of two (2) or more tracts of land into one (1) tract or lot.
b. Is the following with regard to changes to a recorded plat:
1. A resubdivision of all or part of the subdivision;
2. Any change of lot size or lot lines; or
3. The relocation of any street.
(171) SUBDIVIDER: Any person or any agent of the person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision, as that term is defined in this section. In any event, the term “subdivider”‘ is restricted to include only the owner,
equitable owner or authorized agent of the owner or equitable owner of land to be subdivided.
(172) SUBDIVISION: Pertaining to land for which a plat has been recorded, subdivision means an area of subdivided lots;
pertaining to the act of subdividing land, see the definition of Subdivide herein.
(173) SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: The total of all repairs, reconstruction or improvements of a structure which have
occurred less than twelve (12) months prior to application for a permit for a proposed repair, reconstruction, or improvement;
which increases the floor area of an existing structure by fifty percent (50%) or more, or the cost of which equals fifty percent
(50%) or more of the market value of an existing structure, either:
a. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
b. If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
(174) SURVEYOR: A licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional land surveyor, as authorized by State
statutes, to practice the profession of surveying.
General Definitions - T
(175) TCEQ: The acronym for the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
(176) TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, TOWER, OR STRUCTURE: See “Antenna, Microwave Reflector &
Antenna Support Structure.”
(177) TEXAS LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE (TLGC): The legislative statutes of State of Texas, as amended, that
involve various rules and laws governing the functioning of municipalities, including zoning and subdivision regulations.
(178) THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR: The primary road within the boundaries of the Corridor Overlay District (the
regulations for this district are contained within Chapter 2, Article 4, Division 4).
(179) TIE-DOWN: Any device designed for the purpose of anchoring a mobile home or manufactured home to ground
anchors, as required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, Chapter 1201.
(180) TEMPORARY/MOBILE ANTENNA: An antenna and any associated support structure or equipment, including, but
not limited to, a support pole, a vehicle that is placed and/or used on a temporary basis only not intended to be permanent,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 647/648
usually in conjunction with a special event, news coverage or emergency situation, or in case of equipment failure or
temporary augmentation of permanent communications equipment.
(181) TREE, CANOPY: Any self-supporting woody plant with one well-defined trunk and a distinct and definite formed
crown which attains a height of at least twenty feet (20" [sic]).
(182) TREE, EXISTING: Any self-supporting woody plant with a caliper of two inches (2") in diameter or greater which is
in healthy condition.
(183) TREE, NON-CANOPY: Any self-supporting woody plant with a two-inch (2") caliper and one (1) or more trunks
which attains a height of at least ten feet (10').
(184) TRUCK: See Heavy Load Vehicle.
(185) TXDOT: The acronym for the Texas Department of Transportation.
General Definitions - U
(186) UTILITY: A business that provides an essential commodity or service, such as electric, gas transmission, and local
telephone, and that is generally under government regulations.
General Definitions - V
(187) VARIANCE: Authorization to deviate from or vary one or more standards applicable to a development application
that is reviewed and decided under Chapter 2, Article 2, Division 5, Section 2.2.5.2 [1.4.4.2] of this Land Development Code.
(188) VESTED RIGHTS PETITION: A request for relief from one or more standards of this Land Development Code
based on an assertion that the petitioner has acquired a vested right requiring the City to review and decide the application
under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the standards of this Land Development Code. Such petition is regulated
under Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 3.
(189) VIOLATION: The failure of a use, structure or other development to fully comply with this Land Development Code.
General Definitions - W
(190) WAIVER: Authorization to deviate from or vary one or more standards applicable to a development application; such
authorization is applied for, reviewed, and decided under Chapter 1, Article 3, Division 4 of this Land Development Code.
(191) WATER STORAGE: {x} Impounded surface water areas or surface tanks used for storage.
(192) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER OR STRUCTURE: See “Antenna, Microwave Reflector & Antenna
Support Structure.”
General Definitions - X
(None included.)
General Definitions - Y
(193) YARD: Open space on the lot or building plot on which a building is situated, between the property line and the
setback line, which is open and unobstructed to the sky by any structure except as herein provided.
(194) YARD, FRONT: The open (unoccupied, unobstructed) space located in front of the front building line of the principal
building(s), calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the front building line of the
principal building(s). Refer to Chapter 2, Article 6 [Article 5], Division 1, Figure 2-1 [Figure 2-2], for a diagram related to this
definition.
(195) YARD, PRIVATE: An open space within a residential lot, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
other than a porch.
(196) YARD, REAR: The open space (unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory buildings or dwellings) located
behind the rear building line of the principal building(s), calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the rear
property line and the rear building line of the principal building(s). Refer to Chapter 2, Article 6 [Article 5], Division 1, Figure
2-1 [Figure 2-2], for a diagram related to this definition.
(197) YARD, SIDE: The open (unoccupied, unobstructed) space located on either side of the principal building(s),
calculated as the minimum horizontal distance between the side property line and the side building line of the principal
building(s). Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line is a side lot line. Where a lot has only three (3) lot lines, those lot
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 648/648
lines which do not front upon a street shall be deemed side lot lines. Refer to Chapter 2, Article 6 [Article 5], SDivision 1,
Figure 2-1 [Figure 2-2], for a diagram related to this definition.
General Definitions - Z
(198) ZONING DISTRICT: A classification within which the regulations specified are uniform and which is assigned to a
particular area of the City by delineation upon the Zoning District Map, which is a part of this LDC.
(199) ZONING DISTRICT MAP: The officially certified map or maps, on which the boundaries of the various zoning
districts are shown, and which are an integral part of the zoning regulations of this LDC.
(Ord. No. 8-2010, pt. 1 (Exh. A), 4-22-10)