7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/225
City of Abernathy
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 8
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 599
adopted 10/8/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Abernathy, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Abernathy, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/225
City and town. Each means the City of Abernathy, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Abernathy, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Hale and/or the County of Lubbock,
Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/225
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/225
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of
the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/225
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Form of government; name of city and governing body
(a) The city hereby changes to a type A general-law municipality.
(b) A copy of the ordinance codified in this section shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing body of
the city, and a copy of the same, signed by the mayor and attested by the secretary under the corporate seal, shall
be filed in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the city is situated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/225
(c) The official name of the city shall hereafter be known as the City of Abernathy, Texas, and its governing
body shall hereafter be known as the city council.
(1996 Code, art. 1.200)
State law reference–Type A form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 5.001; sec. 22.001 et seq.
Secs. 1.02.002–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.031 Notice requirements
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal
injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or, in the event the
injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in
writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person
or property was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the
claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according
to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part
thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the
damage or any part thereof.
(1996 Code, art. 1.800(a))
Sec. 1.02.032 Refusal required before suit
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein
shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for
redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
council refused. (1996 Code, art. 1.800(b))
Sec. 1.02.033 Service of notices
All notices required by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city manager at the following
location:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/225
City Hall
811 Ave. D.
Abernathy, Texas 79311
and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above.
(1996 Code, art. 1.800(c))
Sec. 1.02.034 Waiver of provisions
Neither the mayor, a city council member, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority
to waive any of the provisions of this division. (1996 Code, art. 1.800(d))
Sec. 1.02.035 Notice to be sworn
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries
or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall
not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as
a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(1996 Code, art. 1.800(e))
Sec. 1.02.036 Exceptions
The notice provisions required herein shall not be applicable in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate
good cause, actual notice by the city, or civil rights violations. (1996 Code, art. 1.800(f))
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 1.03.001 Time and place of meetings
The city council shall hold a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on the second Monday of every month. All meetings
of the council shall be held in the council chamber in the city hall, but the council may adjourn a meeting to any
other place in the city. (1996 Code, art. 1.300)
State law reference–Meetings of governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.038.
ARTICLE 1.04 CITY OFFICERS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Manager*
Sec. 1.04.031 Appointment
The governing body of the city shall appoint a city manager for the city, who shall be the administrative head of
the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the governing body. (1996 Code, sec. 8.101)
State law reference–Appointment of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.026.
Sec. 1.04.032 Term of office
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/225
The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the
governing body of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.102)
State law reference–Term of office of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.028.
Sec. 1.04.033 Absence or disability
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the governing body shall designate some properly qualified
person to perform the duties of said office. (1996 Code, sec. 8.103)
Sec. 1.04.034 Powers and duties; purchasing
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be:
(1) To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to
the governing body for the efficient administration of its affairs.
(2) To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(3) With the advice of the governing body of the city, to appoint and remove all heads of
departments. He shall have the power to appoint or remove all subordinate employees.
(4) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the governing body or that
may hereafter be created by the governing body of the city.
(5) To attend all meetings of the governing body with the right to take part in the discussion, but
having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of said governing body.
(6) To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city and its inhabitants in any
public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation
thereof to call the same to the attention of the governing body.
(7) To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the governing body, prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as
much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of
each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures.
(8) The city manager, in addition to the foregoing subsection (7), shall make and file a budget as
required by state law.
(9) To make a full written report to the governing body as soon after the close of each month's
accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding
month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly
allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the governing body fully
advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
(10) (A) To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all merchandise, material
and supplies needed by the city, and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such
supplies shall be kept and from which same shall be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules
and regulations governing requisitions and transaction of business between himself as such
purchasing agent and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as the
governing body may approve.
(B) It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to give opportunity for competition on
purchases and sales, except when the nature of the purchase or sale is such that competition is
impossible or impracticable. All purchases in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/225
except of real estate, or rights or easements therein, shall be by contract to the lowest
responsible bidder, and all sales in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), except real estate
or rights or easements therein, shall be made to the highest bidder after public notice and the
receipt of sealed bids, unless the governing body, by ordinance, determines that it is impossible
or impracticable to purchase or sell in such manner. All sealed bids received shall be opened in
public and thereafter shall be subject to public inspection. The purchasing agent may reject all
bids and readvertise for new bids. The purchasing agent may require successful bidders to
furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their contract or conditioned upon
the payment of the wages and compensation of all laborers employed on work for which a
contract is made by the contractor, subcontractor, agent or any other person, or condition for
both. The purchasing agent shall not let any contract for periods exceeding one year for street
lighting, public improvements, labor or supplies.
(C) In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city manager may,
with the consent of the governing body, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of
repairing damages caused by said accident or avoiding said public emergency; but immediately
afterwards, he shall file with the mayor a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity
of such action together with an itemized account of all expenditures.
(11) To recommend to the governing body the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and
subordinate employee of the city, and it shall be the duty of the governing body to pass ordinances or
resolutions, from time to time, fixing rates of compensation.
(12) To recommend to the governing body, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
(13) To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the
governing body of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.104)
State law reference–Powers and duties of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.029.
Sec. 1.04.035 Compensation; bond
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the governing body shall fix from time to time by
ordinance and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the governing body by ordinance, the
premium to be paid by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.105)
Secs. 1.04.036–1.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. City Secretary
Sec. 1.04.061 Duties; compensation; bond
It shall be the duty of the city secretary to attend all meetings of the city council and keep accurate minutes and
records of the proceedings thereof in a book provided for that purpose, and to engross and enroll all laws,
ordinances and resolutions of the city council; to keep a corporate seal; to take care of, preserve and keep in
order all books, records, maps, papers, documents and files which have been submitted to the city council; to
countersign all commissions issued by the city officers and all licenses issued, and to keep a record or register
thereof, and to make all notices required under resolution or ordinance of the city. He shall draw all warrants on
the city funds and moneys as directed by the city council and countersign the same and keep an accurate account
thereof in books provided for that purpose; he shall also serve and discharge the duties of city treasurer and will
keep and preserve all moneys belonging to the city in the depositories, and shall draw checks against the same
only when authorized by the order of the city council; he shall keep in books regular accounts and receipts and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/225
disbursements of the city, showing separately, under proper head of each of said accounts, each cause of receipts
and disbursements, and he shall also keep accounts with each person, crediting amounts allowed by proper
authority and specifying the particular transaction to which such entries apply. He shall also keep a register of
bonds and bills issued by the city, and all evidences of debt due and payable to, noting particulars thereof, and all
facts connected therewith as they occur. He shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city and he shall
perform all such duties as may be required of him by law or ordinance, resolution or order of the city council. He
shall also serve as ex officio clerk of the municipal court and keep all the records of said court. He shall receive
such salary, payable in monthly installments, as may be fixed by the city council. He shall give bond with good
security, payable to the city, in such amounts as the city council may deem necessary, and their salaries to be
paid by the city. (1996 Code, art. 8.100.5)
State law reference–Powers and duties of city secretary, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.073.
ARTICLE 1.05 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.05.001–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission*
Sec. 1.05.031 Created; membership
There is hereby created and established for the city a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed
of five (5) members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters of the city, all of
whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the governing body, to serve for terms of one
(1) year. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original
appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and in the
same manner. Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the governing
body, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation. (1996 Code, sec. 12.201)
Sec. 1.05.032 Officers; expenditures; bylaws
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and shall
have power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of
the commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses, provided that the cost of such
services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the use of the
commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government, which
shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and same shall be subject to approval
by the council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(1) Regular and special meetings, open to the public;
(2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public;
(3) Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually; and
(4) The holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.202)
Sec. 1.05.033 Powers and duties; preparation of master plan and zoning ordinance
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/225
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for
adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality
and its environs, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance for
zoning the city in accordance with chapter 283, Acts of the Regular Session of the Legislature, 1927 (Texas
Local Government Code, chapter 211). The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or state law. (1996 Code, sec. 12.203)
ARTICLE 1.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.06.001 Operational organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.701)
Sec. 1.06.002 Powers and duties of director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization, as
well as the training of emergency management personnel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/225
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (Texas Government Code
chapter 418).
(1996 Code, sec. 1.702)
Sec. 1.06.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (1996 Code, sec. 1.703)
Sec. 1.06.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Hale in the formation of an
emergency management council for the County of Hale and shall have the authority to cooperate in the
preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management
insofar as said program may affect the city. (1996 Code, sec. 1.704)
Sec. 1.06.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1996 Code, sec. 1.705)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/225
Sec. 1.06.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1996 Code, sec. 1.706)
Sec. 1.06.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (1996 Code, sec. 1.707)
Sec. 1.06.008 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180 days.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.708)
ARTICLE 1.07 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.07.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1001)
Sec. 1.07.002 Additional definitions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/225
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.07.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.07.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1002)
Sec. 1.07.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.07.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city.
No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files,
or use of such records is prohibited. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1003)
Sec. 1.07.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from [their creation to] their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1004)
Sec. 1.07.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as
applicable. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1005)
Sec. 1.07.006 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/225
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those
records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1006)
Sec. 1.07.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties
in the records management program;
(11) Direct personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of
records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
city [records] is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/225
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel
with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government
Records Act.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1007)
Sec. 1.07.008 Adoption of records control schedules
The records management officer will file with the director and librarian a written declaration that the city has
adopted records control schedules for the city that comply with records retention schedules issued by the state
library and archives commission as provided by section 203.005(g), Local Government Code. (1996 Code, sec.
1.1008)
Sec. 1.07.009 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.07.008
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1009)
Sec. 1.07.010 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved [destruction]
authorization request. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1010)
Sec. 1.07.011 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all
microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer.
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for microfilming of city records, including
policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming
of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also
establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a
microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic
review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance
with commission rules. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1011)
ARTICLE 1.08 DISCRIMINATION
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/225
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.08.001–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.08.031 Declaration of policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures,
the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each
individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, or familial status and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on these
protected classes is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an
unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of
government to prevent.
Sec. 1.08.032 Definitions
As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
Director. The director of the human relations department or authorized assistant.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act which is unlawful under this division.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. A single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
Physical or mental handicap. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major
life activities.
Physical or mental impairment. Shall include:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs,
respiratory including speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and
lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
Senior adult. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/225
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
Sec. 1.08.033 Interpretation and effect
This division shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or
substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or
the federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted
to them [pursuant] to title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the federal Equal Credit
Opportunity Act. In construing this division, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by
federal court interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the federal Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate.
Sec. 1.08.034 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by [section 1.08.038] it shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(3) To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental
when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 1.08.035 Discrimination in housing financing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other
financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of such person or such persons
associated therewith or because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings
for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Sec. 1.08.036 Discrimination in providing brokerage service
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in or participation in any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/225
such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 1.08.037 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because such individual, group, or, business has complied with the provisions of this division or has
exercised in good faith rights under this division, or has enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because such
individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in
any manner in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director.
Sec. 1.08.038 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) Nothing in this division shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at
any one time;
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply
only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period;
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned
or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express [or] voluntary agreement, title to or any
right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time;
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of this division; but nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting
dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of
his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2)
or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five
(5) or more families.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/225
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status.
(d) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to
its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its
members.
(e) Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in
which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such
housing accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this division shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap or familial status.
(g) Nothing in this division shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether
located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of
dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that
said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental
dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the
tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this division.
Sec. 1.08.039 Violations
No person shall violate any provision of this division, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this
division.
Sec. 1.08.040 Enforcement
The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing
this division. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated
city employees.
Sec. 1.08.041 Complaints
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as
the “charging party”) may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall
identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and
shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall
prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
(b) The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General
and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act
of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed
pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(c) All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/225
the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein (hereinafter referred to as the
“respondent”) who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written
complaint.
(d) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer
oaths.
(e) If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to
believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint
has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in
his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person
aggrieved.
Sec. 1.08.042 Investigation and conciliation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt
and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes
accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the
charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the
provisions of this division. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not
come within the provisions of this division, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of
the reasons why it does not.
(b) If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory
housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged
offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of compliant, the director
shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by
informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing
practice, and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this division.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the
commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a
subsequent proceeding, without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(d) Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory
housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable
conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the
case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With such
recommendation of the director and the referral of the human relations commission, the director shall refer his
entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to
proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.
Sec. 1.08.043 Penalty
If a discriminatory housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal
court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty of $300.00 per violation.
(Ordinance 502 adopted 4/13/09)
ARTICLE 1.09 LIBRARY*
Division 1. Generally
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/225
Sec. 1.09.001 Department created
Pursuant to the provisions of this article, a department is hereby created within the framework of the
governmental organization of the city, which shall be known as the Abernathy city-county public library
department, and it shall function according to the laws of the state, the policies of the city and the provisions of
this enactment. (1996 Code, art. 8.400(a))
Sec. 1.09.002 Acceptance of gifts and donations
The city accepts all gifts and donations of books and equipment heretofore made for the city-county public
library, with grateful thanks to the donors both of books and time, and it is ordained that such books and
equipment, together with such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the books
and equipment of the city-county public library. (1996 Code, art. 8.400(b))
Sec. 1.09.003 Designation as community library
The city hereby accepts the designation of a community library as authorized by the state library and archives
commission, pursuant to the authority invested in the commission by the Texas Library Systems Act, House Bill
260, 1969, 61st Legislature, and also being known as V.T.C.A., Government Code, section 441.121 et seq. (1996
Code, art. 8.400(f))
Sec. 1.09.004 Membership in regional system
Such community library as herein designated shall be a member of the West Texas Major Resource System.
(1996 Code, art. 8.400(g))
Secs. 1.09.005–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Board of Trustees
Sec. 1.09.031 Created; powers and duties
There is hereby created the board of trustees, Abernathy city-county library, and such board shall administer and
supervise the operation of the city-county public library and any branches thereof as may be hereafter
established by the council, under the supervision and control of the city council. Such board may formulate such
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary for the orderly use of the library facilities and in governing the
performance of duties of the library employees and personnel. (1996 Code, art. 8.400(c))
Sec. 1.09.032 Membership
The board of trustees of the city-county public library shall consist of five (5) members, to be appointed by the
city council for the term of three (3) years; provided, however, that of the first five (5) appointments made under
this article, two (2) shall be appointed for three (3) years and two (2) shall be appointed for two (2) years and
one (1) shall be appointed for one (1) year and thereafter each one shall be appointed for three (3) years,
alternating years, one (1) selected and then two (2) and the next year two (2) followed by one (1) selected, not
more than two (2) going off the board any one (1) year. (1996 Code, art. 8.400(d))
Sec. 1.09.033 Finances
The board of trustees shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever; its finances shall be
handled in the same manner as any division of the city government. (1996 Code, art. 8.400(e))
ARTICLE 1.10 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 1.10.001 Title
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/225
This article shall be known and cited as the parks and recreation ordinance.
Sec. 1.10.002 Definitions
For the purpose of article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein:
Director. The city manager or person appointed by the city manager as parks and recreation director, or the
director's designee.
Park. A park, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city owned or used by the city, and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
Vehicle. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. This term shall
include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages, and for vehicles
used for emergency, police, or park purposes.
Sec. 1.10.003 Penalty; civil remedies; towing of vehicles
(a) Criminal penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, except where a different penalty has
been established by state law for such offense, and for any violation of any provision which governs public
health or sanitation, which shall be punished by a penalty of fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and
separate offense.
(b) Civil remedies. The criminal penalty provided in this section is independent of any other civil remedy
which may be available for any violation or threatened violation of any provision of this article.
(c) Towing of vehicles. Vehicles found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to towing at the
owner's expense without notice.
Sec. 1.10.004 Hours of operation
All parks shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Parks may be opened at other times at
the discretion of the director.
Sec. 1.10.005 Prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any one (1) or more of the following acts in a park:
(1) To remain, stay or loiter in any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, or remain, stay, or loiter in any park except during the posted hours of operation,
unless authorized by the director.
(2) To camp, sleep or stay overnight in any park unless authorized by the director in writing.
(3) To possess, bring in, or use any glass container in any area of a park.
(4) To possess or consume any alcoholic beverages.
(5) To make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, grills, braziers, fire pits or designated areas
provided for that purpose.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/225
(6) To swim, wade in or pollute the water of any pond, lake or stream except when authorized by
the director.
(7) To use or operate any motorboat, boat, or watercraft on any pond, lake, or water within any
park except when authorized by the director.
(8) To damage, move, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building,
monument, fence, bench, equipment or other structure, apparatus or property.
(9) To hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw any object at any animal,
reptile or bird, or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest
or young of any reptile or bird. Exception is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such
as rattlesnakes, coral snakes, or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight.
(10) To ride a horse or any other animal, except on vehicular roads.
(11) To ride, drive or park any motorcycle, automobile or other motorized vehicle (other than a
motor-assisted scooter) upon, over or across any park, curb, sidewalk, grass, lawn, or park land
except in designated areas or unless authorized by the director. This provision is not applicable to city
motor vehicles or emergency vehicles.
(12) To operate a vehicle in a park or in a park facility parking lot in an unsafe or reckless manner
or in such a way as to damage property.
(13) To allow a vehicle to remain unattended in a park facility parking lot for a period of more than
24 hours.
(14) To park or operate any truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or pole-trailer in a park facility
parking lot at any time, unless there on official business.
(15) To ignite or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn, within a park, any firecracker,
torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosive. This prohibition shall not apply to a fireworks
display as authorized and for which permission has been issued by the director.
(16) To carry a firearm, except those persons who are duly licensed by the state to carry a
concealed handgun in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Concealed Weapons Act, as
amended.
(17) To carry (unless permitted under subsection (16) above) or discharge firearms, BB guns, bows
and arrows, slingshots, blowguns, rockets or paintball guns unless authorized by the director.
(18) To hit golf balls except in designated areas.
(19) To distribute, post, place or erect any static or mobile advertising, handbill, circular, bill,
notice, paper or other advertising device.
(20) To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services except pursuant
to a written agreement with the city or by permission from the director.
(21) To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession, or to
circulate any petition of whatsoever kind or character.
(22) To enter an area posted as “closed” or to use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted
notices.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/225
(23) To conduct or participate in any tournament, camp, or organized sporting activity which has
not been specifically authorized by the director or which conflicts with a scheduled activity or event
authorized by the director.
(24) To construct, modify, or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent
or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands,
except when authorized by the director.
(25) To disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person, party, picnic, meeting, service, concert,
exercise or exhibition occupying any area or participating in any activity under authority of the city.
(26) To use, operate, or allow to be used or operated any device for the reproduction or
augmentation of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of persons within a
city park. The operation of any such sound-reproducing or augmentation device in such manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this subsection. For the sound to be plainly audible, words or phrases need
not be distinguishable; bass reverberations are sufficient. This prohibition shall not apply to citysponsored
entertainment events within parks.
(27) To participate or engage in any activity on any public park area when such activity will create
a danger to the public, or a public nuisance, or cause damage to public park property.
Sec. 1.10.006 Approval of organized events, meetings, etc.
(a) Use of park facilities, including but not limited to specific events, fields, and pavilions, for tournaments,
camps, organized sporting events, and games must be prescheduled with and approved by the director.
(b) The director shall have the authority to issue special permits or grant exceptions or waivers to any of the
terms of section 1.10.005 for authorized events and activities.
(c) No person shall advertise an event, meeting or activity or the time, permitted hours, or usage of any event,
meeting, or activity to be held or conducted in a park facility unless such event, meeting or activity and
advertisement of such event, meeting, or activity and the time, permitted hours, or usage has been approved by
the director.
Sec. 1.10.007 Responsibility for damages and cost of services
The person, group, organization or entity reserving the use of a park facility shall be responsible for all damages
to city property and for the cost of any park maintenance services or emergency or public safety services,
including police and fire, provided to, at or dispatched to the park facility as a result of such person's, group's or
organization's misuse or improper or unlawful use of the park facility.
Sec. 1.10.008 User fees
The city council may establish fees for the use of park and recreation facilities by resolution from time to time.
Said fees will be included in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 500 adopted 3/9/09)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/225
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
In this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning, unless the context indicates
otherwise:
Abandon. The dumping, deserting, or leaving of any animal on public or private property with the intent of
terminating any further responsibility for the animal; or failing to properly redeem any animal impounded or
quarantined by the city.
Adoption. The purchase of a dog or cat from the city for pet purposes.
Animal. Any living creature, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals,
reptiles, insects, fowls, and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal control officer. The chief of police or person(s) designated by the chief of police to represent and act for
the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Cat. A domesticated animal that is a member of the Felidae (feline) family, but does not include a lion, tiger,
bobcat, jaguar, panther, leopard, cougar, or other wild animal of this family or hybrids.
Collar. Any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used for a dog.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack which causes bodily injury to a person, and where the attack
occurred in a place other than the dog's enclosure, which was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from escaping on its own;
(2) Commits an unprovoked act which causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog will
attack and cause bodily injury to that person, and where the unprovoked act occurred in a place other
than the dog's enclosure, which was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from escaping on its own;
or
(3) Without provocation, has attacked and bitten another animal on one (1) previous occasion.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the Canidae (canine) family, but does not include a wolf, jackal,
fox or other wild animal of this family or hybrids.
Dog tethering. Using a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or
trolley system.
Ferret. A domestic member of the family Mustilidae, specifically Mustela putorius furo.
Fowl. Chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, geese, ducks, ostriches, emus or similar feathered animals, regardless
of age, sex or breed.
Guard dog. A dog which has been trained for the purpose of protecting property by a guard dog company which
is required to be licensed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1702, as amended.
Hybrid. A product of the mating of two (2) different species of animals, regardless of the number of generations
born since the original mating.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/225
Licensed veterinarian. A person licensed to practice veterinarian medicine.
Livestock. Any horses, mules, donkeys, ponies, cattle, bulls, sheep, goats, hogs, and pigs of any and all kinds,
regardless of sex.
Local rabies control authority. The person designated by the city council in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health
and Safety Code section 826.017.
Miniature swine. Any member of the swine family which has, through selective breeding, been genetically
manipulated so as to attain a maximum height of eighteen (18) inches at the shoulder and a maximum weight of
sixty (60) pounds.
Owner. Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or sheltering any animal. An animal shall be
deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for five (5) consecutive days or more.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity.
Prohibited animal.
(1) Any animal, regardless of its state or duration of captivity, which poses a potential physical or
disease threat to the public or which is protected by international, federal or state regulations,
including but not limited to the following:
(A) Class Reptilia: Family Helodermatidea (venomous lizards); Family Viperidae
(rattlesnakes, copperheads, cottonmouths, other pit vipers and true vipers); Family Elapidae
(coral snakes, cobras, mambas, and other elapids); the following listed species of Family
Colubridae - Dispholidus typus (Boomslang), Hyrodynastes gigas (water cobra), Boiga
(mangrove snake), and Thelotornis (African twig snake) only; Order Phidia, Family Boidae
(racers, boas, water snakes, and pythons); and Order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans,
and gavials);
(B) Class Aves: Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles, and vultures); Subdivision
Ratitae (such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus); and Order Strigiforms (such as owls);
(C) Class Mammalia: Order Carnivora, Family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers,
jaguars, leopards, and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; Family Canidae
(such as wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, dingos, coyotes, and jackals), except domesticated dogs;
Family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, martens, mink, and badgers), except ferrets;
Family Procyonidae (raccoon); Family Ursidae (such as bears); Order Marsupialia (such as
kangaroos and common opossums); Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters, and armadillos);
Order Proboscidea (elephants); Order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, and gorillas);
Order Rodentia (such as porcupines); and Order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison, and
camels); and
(D) Animals not listed: The animal control officer may declare any species of animal not
listed in this subsection as “prohibited” if the confinement of the animal within the city can be
shown to constitute a threat to public health and safety.
(2) This definition does not apply to:
(A) Birds which are not regulated by international, federal or state law and are kept in a cage
or aviary; or
(B) Common domestic species which include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs or laboratory
mice or rats.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/225
Properly fitted. With respect to a collar, a collar that measures the circumference of a dog's neck plus at least one
inch.
Restraint. A leash, lead, cord, rope, tether, cable, chain, or other device that attaches a dog to a stationary object
or trolley system, and it may not come closer than fifteen (15) feet to a public walkway or sidewalk when the
restraint is stretched to full length.
Running at large. An animal not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of sufficient strength or
construction to restrain it, except when such animal is either on a leash, or held in the hands of the owner or
keeper, or under direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner's private property. Any animal
confined within an automobile or other vehicle shall not be deemed running at large.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the animal control officer.
Serious bodily injury. Any physical injury that involves a substantial risk of death, disfigurement, or impairment
of any part of the body, including but not limited to a broken bone or a laceration requiring either multiple
stitches or cosmetic surgery.
Unprovoked. Any action by an animal that is not:
(1) In response to being tormented, abused, or assaulted by any person;
(2) In response to pain or injury; or
(3) In protection of itself or its food, kennel, immediate territory, or nursing offspring.
Vaccination. An injection of the United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered
by a licensed veterinarian.
Vicious animal. Any animal that has had on two (2) previous occasions without provocation attacked or bitten
any person or other animal, or any animal which the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian has reason
to believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals.
Wild animal. Any animal except the common domestic species (dogs, cats, horses, livestock, and other common
farm animals), regardless of the state or duration of captivity.
Sec. 2.01.002 Enforcement
(a) The chief of police may designate an employee(s) as animal control officer(s).
(b) Enforcement of this chapter and any state laws regulating animal control shall be the responsibility of the
chief of police or designated animal control officer.
(c) The provisions of subchapter D, chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code section 822.041 et seq.), as amended, are incorporated into this chapter, and the animal control
officer is hereby the animal control authority for purposes of administering and enforcing that subchapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/225
(d) The animal control officer is authorized to:
(1) Impound any animal in violation of this chapter;
(2) Issue citations for any violation of this chapter or applicable state law.
(e) No person shall interfere with any animal control officer or any authorized representative in the
performance of their duties.
(f) Except when required otherwise by state law, all fees and charges required under this chapter shall be
established by resolution of the city council from time to time.
Sec. 2.01.003 Exemptions
This chapter does not apply to a peace officer or person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the
state, or other governmental agency, that trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or correction purposes.
Sec. 2.01.004 Running at large
It shall be unlawful for an owner, regardless of their mental state, to fail to keep the animal from running at
large.
State law references–Animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026; restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health
and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.005 Restraint required; unlawful restraint of dog
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of an animal to fail to keep the animal under restraint
in a securely enclosed or confined area and in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and other
animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner.
(b) It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail or refuse to exercise diligent care and control of his or her animal
to prevent such animal from becoming a public nuisance.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device to attach a dog to
a stationary object or trolley system.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (c) that the dog tethering:
(1) Is during a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming, training, or law enforcement
activity;
(2) Is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or the dog, and the dog's owner
maintains direct physical control of the dog;
(3) Occurs in a designated city dog park by direct physical control of the owner; or
(4) Occurs on the owner's premises and:
(A) While the dog is within the owner's direct physical control; and
(B) Prevents the dog from advancing to within fifteen (15) feet of the edge of any public
street.
(e) The affirmative defenses provided in subsection (d) are only available if the following specifications are
met:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/225
(1) The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device is attached to a properly fitted collar or
harness worn by the dog;
(2) The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device is not placed directly around the dog's
neck;
(3) The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device does not exceed 1/20th of the dog's body
weight;
(4) The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device, by design and placement, allows the dog a
reasonable and unobstructed range of motion without entanglement; and
(5) The dog has access to adequate shelter and clean and wholesome water.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with this section.
(1) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. If a person fails to comply with this
section with respect to more than one (1) dog, the person's conduct with respect to each dog
constitutes a separate offense.
(2) An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(g) This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash.
Sec. 2.01.006 Rabies vaccinations
The owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian by the
time the animal is four (4) months of age. The animal must receive a booster within the twelve (12) month
interval following the initial vaccination. Every animal must be re-vaccinated against rabies at least once every
three (3) years based on the type of vaccine administered by the veterinarian.
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.007 Registration of dogs, cats and ferrets required; number of animals
(a) The owner of a dog, cat, or ferret four (4) months of age or older shall register the animal with the city.
The submission of a current rabies vaccination certificate and payment of the applicable license fee as
established by resolution of the city council shall be made to the city. The rabies vaccination certificate shall
include the name and address of the applicant, a description of the animal, and proof of a current rabies
vaccination. Upon receipt of a rabies vaccination certificate that meets the criteria of this section and state law
and payment of the applicable license fee, a city license tag shall be issued, which shall bear an identifying
number for the animal. The license tag shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the animal and worn
at all times.
(b) A person commits an offense, without regard to mental state, if the person owns, keeps, or harbors a dog,
cat, or ferret over four (4) months of age without having such animal currently licensed by the city.
(c) A person commits an offense, without regard to mental state, if the person owns, keeps, or harbors a dog,
cat, or ferret required to be licensed by this section and fails to display on the animal at all times a valid city
license tag.
(d) A person commits an offense, without regard to mental state, if the person owns, keeps, or harbors a dog,
cat, or ferret and displays on the animal a city license tag issued to another animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/225
(e) A person commits an offense, regardless of their mental state, if the person owns, keeps, or harbors more
than three (3) domestic animals (of the same species) over six (6) months of age.
State law reference–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.008 Denial or revocation of registration
(a) The animal control officer may deny or revoke registration for an animal owned by a person who has been
convicted of:
(1) V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 42.09, as amended;
(2) Three or more separate violations of this chapter; or
(3) An animal control ordinance of another jurisdiction;
within any twelve (12) month period, or had the same animal impounded three (3) or more times within any
twelve (12) month period.
(b) If the animal control officer revokes or denies registration of a dog or cat, a written notice of the action and
of the right to an appeal shall be given to the owner. The owner may appeal the decision of the animal control
officer to the municipal court. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing stays an action of the animal control
officer in revoking or denying the registration until the municipal court makes a final decision.
(c) The denial or revocation of registration may be appealed by filing with the animal control officer a written
request for hearing within ten (10) days after notification of the denial or revocation. If written request for an
appeal is not timely made, the denial or revocation is final. The municipal court may consider evidence offered
by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. The municipal court shall make its decision
on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The municipal court should conduct a
hearing and render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the request for an appeal is filed or as soon thereafter
as practicable. The municipal court may affirm or reverse the denial or revocation. The decision of the municipal
court shall be sent to the owner of the affected animal. The decision of the municipal court is final.
(d) Within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of a notice of revocation or denial of registration, or after a
final decision of the municipal court if an appeal is filed, a dog or cat owner shall remove the affected animal
from the city limits. The animal control officer or the municipal court may extend the fifteen (15) day removal
period for an additional fifteen (15) calendar days. The owner shall provide the animal control officer with a
sworn statement confirming the removal of the animal.
(e) A person commits an offense, without regard to mental state, if the person owns, keeps, or harbors a dog or
cat within the city during a period when registration for the animal has been revoked or denied, or fails to
remove a dog or cat when required by this section.
Sec. 2.01.009 Guard dogs
All guard dogs shall be registered annually with the animal control officer prior to use as guard dogs. The city
license tag for a guard dog shall be securely attached to the collar or harness on the animal and worn at all times.
Guard dogs shall be restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length and humanely muzzled
when off the premises where used.
State law reference–Licensing and duties of guard dog companies, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1702.109 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.010 Quarantine of suspected rabid animals
(a) Any animal that has rabies or symptoms which could reasonably indicate rabies or that bites, scratches or
otherwise creates a condition which may expose or transmit the rabies virus to a human being shall be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/225
impounded immediately. Upon notification, the owner shall surrender the animal to the animal control officer for
quarantine at the city's designated animal shelter, or with approval from the animal control officer deliver the
animal to a state-approved veterinarian quarantine facility for quarantine at the owner's expense. Quarantine
shall be for a minimum of ten (10) days beginning on the date the incident occurred or longer as the animal
control officer may deem necessary. Animal quarantine shall be in accordance with any applicable rules and
regulations adopted by the department of state health services.
(b) Quarantine shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The quarantined animal showing clinical signs of rabies shall be immediately destroyed and the
head or brain submitted to the nearest department of state health services laboratory for testing.
(2) The animal placed in quarantine shall not be released without prior notification to and written
approval from the animal control officer.
(3) Home quarantine at the residence of the owner, if approved by the animal control officer, must
satisfy the following conditions:
(A) Secure facilities are available and approved by the animal control officer.
(B) The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies.
(C) A licensed veterinarian must observe the animal on the first and last days of the
quarantine period.
(D) The owner of the animal shall notify the animal control officer if the animal escapes,
becomes or appears to become sick, or dies; and, in case of death of the animal while under
quarantine, shall immediately surrender the dead animal to the animal control officer for
diagnostic purposes.
(E) The animal was not running at large at the time of the incident.
(F) The animal is isolated from all other animals and human beings other than the
individual(s) who own the animal.
(c) A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee
as capable of transmitting rabies, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the
incident or animal to the animal control officer. The report shall include the name and address of the victim and
the owner of the animal, and any other information relating to the incident or animal.
(d) The owner shall submit for quarantine an animal that:
(1) Is reported rabid or to have exposed an individual to rabies;
(2) The owner knows or suspects is rabid or has exposed an individual to rabies; or
(3) Has bitten, scratched or otherwise created a condition which may have exposed or transmitted
the rabies virus to any human being.
(e) When submitted for quarantine, the owner shall provide the name, address and any other relevant
information about the animal.
(f) The owner of a quarantined animal shall pay all reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the
animal, including charges for shipment of animal tissues, if required, to the department of state health services
laboratory for testing.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/225
(g) An animal that has been quarantined may be released by the animal control officer after a licensed
veterinarian determines that the quarantined animal does not show clinical signs of rabies and under the
following conditions:
(1) At the end of the observation period upon proof of vaccination prior to release from quarantine.
(2) When all applicable fees have been paid.
(3) If the animal is not being held for legal proceedings.
(4) If appropriate city license registration has been obtained.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the observation period or otherwise interfere with
quarantine.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or remove from the city any animal that has bitten a person or
other animal or that has been placed under quarantine, except when necessary to protect the life of any person or
other animal or otherwise approved by the animal control officer.
(j) The carcass of a dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of having been rabid shall, upon demand, be
surrendered to the animal control officer.
(k) Wild animals shall not be placed in quarantine. Wild animals shall be humanely destroyed in such a
manner the brain is not mutilated. The brain will then be submitted to a department of state health services
laboratory for testing.
(l) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for quarantine or for destruction when ordered by the
animal control officer.
State law reference–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.011 Nuisances
The following shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be unlawful:
(1) The keeping of an animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health by the
accumulation of animal waste which causes foul and offensive odors considered to be a hazard to
other animals or human beings.
(2) To permit or allow an animal to defecate upon private or public property other than the
property of the owner of said animal, and to fail to remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any
feces left by such animal.
(3) Property not kept free from carrion or other putrescible material.
(4) The keeping of bees in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or
endanger the health and safety of others.
(5) The keeping of any animal which causes loud and unusual barking, howling or other noise that
disturbs the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensibilities.
(6) Persistent laxness in cat supervision so that their running at large results in an unreasonable
disturbance to a person or persons.
Sec. 2.01.012 Keeping wild, wild-hybrid or prohibited animals
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/225
(a) It shall be unlawful to own, possess, keep or harbor any wild, wild-hybrid, or prohibited animal within the
city.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner or possessor:
(1) Holds a valid prohibited animal permit issued under this section; or
(2) Is a governmental entity.
(c) A permit for possession of a prohibited animal may be issued to:
(1) A public zoo;
(2) A public or private primary or secondary school; or
(3) An animal exhibition, rodeo, or circus of which the animal is an integral part, if the animal is
restrained from inflicting injury upon persons, property, or other animals.
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.013 Dangerous dogs
(a) Nuisance declared. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner harbors, keeps or maintains
a dangerous dog in the city unless the owner complies with the requirements of this section and state statutes
regulating dangerous dogs.
(b) Requirements for owner.
(1) Not later than the thirtieth (13) [sic] day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a
dangerous dog, the person shall:
(A) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control officer;
(B) Provide animal control with two (2) colored pictures of the animal and have the animal
microchipped;
(C) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or
in a secure enclosure;
(D) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at
least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by
the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person.
(2) For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog
when:
(A) The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of “dangerous dog”;
(B) The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is a dangerous dog; or
(C) The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found that the dog is dangerous.
(3) If a person reports an incident described in the definition of “dangerous dog,” the animal
control officer may investigate the incident. After receiving sworn statements of any witnesses, the
animal control supervisor shall determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog and shall notify the
owner of that determination.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/225
(4) The owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned
by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the
municipal court. The owner shall confine the dog during the pendency of an appeal in a manner
satisfactory to the animal control officer. An owner may appeal a decision of the municipal court in
the same manner as appeal for other civil cases. The determination of the animal control officer is
final if the owner does not timely appeal.
(5) The animal control officer shall provide written notice of the date, time and location of the
hearing to the owner of the dangerous dog and to any complainant, either in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. At the hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to
be heard.
(c) Registration.
(1) The animal control officer shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(A) Presents:
(i) Proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in an amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the
dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person.
(ii) Proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog.
(iii) Proof of a secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept.
(B) Pays an annual registration fee established by resolution of the city council from time to
time.
(C) Provides two (2) color identification photographs of at least three (3) inches by three (3)
inches of each dangerous dog with one (1) photograph showing the frontal view and the other
photograph showing the side view of each dog.
(D) Provides the name, general description, including sex, weight, color, predominate breed,
height and length and any other discernible features of the dangerous dog.
(2) The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration
tag, which shall be placed and maintained on the dog's collar at all times.
(3) If the owner of a dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later
than the fourteenth day after the date of sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the
area in which the new address is located. If the dangerous dog has been sold or given away, the
former owner shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number
of the new owner. If the new owner resides in the city or if the animal is kept in the city, the animal
control officer shall notify the new owner in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, that
a determination has been made that the dog is dangerous and provide the new owner with a copy of
the requirements for the owner of a dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for the new owner to fail to
comply with such requirements.
(4) The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control officer if
the dangerous dog is running at large, has bitten or attacked a human being or another animal, has
died, or has been sold or given away.
(d) Attack by dangerous dog.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/225
(1) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes
an unprovoked attack on a person or another animal outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily
injury to a person or another animal.
(2) An offense under this subsection is a class C misdemeanor.
(3) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court which hears the case may
order the dangerous animal destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or a person authorized by state law.
(e) Violations. A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the
person fails to comply with any requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog. An offense under this
subsection is a class C misdemeanor. If the owner of any dog determined to be dangerous under this section fails
or refuses to comply with the requirements of this section, the dog shall be seized by the animal control officer
and humanely destroyed.
(f) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (d) or (e) of this section that the person is a
veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed
by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals, and has temporary
ownership, custody and control of the dangerous dog in connection with that position.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (d) or (e) of this section that the person is an
employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement
agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or correction purposes.
(3) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (d) or (e) of this section that the person is a dog
trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under the Private Security Act, V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code ch. 1702, as amended.
State law reference–Authority of city to regulate the keeping of dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.041 et
seq.
Sec. 2.01.014 Tampering with or stealing traps
(a) Any animal confined in an animal trap belonging to the city shall be considered immediately impounded.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully remove, steal, or tamper with all or any part
of an animal trap belonging to the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to release an animal from a trap belonging to the city or take the animal
from the trap without authority.
Sec. 2.01.015 Livestock and fowl
(a) Swine prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine within the city.
(b) Cows or horses. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a cow or horse on any premises, the overall
area of which is less than one-fourth (1/4) of an acre for each cow or horse kept, or keep more of said animals
than can be cared for under sanitary conditions. The total number of cows or horses permitted shall not exceed
one (1) adult per one-fourth (1/4) acre for the first acre, and two (2) adults per acre for each additional acre of a
single tract of land.
(c) Enclosures generally. Livestock pens, stables, corrals, or enclosures shall be capable of preventing the
escape of the livestock.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/225
(d) Location of enclosures.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any horse, cow, cattle, sheep or goat or any other
livestock within fifty (50) feet of any residence or occupied building.
(2) Any enclosure, pen, corral, or other restrictive area for livestock may not be located within ten
(10) feet of any industrially, commercially, or residentially zoned property or any property used for
residential purposes.
(e) Fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any fowl, such as chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese,
pigeons or guineas, except when the same are kept more than fifty (50) feet from any property line.
(f) Selling or displaying animals in certain places prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade,
barter, lease, rent, give away or display for any purpose any live animal on any roadside, public right-of-way,
commercial parking lot or flea market.
(g) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer,
a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of
the state to deal with animals, and has temporary ownership, custody and control of the animal in connection
with that position.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to prohibit or otherwise regulate the keeping of livestock and swine, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 215.026(b).
Sec. 2.01.016 Sanitary requirements
The owner or person who has custody or control of any animal shall comply with the following standards:
(1) All manure and other animal waste shall be removed from pens, corrals, cages, yards, or other
enclosures twice a week to an approved disposal site;
(2) Food shall be placed in impervious containers on impervious surfaces;
(3) Refuse on the premises shall be removed and disposed of by means approved by the animal
control officer;
(4) Watering troughs or tanks shall be equipped with adequate facility for draining the overflow so
as to prevent breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects;
(5) No putrid material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises, and all such material used
to feed which is unconsumed shall be removed and disposed of by sanitary means.
Sec. 2.01.017 Animal care; cruelty
(a) The owner or person who has custody or control of any animal shall provide:
(1) Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served to the animal in clean containers, to maintain
the animal in good health;
(2) Clean and wholesome water, served to the animal in a clean container, such water to be
available to the animal at all times;
(3) Adequate shelter and protection from the weather at all times; and
(4) Veterinarian care as needed to prevent suffering.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/225
(b) It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person having custody or control of any animal to abandon such
animal.
(c) No person other than a licensed veterinarian shall crop a dog's ears.
(d) The operator of any motor vehicle which strikes or injures a domesticated animal shall stop and
immediately render aid and report such incident to the animal control officer and the police.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, starve or overwork or to otherwise abuse any animal.
State law references–Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 821 et seq.; cruelty to livestock animals,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09; cruelty to nonlivestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092.
ARTICLE 2.02 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.02.001 Generally
(a) The following animals may be impounded:
(1) Cats, dogs, or ferrets not exhibiting evidence of vaccination or registration.
(2) Any animal kept under conditions which can endanger the public or animal health.
(3) Any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof or that a person could reasonably suspect of
having rabies or that bites, scratches or otherwise creates a condition which may have exposed or
transmitted the rabies virus to any human being or animal, or that requires observation for rabies as
determined by the animal control officer.
(4) Any animal other than a cat running at large, except that a cat may also be impounded pursuant
to section 2.01.011(6) of this chapter.
(5) Any animal treated in a manner determined to be in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code section
42.09, as amended.
(6) Any animal in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(7) Any animal reasonably suspected of having inflicted bodily harm on any human being or
animal that poses a threat to public safety or constitutes a public nuisance.
(8) Any prohibited animal.
(b) If any animal is found on the premises of any person, that person may confine such animal in a humane
manner until the animal control officer impounds such animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of the
animal control officer to have such animal impounded.
(c) The chief of police shall select and establish facilities in the city for the impoundment, quarantine,
maintenance, and destruction of animals.
(d) Reasonable effort shall be made by the animal control officer to contact the owner of any animal
impounded which is wearing a current registration tag.
Sec. 2.02.002 Redemption of impounded animal
(a) The owner may redeem an impounded animal upon payment of all applicable impoundment fees, handling
fees, and any veterinarian bills or other cost incurred by the city for the impoundment, care and welfare of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/225
animal and upon proof of compliance with the vaccination/registration requirements of this chapter. Any animal
being held under quarantine or observation for rabies shall not be redeemed until released from quarantine.
(b) Impounded animals shall be held for three (3) days after the date of impoundment. If the owner of an
impounded animal does not redeem it within the period of impoundment, disposition will be in accordance with
this chapter.
Sec. 2.02.003 Disposition of impounded animals
(a) Except as provided herein, any animal not redeemed within the above-stated time periods after
impoundment, or release from quarantine, shall become the property of the city and shall at the direction of the
animal control officer be placed for adoption, transferred to a bona fide humane society or humanely destroyed.
(b) Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide
care for the baby may be immediately destroyed to prevent further suffering. Any impounded animal that
appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be immediately destroyed to prevent further suffering.
(d) Any owner who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal or believes the animal to be ill or injured
may sign a written waiver supplied by the animal control officer allowing the animal to be immediately
destroyed by the city. The owner of such animal shall be charged a fee for this service.
State law reference–Disposition of cruelly treated animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.004 Adoption of dogs and cats
(a) A person may adopt a dog and/or cat from the city animal shelter facility that has been classified as
adoptable. Any animal adopted must be vaccinated within five (5) days after adoption or by the time the animal
reaches the age of four (4) months.
(b) The animal control officer may refuse to allow a person to adopt an animal who he has reason to believe:
(1) Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal.
(2) Wants the dog or cat for the purpose of resale or for purposes other than pet ownership.
(3) There are reasonable grounds to believe the animal would be subjected to abandonment or
cruelty.
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
(Ordinance 499, sec. 1, adopted 3/9/09)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/225
Sec. 3.01.001 Trench safety
(a) On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city, or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain:
(1) Detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet OSHA standards; and
(2) A pay item for those safety systems.
(b) This requirement shall not apply to persons subject to safety standards adopted under and subject to the
administrative penalty provisions of subchapter E, chapter 121, Utilities Code.
(1996 Code, art. 3.700)
State law reference–Trench safety requirements, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.021 et seq.
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS*
Sec. 3.02.001 Codes adopted
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully:
(1) ICC International Building Code, 2018 edition.
(2) ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition.
(3) ICC International Mechanical Code 2018 edition.
(4) ICC International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition.
(5) ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition.
(6) ICC International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition.
(7) ICC International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition.
(8) NCC National Electrical Code, 2017 edition.
(9) ICC International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2012 edition.
(Ordinance 594 adopted 1/8/18)
ARTICLE 3.03 BUILDING PERMITS
Sec. 3.03.001 Required; application
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, or to build, erect or construct, any building or
structure of any kind within the city unless such person, firm or corporation shall first apply to the city secretary
for a permit to remove or to build or construct same, stating in said application a description of said proposed
building or structure, where same is to be built or constructed, the material same is to be made and composed of,
and the estimated cost of same, and obtain a permit from the city secretary for such purpose. (1996 Code, sec.
3.501)
Sec. 3.03.002 Permit fees
The following fees are adopted for the issuance of permits as required by section 3.03.001:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/225
(1) Building permit: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) plus five cents ($0.05) per square foot.
(2) Electrical permit: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) plus five cents ($0.05) per square foot.
(3) Plumbing permit: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) plus five cents ($0.05) per square foot.
(4) Mechanical permit: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) plus five cents ($0.05) per square foot.
(5) Irrigation permit: Forty dollars ($40.00) for new installation only.
(Ordinance 534, sec. 2, adopted 5/14/12)
Sec. 3.03.003 Penalty
Any person, firm or organization found in violation of this article will be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
[a fine] in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec.
3.503)
ARTICLE 3.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Title; purpose; scope
(a) Title. This article shall be known as the property maintenance code of the city, and shall be referred to
herein as “this code.”
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and
preserve life or limb, property, and public welfare by regulating the use and maintenance of the exterior of all
structures, buildings, and properties within the city.
(c) Scope. This code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures, and buildings within the
city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties,
structures, and buildings.
(d) Conflicts with other ordinances. If other ordinances of the city conflict with this code and the standards
and regulations established herein, the stricter standard (or regulation) shall prevail.
(e) Intent. It is the intent of this code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions and
circumstances, as herein set forth, that adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; it is
not intended that this code be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are
primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private
interests without material danger to the public health, safety, or welfare.
Sec. 3.04.002 Definitions
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning within the context within which
they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright
1981, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and
the singular. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine, and the feminine the masculine. The following
terms are defined and shall apply to all sections of this code unless defined elsewhere in the code:
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any
kind which has enclosing walls of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/225
Building official. The city manager or the person or department to whom the city manager may delegate the
building official duties.
Carrion. Dead or decaying animal, fowl or fish.
Commercial motor vehicle. A motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for:
(1) Transportation of property; or
(2) Delivery purposes.
Commission. The buildings and standards commission of the city.
Enforcement authority. The city manager or the person or department to whom the city manager may delegate
the enforcement responsibility.
Graffiti. Words, phrases, designs, symbolic letters or drawings, written, painted or scratched on sidewalks,
fences, windows, vehicles, walls or buildings, trees or other structures or property.
Hazardous waste. Toxic, caustic, or flammable materials.
Infectious waste. A waste containing pathogens or biologically active material capable of transmitting disease
such as animal and human blood or body parts, microbiological and pathological waste, needles, syringes, and
sharps.
Junk. Used metals, materials, equipment, appliances, furniture, tires, engines and parts and other manufactured
or raw goods that are so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make the item unusable or inoperable in its existing
condition, or is a potential safety or health hazard.
Light truck. A commercial motor vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one and one-half
(1-1/2) tons or less.
Nuisance.
(1) Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the
premises of the building or upon an occupied premises, including but not limited to any abandoned
wells, shafts, basements, excavations, discarded refrigerators, unsecured vacant buildings, motor
vehicles, unprotected swimming pools, or any structurally unsound fences or structures, or any
gasoline, chemicals, lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive
children.
(2) Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health and is contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(3) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, allowing sewage on lots, grounds,
yards or any other place in the city, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of
the codes and ordinances of the city and state.
(4) Uncleanliness contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and
ordinances of the city and state.
(5) Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human
beings, public health, safety or welfare, or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city and
state.
(6) Graffiti of any type.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/225
(7) Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish, including newspapers, refrigerators, furniture, tires,
cans, etc., on premises in a neighborhood for ten (10) days or more, unless the rubbish or object is
completely enclosed in a building or is not visible from a public street.
(8) Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor
mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests.
(9) Sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage, or other organic waste deposited, stored,
discharged or exposed in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in disease
transmission to a person or between persons.
(10) A vehicle or container that is used to transport garbage, human excreta or other organic
material and that is defective and allows leakage or spilling of contents.
(11) A collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding in the city limits.
(12) A place or condition harboring rats or breeding flies in a populated area.
(13) Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisdiction or as defined by codes or
city ordinances.
(14) Overcrowding a room with tenants.
Objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter. Any matter or object which is offensive to ordinary sensitivities
of a person, is not conducive to high aesthetic appearance and quality of a home or neighborhood, or is a health
or safety hazard or a potential health or safety hazard.
Open storage. The unscreened storage of new or used materials, salvaged items, vehicle parts, or any item that
will cause deterioration of property values.
Owner. Any person claiming the ownership or title of real or personal property, including, but not limited to:
(1) Holder of fee simple title.
(2) Holder of life estate.
(3) Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more.
(4) A buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract or deed.
(5) A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in possession or control, or having right of
possession or control, of real property.
(6) Any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing, or operation of property.
Pool. A permanent swimming pool, spa, or hot tub over eighteen (18) inches deep if public or semi-public, and
three (3) feet deep if private, located at ground level, above ground or below ground, filled or empty.
Premises. Any parcel, lot or tract of land, including any structure, building, landscaping, trees, or other structure
or improvement located thereon.
Recreation vehicle. A motor vehicle primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or
travel use which can be towed, hauled, or driven. The term includes, but is not limited to, a travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper, or motor home, including any truck, truck-tractor or other vehicle exclusively
used to tow or haul a recreation vehicle.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/225
Refuse/rubbish. All decaying and non-decaying solid waste (except body waste), including, but not limited to,
garbage, rubbish, ashes, cans, papers, boxes, glass, and other matter commonly understood as rubbish.
Screening wall. Wood, vegetation, or a combination of both at least six feet in height. Screening walls shall
mean:
(1) A solid, opaque screening fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height;
(2) Vegetation consisting of solid hedgerow or evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full
screening from the ground to a minimum of six (6) feet;
(3) Any combination of the above; or
(4) Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening as approved by the city.
Semitrailer. A vehicle designed or used with a motor vehicle so that part of the weight of the vehicle and its load
rests on or is carried by another vehicle.
Standard driveway. The pavement between the street and the garage or carport, which is to be no wider than the
width of the garage or carport which it serves, or twenty-two (22) feet, whichever is greater, or a paved circular
driveway which is intended to facilitate easier access to the main entrance of the premises.
Structure. Any residential building, nonresidential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit,
detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation, any edifice, erection of
material, or any other improvement placed or located on any property within the city.
Tenant. Any person or agent who occupies a structure or property.
Trailer. A vehicle that:
(1) Is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure which does not exceed eighteen
(18) feet in length; and
(2) Is drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck-tractor. A motor vehicle:
(1) Designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle; and
(2) Not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be
drawn.
Unsafe building. A building which is dilapidated, substandard, structurally unsound or dangerous and unfit for
human habitation and is a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare or is unoccupied by its owners, lessees,
or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children.
Unwholesome matter. Any condition, object, or matter, whether decaying or non-decaying, which may produce
injury, disease, or death to human beings, directly or indirectly.
Sec. 3.04.003 Enforcement; inspections; right of entry
(a) The enforcement authority for the provisions of this article shall be the city manager or the person or
department to whom the city manager delegates the enforcement responsibility.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/225
(b) Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this code, or whenever the enforcement
authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any property a condition or violation which is
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the enforcement authority may enter upon
such property at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided that, if such structure or property is occupied,
the enforcement authority shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such entry is refused the
enforcement authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
Sec. 3.04.004 Responsibilities of owner and tenant
(a) Owner. Every owner of the premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this code. An owner
shall not let, rent, or lease premises for occupancy or use which do not comply with the provisions of this code.
(b) Owner and tenant. Every owner and every tenant of the premises shall maintain the premises in a clean,
sanitary, and safe condition, including the disposal of rubbish, garbage, organic or inorganic waste, junk, or other
waste in a lawful manner.
Sec. 3.04.005 Unsafe building hearing procedures; action by city; civil penalty; lien
(a) If the building official finds that a building is unsafe and must be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished or the tenants relocated, the building official shall give notice to an owner, lienholder or mortgagee
of the building that a hearing will be held to determine whether the building is an unsafe building. The notice
must include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof
of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work. The notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, and sent to the last
known address of the persons described above. If the certified mail is returned undelivered, the building official
may serve the notice personally if the person is located in Lubbock or Hale County and his address is known. If
the notice sent to an owner is returned undelivered, and after diligent search, the building official is unable to
discover a correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the owner personally, then the building official
shall give notice by publication of the order once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five (5)
days before the hearing.
(b) A hearing to determine whether a building is unsafe shall be held before the city council and is open to the
public. At the hearing, the building official shall present testimony and evidence of the condition of the building
and the owner, lessor, tenant, mortgagee or lienholder may present testimony and evidence.
(c) The city council, after the public hearing, may:
(1) Find that the building is not an unsafe building and refer the matter to building official for
further appropriate action;
(2) Grant a variance in order to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship;
(3) In the case of a single-family dwelling occupied by the owner where the health, safety and
welfare of other persons will not be affected, grant an exception to any provision of this article to
avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship; or
(4) Find the building is an unsafe building and order:
(A) Demolition of the building;
(B) Repair or correction of the building within a specified period of time;
(C) Repair or correction of the building within a specified period of time and demolition of
the building if the repair or correction is not timely effected;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/225
(D) Repair or correction of the building by the owner, mortgagee or lienholder within a
specified period of time and repair or correction by the city if not timely effected by the owner,
mortgagee or lienholder;
(E) Repair, correction or demolition of the building within a specified period of time and the
assessment of a civil penalty against the owner for each day or part of a day that the owner fails
to repair, correct or demolish the building;
(F) An action be brought in district court in accordance with Texas Local Government Code
section 214.003, as amended, for the appointment of a receiver of the property;
(G) Vacation of the building within a specific period of time;
(H) Securing the building within a specific period of time; or
(I) Relocation of the tenants of the building within a specific period of time.
(d) If a building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished or the tenants are not relocated
within the specified period of time set forth in the city council's order, the city may:
(1) Vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building at its own expense; or
(2) Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove or demolish the
building.
(e) The city may repair a building only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the
minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units. The
repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum housing standards.
(f) If the city incurs expenses to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish a building or assesses a civil
penalty, the city has a lien against the land in which the building stands or sits, unless its a homestead as
protected by the state constitution, to secure the payment of said expenses or a civil penalty. The city's lien to
secure the payment of a civil penalty or the cost to vacate, secure, remove, repair or demolish the building or
relocate the tenants arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed
in the office of the county clerk in the county in which property is located. The notice must be filed promptly
after the imposition of the lien and contain the name and address of the owner, if reasonably determinable, a
legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of the expenses incurred by
the city, and the balance due. The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens if each mortgagee
and lienholder of the building was given notice and an opportunity to repair or demolish the building; otherwise,
the city's lien is inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property to
which the city's lien attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the county clerk of the
county in which the real property is located before the date the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal or
demolition is begun by the city. The city's lien is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens. The
lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses.
(g) A civil penalty or assessment imposed by the city to recover its expense for the repair of a building accrues
interest at the rate of ten (10) percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full and the city's right
to the assessment lien may not be transferred to third parties.
(h) The lien imposed by the city for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on which the repairs
are made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older.
(i) The city may assess and recover a civil penalty not to exceed a thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each
violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/225
ten dollars ($10.00) a day for each violation, if the city proves:
(1) The property owner was notified of the requirements of this article and the owner's need to
comply with the requirements; and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this article or failed to
comply with the city council's order.
(j) The assessment of a civil penalty is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in
any suit brought by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the
assessed penalty. To enforce a civil penalty the clerk or secretary of the city must file with the district clerk of
the county in which the city is located a certified copy of the city council's order stating the amount and duration
of the penalty. No other proof is required for the district court to enter a final judgment on the penalty.
(k) The building official shall, after the hearing, promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the order of the city council to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the
building and shall file a copy of the order of the commission in the deed records of the county where the
property is located. Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued, the building official shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary or clerk; and
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the building is located a
notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(l) When an order of the city council has been filed in the county deed records, the execution of the order is
not affected by a sale or other transfer of the premises. A person acquiring interest in the property after an order
has been so filed is subject to the requirements of the order.
Sec. 3.04.006 Vacating building
(a) When the building official has given notice of a hearing to consider vacation of a building, the building
official shall place a sign on the building. The sign shall serve as a warning of the unsafe, unsanitary, and
dangerous condition of the building. A person commits an offense if he does any of the following:
(1) Without authority from the building official, moves or destroys a sign placed by the building
official;
(2) Occupies a vacant building on which the building official has placed such sign; or
(3) As the owner of a building, authorizes a person to occupy a vacant building on which the
building official has placed such sign.
(b) Each occupant of a building that has been ordered vacated shall vacate the building within a specified time
determined by the city council. No person shall occupy a building that has been ordered vacated.
(c) The owner shall provide alternative housing to all tenants of a building which has been ordered vacated.
Sec. 3.04.007 Securing building
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/225
(a) The city may secure a building that the building official determines:
(1) Violates the minimum standards set forth in this article; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is occupied by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building.
(b) Before securing a building under subsection (a), the city shall post a notice on or near the front door of the
building stating that, if the owner does not secure the building within forty-eight (48) hours, the city will secure
the building at the owner's expense.
(c) Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail by certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and
the owner's address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's address is unknown.
(d) The notice issued under subsection (c) must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the city's minimum standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement the city that will secure or has secured the building; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing regarding the city's decision to
secure the building.
(e) A hearing shall be held before the city council if, within thirty (30) days after the date the city secures the
building, the owner files with the building official a written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be held
within twenty (20) days after the date the request is filed and is open to the public. At the hearing, the building
official shall present evidence of the need to secure the building and the owner may testify or present witnesses
or written information about any matter relating to the city's decision to secure the building.
(f) The city council shall uphold the city's action in securing a building if it finds the building or a portion of
the building to be open and potentially dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. A building is
open if a door, window, or other opening is not securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry, and the building is
left unattended.
Sec. 3.04.008 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction in the municipal court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for
each offense, and each day such violation continues it shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 3.04.009 Injunctive relief
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/225
In addition to and cumulative of all penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all
violations of this article.
Secs. 3.04.010–3.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Standards
Sec. 3.04.041 Exterior grounds
(a) Trash, debris and other objectionable matter. The regulation of objectionable matter is contained in section
6.03.001. All exterior property shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to
allow paper, wood, rocks, junk, appliances, furniture, dead grass, branches, trash, debris, carrion, improper
composting, rubber tires, bottles, scrap metal, vehicle parts, construction materials, fill materials, hazardous
waste, i.e., chemicals, oils, solvents, gasoline, paints, pesticides, cleaners, or batteries, and other unwholesome
matter, to accumulate or remain on any piece of property, to include easements, so as to create a potential
harborage, or breeding place, for rats, vermin or insects, or in such a manner as to be oppressive or injurious to
the public health or unpleasant and disagreeable in sight or odor to persons residing or occupying the premises
or adjacent premises or to persons who may be in a public place or public right-of-way.
(b) Grading and drainage.
(1) All property shall be maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant, foul, and
offensive water thereon, or within or under any structure located thereon.
(2) No filling or excavation shall be performed or constructed on any property without city
determination that there will be no adverse effect on an existing or planned drainage pattern on an
adjacent property. If it appears that drainage problems may result from filling, excavation,
improvements, or landscaping, plans must be submitted by the property owner with an engineer's
seal.
(3) It shall be unlawful to drain swimming pool backwash onto public or private property. It is also
unlawful to drain swimming pool water containing chemicals onto adjacent private or public
property, to include alleys. However, those pools built prior to adoption of this article shall maintain a
nonconforming status until such time as the Environmental Protection Agency or other federal
agency requires enforcement by the city.
(4) It shall be unlawful to impede the flow of water into any gutter or drainage ditch.
(5) If dirt used for fill appears to the enforcement authority to be contaminated, the city may
require proof of non-contamination.
(6) The draining or discharging of pesticides, grease, petroleum products, paints, sewage, septic
tank or grease trap waste, cooling towers, etc., and toxic chemicals onto any property, streets, alleys,
or sewers is prohibited.
(c) Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, steps, and driveways located on all private property
shall be maintained in a state of good repair. The owner and tenant of private property adjacent to all public
sidewalks, walkways, and steps shall keep such sidewalks, walkways, and steps free of mud, debris, or other
obstruction that would impair or prevent their use.
(d) Insect and rodent control. Every owner and every tenant of a building, structure, or property shall prevent
any condition which can provide harborage and breeding of insects, rats, ants, vermin, mosquitoes, or other pests
which can create a hazard or a nuisance to said building, structure, or property, or are otherwise detrimental to
the public health, safety, and welfare.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/225
(e) Glare and direct illumination. Exterior lights placed or erected on private property shall be shielded, placed
or erected so as not to create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance. They shall be located so as to not produce
direct illumination across the bounding property line.
(f) Trees, shrubs, and plants. Trees, shrubs, and plants that are dead or which are considered by the
enforcement authority to be hazardous to persons or property shall be removed by the owner.
(g) Weeds and grass. The regulating of high weeds and grass is contained in article 6.03 of this code.
(1) Weeds or grass shall be maintained at a height not exceeding twelve (12) inches.
(2) All cut weeds, grass and shrubs or brush shall not be left or allowed to accumulate on any
public street, sidewalk or public way.
(3) Weeds, grass, shrubs or brush shall not be deposited in any drainage ditch, inlet, manhole, or
storm sewer, or sanitary sewer system, or on any private or public property.
(4) The unpaved areas of the front yard shall be maintained with grass, ground cover, or other type
of landscaping to such an extent that the soil is not subject to erosion.
(h) Animal pens. The regulating of animals can be found in the city Code of Ordinances, chapter 2, Animal
Control.
(1) All animal pens, runs, exercise areas, fenced areas, houses, structures and enclosures shall be
kept clean, sanitary, and free from odor and excrement, insects, and other unsightly or objectionable
matter which constitutes a public nuisance or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
(2) Pens and housing for animals shall be kept in a state of good repair.
(i) Accumulations of firewood, lumber, boxes, etc. Any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, pipes, firewood,
or any other character of materials which may be used as a harborage by rats, rodents or other vermin, or in
which evidence of rats, rodents or other vermin is found, shall be separated from a fence owned by an adjacent
property owner a minimum of three (3) feet, and elevated not less than six (6) inches above ground, with a clear
intervening space underneath.
(j) Fences.
(1) All fences shall be maintained structurally sound and not be out of vertical alignment more than
twenty (20) percent.
(2) All damaged, rotting, removed, or missing portions shall be replaced with comparable materials
to the remaining portion of the fence and shall be kept free from deterioration.
(3) A fence that has deteriorated to a condition that it is likely to fall shall be repaired, replaced, or
removed.
(4) Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns, or other
structural members.
(5) All damaged or missing parts of chain-link or metal fences shall be replaced or repaired.
(k) Accessory structures.
(1) Carports, awnings, patio covers, detached garages, sheds, storage buildings, benches, and other
accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. All accessory
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/225
structures shall be protected from the elements by periodic painting, staining, or other waterproofing
or surface protection.
(2) Structures such as tree houses, forts, skateboard ramps, etc., shall not be allowed in the front
yard.
(l) Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
(1) Swimming pools, spas, and similar structures, above ground, on ground, or in ground, shall be
maintained safe, clean, sanitary, secure, and structurally and mechanically sound in accordance with
applicable city codes.
(2) The dumpsite for pool excavation shall be approved by the city at the time of plan review.
(m) Enclosure of pools, spas, and hot tubs.
(1) Private pools, spas and hot tubs.
(A) Every outdoor swimming pool, spa, and hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a fence
or wall not less than six (6) feet in height.
(B) All gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device. The
latching device shall be located on the pool side at least four and one-half (4-1/2) feet from the
ground.
(C) Prior to excavation, a temporary fence shall be installed and maintained until completion
of the pool.
(2) Public and semi-public pools, spas and hot tubs.
(A) Every outdoor swimming pool, spa, and hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a fence
or wall not less than six (6) feet in height.
(B) Openings under the pool yard enclosure may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in
diameter to pass under the pool yard enclosure.
(C) If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members, and the
distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least forty-five (45) inches, the
openings may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure.
(D) If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members, and the
distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the
openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths (1-3/4) inches in diameter to pass
through the enclosure.
(E) If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with diagonal members and no vertical
members, such as a lattice fence, the openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths (1-
3/4) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure.
(F) If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with chain-link metal fencing material, the
openings may not allow a sphere one and one-fourth (1-1/4) inches in diameter to pass through
the enclosure.
(G) Decorative designs or cutouts on or in the pool yard enclosure may not contain any
openings greater than one and three-fourths (1-3/4) inches in any direction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/225
(H) Permanent equipment or structures may not be constructed or placed in a manner that
makes them readily available for climbing over the pool yard enclosure.
(I) All gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device. The
latching device shall be located at least four and one-half (4-1/2) feet from the ground.
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for
multiunit rental complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
(n) Private parking lots, drives, and streets. Private parking lots, drives, and streets and improved surfaces
shall be maintained in good, safe condition and be free of litter, holes, excavations, protrusions, cracks, or other
failures that may affect the use, safety, appearance, or drainage of the property or of the adjoining property.
(o) Solid waste. The regulation of solid waste is contained in the city Code of Ordinances (chapter 13,
Utilities).
(1) Dumpsters.
(A) All garbage and trash shall be placed inside dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be kept closed to
prevent littering and to render contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals.
(B) Construction materials shall not be placed in dumpsters.
(C) Grass clippings and leaves shall be bagged, and shall not be commingled with garbage or
trash.
(2) Bulky item pickup. Bulky items shall be contained to prevent littering.
(3) Commercial dumpsters.
(A) Dumpsters shall be maintained in safe, clean, painted and sound condition.
(B) Commercial customers shall insure that no liquid waste of any type is placed in their
containers and that no solid waste is placed outside the container.
(C) Dumpster lids, if provided, must be kept closed at all times.
(4) Construction sites.
(A) Each contractor and property owner shall be responsible for a construction site so that
building materials and debris will be contained on the site of construction. Litter or other debris,
including dirt and mud deposited as a result of normal construction, remodeling, or landscaping
process, upon any public place or private premises, shall be removed by the contractor and/or
property owner.
(B) A temporary container may be used on the construction site to contain the litter generated
from construction or construction workers. When the trash container is full, the trash shall be
disposed of immediately.
(5) Dumping or littering.
(A) Dumping of any residential or commercial garbage, rubbish, brush, junk, stone,
construction materials, appliances, furniture, grease, solvents, petroleum products, vehicles and
vehicle parts in any place and in any manner is prohibited.
(B) The hauling of materials and waste without proper containment is prohibited.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/225
(C) It is in violation of this section for property owners to allow dumping or littering to take
place on any property under their control and supervision.
(6) Infectious or hazardous waste. No infectious or hazardous wastes shall be deposited at any
location within the city regardless of consent of the property owner. Infectious and hazardous
household waste shall not be placed in dumpsters. The disposal of infectious or household hazardous
waste will be in accordance with the regulations and policies stipulated by the state department of
health services and the state commission on environmental quality.
(p) Open storage of materials and equipment.
(1) Commercial/industrial premises. All properties located within a commercial development with
open storage of materials, equipment, vehicles, etc., shall screen such storage from residential
property [and] from public view.
(2) Residential premises. Open storage shall not be permitted in the front yard, in a carport, or on a
front porch of any residential dwelling. Open storage shall be screened from adjacent properties and
streets by a six-foot solid screening fence. Open storage shall include furniture other than furniture
designed for outside use, household items, products of a commercial trade or business enterprise,
whether such items are used or new, items of salvage such as scrap metal, papers, cans, lumber and
building materials not currently being used or held for immediate use upon the premises and other
similar materials.
(q) Unsafe buildings and structures. All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with this code.
(r) Burned structures. Whenever any building or structure in the city is partially burned, the owner or person
in control shall, within thirty (30) days, after completion of investigation by the fire department, remove from
the premises all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned lumber and material. If such building or structure
shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner or person in control
shall, within sixty (60) days, after completion of investigation by the fire department, remove from the premises
all the remaining portion of the building or structure. If the building or structure is to be repaired, work shall
begin within sixty (60) days and progressively be completed in one hundred twenty (120) days.
(s) Vacant buildings. Every vacant dwelling, house, building (residential or commercial) or other similar
structure within the corporate limits of the city shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) All exterior doors and windows shall be kept in sound working condition and free of broken
glass.
(2) All exterior doors shall be equipped with a workable lock or locking device and shall be kept
securely locked during the period of time said building is vacant.
(3) All windows shall be secured by a latch, lock or other means so as to prevent easy entry into
said structure by children, vagrants or other unauthorized persons.
(4) All exterior walls and roof shall be kept in good repair and free of holes, cracks, defective
materials and structural deterioration, so as to keep such building from becoming a breeding place for
rodents, roaches and disease-carrying insects.
(5) The exterior of said building and the premises thereon shall be kept free of any accumulation of
paper, hay, moss or other flammable or combustible rubbish or waste material of sufficient quantity
to constitute a danger to said building or any other building or premises in case such waste material
should become ignited.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/225
(6) The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of any accumulation of trash, garbage, rubbish or
any waste material of such quantity as to constitute an unsanitary condition.
(7) Fences shall be maintained in good repair and gates locked at all times.
(t) Parking and storage of vehicles on residential properties.
(1) Vehicles must be parked in such a way as not to block public walks, be in a good state of repair,
be maintained in such condition as not to be unsightly, and must be parked or stored in a safe manner,
so as to protect the health and safety of all persons.
(2) Boats, motor homes, recreational vehicles, and small utility trailers may be parked on the
residential premises of the owner provided grass and weeds are maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion, not to exceed six (6) inches in height.
Sec. 3.04.042 Exterior of structure
(a) Generally. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound.
(b) Structural members. All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound,
free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads upon them.
(c) Exterior surfaces. The foundation, exterior wall, floor, roof, and all exterior surfaces of every structure
shall be maintained in a state of repair sufficient to exclude rats, rodents, birds, vermin and other animals.
Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, broken glass, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall
be repaired, replaced or restored.
(d) Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to safely carry applicable dead and live
loads that are imposed upon the foundation walls.
(e) Exterior walls. The exterior wall of every structure should be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards
or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or
to the interior of the structure. The exterior wall surface materials of every structure should be maintained
weatherproof or the surface protected as required to prevent deterioration. Exterior wall surface deterioration
that is visually apparent from the exterior of the building shall be considered a violation of this article.
(f) Roof. The roof of every habitable structure should be structurally sound, tight, and free of leaks. Roof
drainage should be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof deterioration that is visually apparent from the exterior of the building shall be considered a
violation of this article.
(g) Decorative features. The cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra-cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features of every structure shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a
safe condition.
(h) Exterior attachments. All exterior canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes,
rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a structure shall be maintained in good
repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition, and their exterior surface
materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent
deterioration.
(i) Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained
structurally safe, sound, properly mortared and in good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be
maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/225
(j) Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so
constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall
be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration.
(k) Window and door frames. The windows, doors, and frames of every habitable structure shall be
constructed and maintained in good repair so as to exclude rain as completely as possible from entering the
dwelling or structure and weatherproofed to prevent deterioration.
(l) Windows and doors to be weathertight. The windows and exterior doors of every habitable structure shall
be fitted in their frames so as to be reasonably weathertight and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(m) Door hardware. The exterior doors, door hinges, and door latches of every structure shall be maintained in
good condition. Door locks in exterior doors of dwelling units shall be maintained in good repair and capable of
tightly securing the door.
(n) Garage doors. Shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, properly attached, and the exterior
surface maintained weatherproof as required to prevent deterioration.
Sec. 3.04.043 Multifamily residential property
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, the property management firm, the landlord, or the apartment
manager to maintain multifamily property in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(1) Structure. All installed systems, including but not limited to plumbing, electrical, heating, and
air conditioning, shall be maintained in a structurally sound and operative condition. The following
items shall also be maintained by the responsible party:
(A) Window panes and screens shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain, moisture, and insects as completely as possible
from entering the dwelling or structure.
(B) Railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in the building
code in effect at time of construction of the building. They shall be kept in sound repair, and
their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or
protected as required to prevent deterioration.
(C) The exterior doors, door hinges, and door latches of every habitable structure shall be
maintained in good condition. Door locks in exterior doors of dwelling units shall be
maintained in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door.
(D) Parking lots, fire lanes, and required paved areas with legible parking and fire lane
markings in accordance with city ordinances.
(E) Swimming pools and fences shall be maintained in accordance with section 3.04.041(l)
of this article.
(F) Decorative features such as cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra-cotta trim,
and wall facings of every structure shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition.
(G) All exterior attachments such as canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire
escapes, standpipes, rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a
structure shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe
and sound condition, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and
shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/225
(H) Burglar bars shall comply with requirements of the building code and other codes or
ordinances of the city. Burglar bars on windows of bedrooms of residential structures shall be
constructed and maintained in such a way so as to be operable and openable from the interior of
the residence without use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
(I) Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
(2) Maintenance. The responsible party shall:
(A) Paint, waterproof, and repair the structure to prevent deterioration due to the elements.
Conditions requiring repair include but are not limited to loose siding with holes, excessive
cracks, or rotted boards which may permit air or water to penetrate rooms; loose roof covering;
holes or leaks in the roof which may cause damage to the structure or rooms; and rotting,
sagging, or deteriorating supports for steps, stairs, or porches. The exterior of all buildings,
including roofs, shall be maintained to such an extent as to be free of rot, decay or deformity.
(B) Repair holes, cracks, and other defects in stairs, railings, porches, steps, and balconies
that may cause injury to a person.
(C) Eliminate holes, excavations, sharp protrusions, and any other object or condition on the
property which may cause injury to a person.
(D) Provide drainage to prevent standing and stagnant water on the premises. No filling,
excavation or other improvement shall be performed or constructed on any property which will
have an adverse effect on an existing drainage pattern on an adjacent property. Any
accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground [shall be
eliminated].
(E) Erosion control. All unpaved areas shall be maintained with grass, ground cover, or other
type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil, when wet, will not be picked up and spread
to sidewalks or adjacent private or public property and is not subject to erosion during rains.
(F) Retaining walls. All retaining walls shall be maintained in good condition.
(G) Remove trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of damaging a structure or that
are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person.
(H) Completely secure all vacant or unoccupied dwelling units from unauthorized entry.
(I) Provide and maintain on each building, and on the property, street address numbers,
including unit numbers, and any additional signage as required by the city Code of Ordinances.
(J) Maintain in compliance with all applicable ordinances property screening fences and all
other fences.
(K) The exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
(L) Sidewalks and public walks shall be kept free of mud, debris, frozen precipitation or
other obstruction that would impair or prevent their use.
(M) Chimneys, antennas, towers, stacks, satellite dishes, and similar structures must be
maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration, and firmly secured.
(N) Fences:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/225
(i) All fences shall be maintained reasonably plumb and structurally sound. Each
structural and decorative member of a fence shall be free of deterioration and be
compatible in size, material, and appearance with the remainder of the fence.
(ii) A fence that has deteriorated to a condition that is likely to fall shall be repaired or
replaced.
(iii) Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts,
columns, or other structural members.
(iv) Any fence repair, alteration or modification must comply with all city ordinances.
(3) Nuisances. The following items shall be deemed to be a nuisance and not allowed:
(A) Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation. The regulation of high weeds and grass as
contained in section 3.04.041(g) shall be adhered to.
(B) Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals,
lumber, or other things.
(C) Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and other vermin.
(D) Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated or damaged condition that
it is unfit for human habitation, does not serve its original intended function, or is kept in such
an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity
thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is
located.
(E) All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances,
or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches.
(F) Any building, structure, or other place or location where any activity which is in violation
of local, state, or federal law is conducted, performed, or maintained.
(G) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.
(H) Any portion of a building or structure that remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(I) Glare. Exterior lights placed or erected on private property shall be shielded, placed or
erected so as not to create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance, and shall be erected so as to not
produce direct illumination across the bounding property line.
(J) The regulation of animals as contained in section 3.04.041(h) shall be adhered to.
(4) Solid waste.
(A) The responsible party shall provide solid waste receptacles or containers as required by
the approved site plan, and the regulations of section 3.04.041(o) shall be adhered to.
(B) The shared or common areas of the premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/225
(C) The premises shall be kept clean of all abandoned items such as abandoned motor
vehicles, i.e., boxes, refrigerators, stoves, glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar
items.
(5) Burned structures. Whenever any building or structure within the multifamily complex is
partially burned, the responsible party shall, within thirty (30) days, remove from the premises all
refuse, debris, charred and partially burned lumber and material. Such thirty (30) days shall begin
after the fire marshal has advised that the investigation is complete. If such building or structure shall
be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner or person in
control shall, within sixty (60) days, remove from the premises all the remaining portion of the
building or structure. Such sixty (60) days shall begin after the fire marshal has advised that the
investigation is complete. If the building or structure is to be repaired, work shall begin within sixty
(60) days and progressively be completed in one hundred twenty (120) days.
(6) Parking and storage of vehicles.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in charge of property zoned for
multifamily uses to permit the parking, standing, or storing of automobiles, buses, trucks,
tractors, motor homes, motorcycles, mopeds, farm machinery, all-terrain vehicles, boats,
aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, trailers, campers, camper shells, wheeled
towing frames, semi-tractor trailers, truck beds mounted on chassis, mobile homes, and all
vehicles, motorized and nonmotorized, within the front yard of the complex. Vehicles must be
wholly parked or stored within the provided parking area, not block public walks, be in a good
state of repair, maintained in such condition as not to be unsightly, and parked or stored in a
safe manner, so as to protect the health and safety of all persons.
(B) Inoperable and/or dismantled vehicles shall be regulated by the abandoned vehicle
regulations of the city Code of Ordinances (article 8.04).
(7) Abatement of nuisances. Notice of violation and abatement of nuisances shall be in accordance
with section 3.04.005 of this article.
(Ordinance 452 adopted 5/10/04)
ARTICLE 3.05 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in Texas Water Code section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does
ordain as follows. (Ordinance 482, art. 1, sec. A, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/225
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(Ordinance 482, art. 1, sec. B, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.003 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ordinance 482, art. 1, sec. C, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 482, art. 1, sec. D, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/225
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1 percent annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO,
V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/225
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See “Flood elevation study.”
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See “Regulatory floodway.”
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/225
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/225
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See “Area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/225
areas.
(Ordinance 482, art. 2, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.006 Lands to which this article applies
The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 482, art.
3, sec. A, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering reports entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Lubbock County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas,” dated September 28, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated
September 28, 2007, and “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Hale County, Texas and Incorporated Areas,”
dated February 18, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated February 18, 2011, and
any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. (Ordinance 523
adopted 2/14/11)
Sec. 3.05.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 482, art. 3, sec. C, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ordinance 482, art. 3, sec. D, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ordinance 482, art. 3, sec. E, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ordinance 482, art. 3, sec. F, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 482, art. 3, sec. G, adopted 6/11/07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/225
Sec. 3.05.013 Penalty
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 and
in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ordinance 482, art. 5,
sec. F, adopted 6/11/07)
Secs. 3.05.014–3.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.05.041 Designation of floodplain administrator
The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of
this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ordinance 482, art. 4, sec. A, adopted
6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.042 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state commission on environmental quality, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.05.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3 of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/225
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH
on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
1 foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 482, art. 4, sec. B, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.05.072(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.05.042(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/225
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(Ordinance 482, art. 4, sec. C, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.044 Variance procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.05.043(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article (section 3.05.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/225
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ordinance 482, art. 4, sec. D, adopted 6/11/07)
Secs. 3.05.045–3.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction Standards
Sec. 3.05.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(Ordinance 482, art. 5, sec. A, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.072 Specific standards
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/225
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.05.007, section 3.05.042(8), or section 3.05.073(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.05.043(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park
or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of
a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/225
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.05.043(a) and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(Ordinance 482, art. 5, sec. B, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be
consistent with sections 3.05.002, 3.05.003, and 3.05.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall meet the floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.05.008 and section
3.05.043 of this article and the provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.05.007 or section 3.05.042(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(Ordinance 482, art. 5, sec. C, adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 3.05.074 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.05.007 are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/225
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified); or
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation
or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.05.043, are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ordinance 482, art. 5, sec. D, adopted 6/11/07)
ARTICLE 3.06 TRAVEL TRAILERS
Sec. 3.06.001 Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them
in this section. Whenever other terms are used in this article, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them by
common usage.
Habitation. A place of abode, dwelling, residence, home, or living quarters.
Travel trailer. Vacation travel trailer, travel trailer, and recreational vehicle are used synonymously and mean a
vehicle designed for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational and vacation uses. Such
vehicles shall include, but shall not be limited to, any travel trailer, camp trailer, pop-up or tent camper, house
trailer, mobile home, motor home or house car, and any pickup camper, on or off the pickup.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.801)
Sec. 3.06.002 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply with any of the requirements,
or who shall use a travel trailer as a habitation in violation of any permit issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. The occupant and the owner of any travel trailer or the owner of the premises upon which
a travel trailer may be located and used in violation of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction, shall be fined as herein provided. (1996 Code, sec. 3.805)
Sec. 3.06.003 Permit required for use as habitation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/225
A travel trailer shall not be used by any person as a habitation for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) days
without first obtaining a permit for that purpose from the city. (1996 Code, sec. 3.802)
Sec. 3.06.004 Application for permit; fee
The city council shall implement a permit application procedure whereby a permit may be issued to an applicant
in compliance with this article upon satisfaction of certain criteria and payment of a fee to be established by the
city council. The application shall be filed with the building official and shall include the following:
(1) The name and permanent address of the applicant and the owner of the travel trailer.
(2) The proposed period of time for use of the travel trailer as a habitation.
(3) The proposed address or location of the travel trailer during the period of time requested by the
applicant.
(4) An explanation of the circumstances requiring the use of a travel trailer as a habitation.
(5) A description of the travel trailer, including type, size, condition, and existence of security
devices on the travel trailer.
(6) The number of persons to occupy the travel trailer.
(7) Other information that may be required by the city council which bears upon the health, safety
and welfare of the general public or of the applicant.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.803)
Sec. 3.06.005 Issuance of permit; renewal
Upon approval by the city council, a permit shall be issued to an applicant for the use of a travel trailer as a
habitation for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. Upon expiration of the period of time provided for
in the initial permit, a new application must be submitted and approved in accordance with this article in order
for the applicant and other affected parties to remain in compliance with this article. (1996 Code, sec. 3.804)
ARTICLE 3.07 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sec. 3.07.001 Access driveways to state highways
(a) Regulations adopted. The Regulations for Access Driveways to State Highways revised by the state
department of transportation in September 1960 are herewith adopted for the public safety and protection of the
city and of the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions herein shall be construed for the accomplishment of that
purpose.
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate or disregard any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1996 Code, art. 9.200)
Sec. 3.07.002 Sidewalk construction
(a) All persons, firms or corporations desiring to construct sidewalks within the city limits, before constructing
or laying any sidewalk, are required to secure a permit from the city secretary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/225
(b) In order to carry out a uniform method of constructing sidewalks and curbs, it is hereby ordained that all
sidewalks constructed upon property abutting upon streets of 60 feet in width shall be constructed four feet in
width beginning on the property line and extending into the street, and if any owner of property on said streets of
60 feet in width desires to erect curbs, said curbs shall be eight feet into the street from said property line. Upon
all residence lots abutting upon streets 80 feet in width all sidewalks shall be four feet wide beginning at the
property line and extending into the street, and if any owner of property on said street 80 feet in width desires to
erect curbs, said curbs shall be eight feet into the street from the property line. Upon all business lots abutting
upon streets of 80 feet in width all sidewalks shall be ten feet in width, and if any property owner desires to erect
curbs, said curb shall extend ten feet into the street from the property line.
(c) Upon all property abutting upon streets 100 feet in width all sidewalks shall be twelve feet in width
extending from the property line into the street, and any owner of property desiring to build a curb on said street
of 100 feet in width shall construct said curb to extend twelve feet into the street from said property line. All
sidewalks are to be constructed in a straight line, parallel with said streets, and curbs shall be parallel with said
streets and sidewalks, and all property owners desiring to join such sidewalks and curbs shall do so in a manner
as that they shall meet and continue in a straight line.
(d) Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day any such sidewalk or curb remains built in
violation of the specifications contained in this section shall be considered a separate offense.
(1996 Code, art. 9.300)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOL SALES*
Sec. 4.02.001 Title
This article shall be known and cited as the alcohol sales ordinance.
Sec. 4.02.002 Conformance with state law
The terms of this article shall be construed to be consistent with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and rules
and regulations promulgated under its authority.
Sec. 4.02.003 Location within 300 feet of church, school or hospital
The sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church, public or
private school, or public hospital is hereby prohibited, except as otherwise provided by this article and the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code.
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/225
Sec. 4.02.004 Location within 300 feet of day care or child care facility
(a) A permit or license holder under chapter 25 (Wine and Beer Retailer's Permit), 28 (Mixed Beverage
Permit), 32 (Private Club Registration Permit), 69 (Retail Dealer's On-Premise License), or 74 (Brewpub
License) of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who does not hold a food and beverage certificate may not sell
or engage in the business of selling an alcoholic beverage at a place of business located within 300 feet of a day
care center or child care facility, as defined by the Texas Human Resources Code, except as otherwise provided
by this article and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(b) The restrictions in this section do not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if:
(1) The seller's business and the day care center or child care facility are located on different
stories of a multi-story building; or
(2) The seller's business and the day care center or child care facility are located in separate
buildings and either the permit or license holder's place of business or the day care center or child
care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multi-story building.
State law reference–Sales near day-care center or child-care facility, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.331.
Sec. 4.02.005 Measurement of distances
The distance between the place of business where the alcoholic beverages are sold and the church, public or
private school, public hospital school [sic], or day care center or child care facility shall be measured in
accordance with section 109.33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
Sec. 4.02.006 Variances
The city council may allow variances to the regulations in section 4.02.003 and section 4.02.004 if the city
council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance:
(1) Is not in the best interest of the public;
(2) Constitutes waste or the inefficient use of land or other resources;
(3) Creates an undue hardship on an applicant;
(4) Does not serve its intended purpose;
(5) Is not effective or necessary; or
(6) For any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of
the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
(Ordinance 504 adopted 7/13/09)
ARTICLE 4.03 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS; SALE OF GOODS ON STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Purpose
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the
public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/225
of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (1996 Code, sec. 4.101)
Sec. 4.03.002 Definitions
For purposes of this article:
Peddler or solicitor. Any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city soliciting,
selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services,
photographs or magazines.
Permit board. The board created by section 4.03.041.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.102)
Sec. 4.03.003 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each and every day
this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 4.122)
Sec. 4.03.004 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products,
bakery products, vegetables, poultry, eggs, or other farm and garden products which have been raised or
produced by the vendor; daily deliveries of milk and bakery and other food products; newspaper distribution
when headquarters are maintained in the city; sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in
the usual course of business; or sales made under authority and by order of law. (1996 Code, sec. 4.115)
Sec. 4.03.005 Structures on street prohibited
No peddler nor any other person or corporation or association or organization shall have or maintain a structure
on any public street or alley in the city for the purpose of selling, exhibiting, or soliciting orders for any goods,
wares or merchandise, or cold drinks, hot drinks, or food, nor for the purpose of exhibiting any kind of exhibit.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.116)
Sec. 4.03.006 Sale of goods on sidewalk
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any of the goods or articles mentioned in section
4.03.002 of this article on the sidewalks of the city unless such goods are offered for sale or sold by a person
owning, occupying or controlling the premises adjoining or adjacent to the sidewalk, and then such goods shall
be exposed and sold in the usual course of trade in accordance with all ordinances of the city and the statutes of
the state. (1996 Code, sec. 4.117)
Sec. 4.03.007 Parking on street
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, truck, trailer or vehicle of any kind
on any public street or alley in the city for the purpose of selling, exhibiting or soliciting orders for any goods,
wares, merchandise, cold drinks, hot drinks, or food, for a longer period than ten (10) minutes. (1996 Code, sec.
4.118)
Sec. 4.03.008 Parking near school
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, stop or park any motor vehicle, truck, trailer or vehicle of any kind
at any place on any public street or alley located within six hundred feet (600') of any public school in the city
for the purpose of selling, exhibiting or soliciting orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, cold drinks, hot
drinks, or food. (1996 Code, sec. 4.119)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/225
Sec. 4.03.009 Hours of operation; entering residence; conduct
(a) There will be no soliciting in the city before 8:00 a.m. or after sundown (unless by appointment).
(b) Solicitors may not enter or attempt to enter a residence (house) unless invited by a property owner or
adult. Uninvited entry could be criminal trespass, a violation of the law.
(c) No threats or intimidating salesmanship will be used on potential customers.
(d) If asked or told to leave, or that they are not interested in what the solicitor is selling, he must leave the
property at once.
(e) Violation of any of the above-listed rules will result in denial of any future permits, and the immediate
termination of the current permit.
(f) A check will be made by the police department, and any information deemed unfavorable by the police
chief will result in that subject being refused access to a permit. If the subject has outstanding warrants he/she
will be arrested.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.121)
Secs. 4.03.010–4.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit for Peddlers and Solicitors
Sec. 4.03.041 Permit board
There is hereby established the permit board of the city, the official name of which shall be “The permit board of
the City of Abernathy.” The permit board shall be composed of the city manager, who shall be chairman of the
board, the chief of police, and the city secretary. The permit board shall perform all duties incumbent upon it
under the terms of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.103)
Sec. 4.03.042 Required
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in any activity mentioned in section 4.03.002 without
having first applied for and obtained a permit so to do from the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.104)
Sec. 4.03.043 Application generally
Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall make written application therefor to the city secretary,
which application shall show the following:
(1) The full name and post office address of the applicant.
(2) The state, county, town or city in which the applicant permanently resides.
(3) The age, height, weight, complexion, color of hair and color of the eyes of the applicant.
(4) The occupation in which the applicant desires to engage and for which he desires a permit.
(5) A full and complete description of the goods, wares and merchandise or other articles or tokens
which the applicant desires to sell, which description shall give in detail the grade and character of
the property to be sold. Further description as to grade and quality may be required by the permit
board.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/225
(6) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.105)
Sec. 4.03.044 Attachments to application
There shall be attached to each application under this article the following:
(1) Two (2) recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, which photographs shall not
exceed one inch (1") square in size.
(2) A certificate or letter from the president, a vice-president, general manager, sales manager,
assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works,
sells or solicits, stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company.
(3) (A) A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall
show the page on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a
certificate from an association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of
citizens of the United States against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm
or company is a member in good standing of such association or organization.
(B) In the event that the applicant is an individual who is not working, selling or soliciting for
any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two (2) citizens of the applicant's
permanent residence shall be submitted.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.106)
Sec. 4.03.045 Consideration of application
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the city secretary to retain
the application until time for the permit board to consider the same. The permit board shall meet as necessary.
All applications filed with the city secretary prior to the preceding Wednesday shall be considered by the permit
board on the next succeeding Monday. Applications filed between Wednesday morning and Saturday shall be
considered by the permit board on the second Monday after filing. (1996 Code, sec. 4.107)
Sec. 4.03.046 Investigation fee
Each applicant for a permit under this article who resides in the city and furnishes local references shall be
charged an investigation fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. Each such
applicant who resides outside of the city shall be charged an investigation fee as provided for in the fee schedule
found in appendix A of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.108)
Sec. 4.03.047 Issuance
If, upon hearing, it shall appear to the permit board, or a majority thereof, that the statements contained in an
application for a permit under this article are true, and that the applicant has the right, under the constitution and
laws of this state and under the ordinances of this city, to engage in business, and that the applicant has not been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the permit board shall issue such permit to
the applicant. (1996 Code, sec. 4.109)
Sec. 4.03.048 Contents
Each permit issued under this article shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the applicant and his address.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/225
(2) A physical description of the applicant.
(3) A photographic likeness furnished with the application.
(4) The date the permit was issued.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.110)
Sec. 4.03.049 Permit to be carried on person
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in any activity for which a permit is required by this
article unless he carries such permit on his person while so engaged. (1996 Code, sec. 4.111)
Sec. 4.03.050 Duration
All permits issued under this article shall be valid from the date shown thereon for a period of one (1) year,
unless sooner revoked as provided in this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.112)
Sec. 4.03.051 Revocation
If, after the permit provided for in this article has been issued, the permit board or other agency or official of the
city finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, such permit may be revoked by
the permit board. Such permit may also be revoked if it shall appear to the permit board that the holder of such
permit has violated any ordinance of the city or any law of the state in connection with any soliciting by such
holder or in connection with the collection, or attempted collection, of any account due to such permit holder or
his employer, or in connection with the repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold by such permit
holder or any other person employed by the employer of such permit holder. (1996 Code, sec. 4.113)
Sec. 4.03.052 Appeals
If the applicant for a permit under this article, or the holder of such a permit, is dissatisfied with any holding or
finding of the permit board, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such
appeal with the permit board within ten (10) days from the making and filing of such decision of the permit
board. Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the permit and all papers possessed by the
permit board in connection with such application and such permit shall be delivered to the city council and such
matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the
notice of appeal. The city council shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is
vested in the permit board by this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.114)
Sec. 4.03.053 Bond
Every applicant for a permit to solicit or take orders for or attempt to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, not a resident of the city, shall file with the city secretary a surety bond, running to the
city, in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable to and approved by the city
manager, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city
and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of soliciting, and guaranteeing to any citizen
of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the
representations of the solicitor, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with said
solicitor that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of said solicitor. Action
on such bond may be brought in the name of the city for the use and benefit of the aggrieved person. (1996
Code, sec. 4.120)
ARTICLE 4.04 DANCE HALLS AND POOL HALLS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/225
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.04.001 Title; definitions
This article shall be known as the dance hall and pool hall ordinance, and the following terms, when used herein,
are defined and shall mean as follows:
Operator. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation which conducts, manages, maintains or
controls, either directly or indirectly, any dance hall or pool hall as defined and designated herein.
Pool hall. Any and every room, place, space, building or floor where the public generally may use tables or a
table to play billiards, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole or any similar game, notwithstanding the fact that some
other name may be used.
Private dance. Any dance given or held at any bona fide home and any dance given or held by any nonprofit
club, society, association or corporation organized for civic, fraternal or charitable purposes, having permanent
membership and to which members are not admitted as such for casual or limited times only and for admission
or initiation as members to which the same fee, if any, is charged all persons becoming members thereof
(excepting those becoming life members), and the dues to which are required to be paid for periods of not less
than six (6) months, and which club, society, association or corporation does not have any business or
commercial purposes and which owns, rents or maintains a place, building or house for the accommodation of
its members for other material social, civic, fraternal or charitable purposes besides that of dancing; and
admission to which dance is granted to members of such club, society, association or corporation and their
invited guests only and from which the general public is excluded.
Public dance. Any and every dance to which admission is or can be had or obtained by paying any fee or in
connection with which any charge is made directly or indirectly for admission, and, generally, shall include any
dance to which the public generally may gain admission for a fee directly or indirectly paid, or to which the
public generally can gain admission without the payment of any fee, and includes every dance except “private
dances” as defined in this section.
Public dance hall. Any and every room, place, space, building or floor where a “public dance” is held or
conducted, and shall include every “cabaret” and “nightclub” as those terms are commonly and ordinarily
understood. Public dance halls are divided herein into three classes according to the area of floor space as
follows: Any public dance hall with a floor space of 2,000 square feet or more for dancing and sitting purposes
is designated as class A; any public dance hall having 500 but less than 2,000 square feet of floor space for
dancing and sitting purposes is designated as class B; any public dance hall having less than 500 square feet of
floor space for dancing and sitting purposes is designated as class C.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.201)
Sec. 4.04.002 Penalty
Any person, association, corporation, operator or licensee who shall violate or aid or assist in violating any of
the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Any remedy
prescribed herein shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.208)
Sec. 4.04.003 Hours of operation
No public dance hall shall remain open or operate between the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 7:00 p.m.,
Central Standard Time. The same hours of closing shall apply to pool halls. (1996 Code, sec. 4.206)
Sec. 4.04.004 Regulations
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/225
In addition to the other provisions of this article, dance halls and pool halls shall be governed by the following
regulations:
(1) Dance halls shall be policed by special officers of the number of two (2) for each hall,
beginning at least thirty minutes prior to the opening hour and ending not less than thirty minutes
after the closing hour. The special officers must be approved by the city manager prior to the hiring
of same by the operator of the hall; or, in the alternative, the operator of the hall may request the city
manager to furnish two (2) or more officers for which the city will charge said operator $10.00 per
officer per night of duty, said charge to be paid to the city in advance.
(2) Free access and entrance into all dance halls shall be at all times accorded and granted to any
officer of the city.
(3) Each dance hall shall be supplied with separate and convenient toilet facilities for each sex, the
approach to which shall be private, and maintained in a sanitary condition.
(4) No intoxicating liquors or beverages may be drunk or dispensed at any public dance hall or
pool hall.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.207)
Secs. 4.04.005–4.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.04.041 Required
It shall be unlawful to hold, conduct, operate or aid and assist in holding, operating or conducting any public
dance as defined herein, or to maintain or operate any public dance hall or pool hall, within the limits of the city,
unless and until the operator or person in charge of same shall have obtained a license for so doing under the
terms of this article. A license for such person or operator shall be issued by the city secretary to any applicant
when the conditions of this article have been approved by the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 4.202)
Sec. 4.04.042 Fee schedule
The fees to be charged for such licenses issued shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A
of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.203)
Sec. 4.04.043 Duration; refund of fee; transfer
All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate one year from the date of such issuance. No refund of any license
fee paid hereunder shall be made by the city for any cause whatsoever. Licenses issued hereunder shall be
deemed personal to the licensee, and shall not be assignable; provided, however, that licenses issued hereunder
may be transferred from one location or place of business to another location or place of business upon
application approved by the city council as an original application. (1996 Code, sec. 4.204)
Sec. 4.04.044 Application; issuance
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation desiring a license to operate a dance hall or pool hall as
herein defined shall file with the city secretary a written sworn application for such license, which application
shall state:
(1) The location, by street and number, of the place, space, building, and room or floor, and the
size of such room or space, including total square feet thereof, which is proposed to be used for such
purpose if a dance hall or a pool hall, and the number of tables to be used in the event it is a pool hall;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/225
and the name and address of the applicant, and, if said premises are leased to the applicant, the name
of the lessor.
(2) If the applicant is an individual, that he is a citizen of the State of Texas, and that he has not
been convicted of a felony, or, if so, the nature of the offense of which he has been convicted, and the
length of his residence in the city, and the previous occupation or employment of the applicant for a
period of five years next preceding the filing of his application, and, if the application is by a firm,
association or partnership, all of the information required of an individual application shall be given
as to each member of the firm, association or partnership. If the application is made on behalf of a
corporation, then all of the foregoing information required of an individual applicant shall be given as
to the manager thereof, and such application shall further state when and where such corporation has
been chartered, and shall give the name of each and every director, officer and stockholder of such
corporation.
(3) Such other and additional information as the city council may from time to time deem proper
and necessary as determined by resolution of such council.
(4) Any license issued under the terms of this article shall not be construed as granting or
conferring any vested right to the licensee or operator but shall be subject to revocation and
cancellation as provided for in this article. Any misrepresentation as to any facts required for the
application for a license shall be grounds for cancellation. The city secretary shall refer all
applications for investigation to the chief of police, the public health officer, the chief of the fire
department and the building inspector, who shall promptly investigate same, and if the officers find
that the premises desired to be used for the purpose applied for comply with the laws of the state, this
article and other ordinances of the city regulating health, sanitation, and fire regulations and the
building code of the city, then such officers in their respective capacities shall note upon such
application their approval and such application shall be referred by the city secretary to the city
council for approval or disapproval. On applications approved by the city council, the city secretary
shall issue a proper license to such applicant upon the payment of the license fee prescribed herein.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.205)
Sec. 4.04.045 Revocation
If any dance hall is operated in violation of any ordinance of the city, or any law of the state, the chief of police
may at any time give notice in writing to such operator or licensee, manager, person or persons in control of the
operation and maintenance of such dance hall that the permit or license issued for the operation and maintenance
of said dance hall has been revoked and canceled, said revocation and cancellation to be final after the expiration
of ten (10) days, unless on or before the expiration of said ten days the operator in charge of said dance hall shall
file with the city secretary a written appeal, addressed to the city council, in which it is requested that the city
council grant unto him or her a hearing upon the operation as to whether or not the permit or license issued be
canceled and revoked. The city council shall then conduct a hearing within thirty days of receipt of the appeal,
and such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing the evidence and facts at such hearing wherein
the applicant is permitted to appear and offer evidence, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties. This
section shall apply also to pool halls and pool hall operators. (1996 Code, sec. 4.207)
ARTICLE 4.05 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES AND POOL TABLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Purpose
This article as herein established has been written for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community and in the furtherance of conserving the value of property and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/225
establishing a community desirable to reside therein. (1996 Code, sec. 4.301)
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
As pertaining to this article, the following definitions will have their specific meaning as follows:
Amusement center. Any business establishment in which at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the public floor
area is devoted to coin-operated machines used for recreation and amusement purposes or pool or billiard tables.
Coin-operated machines used for recreation or amusement purposes. Every machine or device of any kind or
character which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks and which dispenses or is used or
capable of being used or operated for amusement, pleasure, skill or recreation. This term expressly includes
pinball, football, coin-operated pool tables, and other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or
pleasure. This term expressly excludes coin-operated music machines, pay toilets, pay telephones, coin-operated
rides for children, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend merchandise, commodities,
confections or music. This term shall also include machines operated by currency or legal tender.
Owner. Any person, firm, company, association or corporation owning any coin-operated machine used for
recreation, or pool or billiard tables, from which he/she derives a profit, save and except religious, charitable and
education organizations authorized under laws of the state.
Pool or billiard table. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, upon which balls are
propelled by a stick or cue, and where the player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit
causing an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may be actually commenced.
Recreation or amusement machine. Any pool or billiard table or any coin-operated machine used for amusement
purposes, of which any table or machine is operated for profit.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.302)
Sec. 4.05.003 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article for which no other penalty is set forth shall upon
conviction be subject to a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code, per incident or per day in which such condition exists. Each day that such violation is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. The term “person” as used in this section shall include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vender in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee or lessee, agent or
another person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or tract of land. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.317)
Sec. 4.05.004 Occupation tax levied
(a) There is levied an annual tax equal to 1/4 of the amount levied by the state on coin-operated machines used
for recreation or amusement purposes, or pool or billiard tables. The occupation tax shall be levied upon the
owner of such coin-operated machines, or pool or billiard tables, save and except religious, charitable and
educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, and the tax levied herein shall be paid to the
city secretary, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt and, for each machine on which the occupation tax is
paid, an occupation tax tag. The occupation tax shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. Such
occupation tax receipt and tax tag shall specify the number of recreation or amusement machines, or pool or
billiard tables, for which it is issued and the address of the legal owner. The occupation tax tag shall be affixed to
each machine and pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax is paid.
(b) In the event the owner of any of the recreation or amusement machines wishes to substitute a different
machine for one within the city on which the occupation tax has been paid, the owner will remove the tax tag
from the machine to be replaced and place it upon the substitute machine; provided, however, that the machine
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/225
that is replaced by the substitute machine shall not be operated for profit within the city again until an
occupation tax tag is affixed to it. In the event the tax tag is mutilated, the owner will turn in a mutilated
occupation tax tag to the city secretary's office and receive a new tag. There shall be a twenty-five cent ($0.25)
charge for the new tag.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.303)
State law reference–Taxation of coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2153.451.
Sec. 4.05.005 Failure to pay occupation tax
The police department is authorized to seal any recreation or amusement machine or pool or billiard table on
which the occupation tax has not been paid. The police department is authorized to charge a fee as provided for
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for the release of any recreation or amusement machine or pool or
billiard table that is sealed as provided above for nonpayment of the occupation tax. Whoever shall break the
seal affixed in the name of the city or display or remove from the location any recreation or amusement machine
or pool or billiard table shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor under the laws of the state. (1996 Code, sec.
4.308)
Sec. 4.05.006 Inspections
The city administrator shall appoint or designate an authorized representative to make periodic inspections of
premises licensed under this article to determine compliance with the building provisions, the maintenance of
toilets and other sanitary facilities and compliance with the health, plumbing, sanitary and other applicable code
provisions and any other ordinance of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.309)
Sec. 4.05.007 Machines to be attended and in open view
(a) The recreation or amusement machines which are operated for profit within a place of business shall not be
left unattended.
(b) Within each place of business in which recreation or amusement machines are operated for a profit, the
machines will be so situated so that the machines will be in full, open, public view.
(c) The term “full, open, public view” as used in this article shall mean that the machines are clearly and
plainly visible from the exterior of the front of the building. The front of the building, as used here, is that side of
the structure where the main entrance is located or that side of a structure which fronts a street. Provided,
however, if the playing of the recreation or amusement machines is in a recreation center where the majority of
the public is engaged in an activity other than the playing of the machines, the machines shall be in full, open,
public view if the recreation and amusement machines are clearly and plainly visible from the areas of the
building where the other activities are being performed.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.304)
Sec. 4.05.008 Partitions obstructing view of machines
It shall be unlawful to erect or construct in any business establishment in which recreation and amusement
machines are operated for a profit, any partition obstructing the full, open, public view of any part of premises in
which recreation or amusement machines are displayed and operated for profit; provided, however, that toilets or
other sanitary facilities shall be enclosed and adequately ventilated in accordance with the health, plumbing,
sanitary and other applicable regulations of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.305)
Sec. 4.05.009 Hours of operation
No person may engage in the operation for profit of any recreation or amusement machines within the city
between the hours of twelve midnight (12:00) and seven a.m. (7:00) Monday through Thursday, and between the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/225
hours of one a.m. (1:00) and seven a.m. (7:00) on Friday and Saturday. Such recreation or amusement machines
may be operated on Sundays only between the hours of one p.m. (1:00) and twelve a.m. (12:00). (1996 Code,
sec. 4.306)
Sec. 4.05.010 Use by minors during school hours
No person who has the control of any business establishment wherein is kept, used or operated for profit any
recreation or amusement machines shall permit or allow any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to play
thereon or operate any such machine during school hours. It shall be the duty of any person who is the proprietor
or keeper of such business establishment to post conspicuously in his/her place of business in the vicinity of the
machine's location within the place of business the following signs: “MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 18
YEARS ARE NOT ALLOWED TO PLAY OR OPERATE MACHINES DURING SCHOOL HOURS.” (1996
Code, sec. 4.307)
Sec. 4.05.011 Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages
The sale of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises licensed under this article is prohibited. No person so
licensed shall knowingly permit the sale, use or consumption of any kind of alcoholic beverages in or upon the
premises for which a license has been issued. (1996 Code, sec. 4.313)
Secs. 4.05.012–4.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Amusement Center License
Sec. 4.05.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity that owns the amusement center, save and except religious,
charitable or educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, to operate such business within the
city without first having obtained an appropriate license from the city secretary. Application for license shall be
made with the city secretary initially and on or before January 1 of each succeeding year. Whoever shall violate
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.310)
Sec. 4.05.042 Fee
There is levied an annual license fee on each person or business entity that owns an amusement center within the
city. The city secretary is authorized to collect this annual license fee, which shall be due and payable on January
1 of each succeeding year. The annual license fee for such a general business shall be provided for in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.311)
Sec. 4.05.043 Location restrictions
Because of the rapid proliferation of such businesses in the city and the observed re-questioned legality of such
activities, the city council hereby finds that a further proliferation and concentration of such businesses
constitutes a nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this
article, no license will be issued for any such establishment unless such is at least three hundred feet in a direct
line from any of its public entrances to the nearest property line of a church or school. Any business existing as
of the time of the passage of this article shall be permitted to continue; however, if they should cease operations,
or violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable city, state or federal law, their license shall
be subject to revocation and such may not be renewed unless they meet all provisions of any applicable law,
including the above spacing requirements. (1996 Code, sec. 4.312)
Sec. 4.05.044 Duration; transfer
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be for one (1) year and shall be nontransferable. (1996 Code, sec.
4.314)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/225
Sec. 4.05.045 Display
A license issued pursuant to this article shall at all times be displayed in some conspicuous place within the
licensed place of business. (1996 Code, sec. 4.315)
Sec. 4.05.046 Revocation
(a) The city council is authorized and empowered to revoke the license of any person licensed under this
article, after giving such licensee ten (10) days' notice of a hearing and after conducting such hearing for the
purpose of determining whether such license should be revoked.
(b) The power of revocation shall be exercised upon the following grounds only:
(1) For the violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) For knowingly permitting the sale, use or consumption of any alcoholic beverages in or upon
the licensed premises.
(3) For violation of the prescribed hours of operation provided in this article.
(4) For knowingly permitting the presence on the premises of a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
(5) For knowingly permitting disorderly conduct or immoral practices on the premises.
(6) For knowingly permitting the violation of the laws of the state or of this article or any other
ordinance of the city.
(7) For failure to provide a minimum lighting of thirty (30) footcandles at every point thirty inches
(30") above the floor in the parlor.
(8) For failure to comply with the regulations of this article relating to minors.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.316)
ARTICLE 4.06 CABLE TELEVISION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.06.001–4.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Rate Regulation
Sec. 4.06.031 Definitions
In this division:
Basic cable rates. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
Basic service tier. A separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier
of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic
television signals other than superstations.
Benchmark. A per-channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/225
Cable Act of 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
Cable operator. Any person or group of persons:
(1) Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or
(2) Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
Channel. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost-of-service showing. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the
price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier
and to continue to attract capital.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Initial basic cable rates. The rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges
for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to
regulate basic cable rates.
Must-carry signal. The signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be
carried on the basic service tier.
PEG channel. The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and
equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
Price cap. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a
formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
Reasonable rate standard. A per-channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
Superstation. Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.501)
Sec. 4.06.032 Initial review of basic cable rates
(a) Notice. Upon the adoption of this division and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall
immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends
to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the
Cable Act of 1992.
(b) Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with
the city its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material
concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
(c) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by
the applicable benchmark, the city council shall:
(A) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/225
(B) Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic
cable rates with the city.
(2) If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic
cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect.
(d) Extended review period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
(A) 90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard; or
(B) 150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify
a rate above the applicable benchmark.
(2) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council
shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are
paid.
(e) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city
council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
(f) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may
request the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the
objector must provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address.
(g) Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in
compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark
analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the
initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
(1) If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial
basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level.
(2) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable
operator's per-channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by 10 percent, or the applicable
benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between
September 30, 1992 and the initial date of regulation.
(3) If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per-channel rate
was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark,
adjusted for inflation.
(h) Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the
cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial
basic cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service
submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/225
cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992 rates,
minus ten percent (10%), will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
(i) Decision.
(1) Generally; formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed
rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of
the following:
(A) If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable
operator; or
(B) If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service
analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic
cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-ofservice
analysis.
(2) Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as
submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing
justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection (g) or
(h) above, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to
subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to
September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with
FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(3) Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are
disapproved in whole or in part, or if there are objections made by other parties to the proposed rates,
the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of
its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city.
(j) Appeals. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may
be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.502)
Sec. 4.06.033 Review of request for increase in basic cable rates
(a) Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated
equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable
operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until
at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates.
(b) Expedited determination and public hearing.
(1) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase
request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the
applicable price cap, the city council shall:
(A) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(B) Act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator
filed its request with the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/225
(2) If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed
its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect.
(c) Extended review period.
(1) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-ofservice
showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
(A) 90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within
the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(B) 150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify
a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
(2) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
(3) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council
shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the
amounts are paid.
(d) Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase,
the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and
record objections.
(e) Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may
request the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the
objector must provide the city secretary with the objector's name and address.
(f) Delayed determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested
rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
(g) Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with
the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be
established as follows:
(1) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the
proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates.
(2) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city
council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with
the price cap.
(h) Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a
rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator
makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or
below the cable operator's then-current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
(i) Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal
resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/225
were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision.
Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city secretary to record the objection or
may be submitted in writing at any time before the decision resolution is adopted.
(j) Refunds.
(1) The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
(A) The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as
described in subsection (c) above;
(B) The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review
period; and
(C) The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable
price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service
showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
(2) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
(k) Appeals. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment
may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.503)
Sec. 4.06.034 Authority to require additional information; request for confidentiality
(a) Authority to require additional information.
(1) In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that
exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce
information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate
determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in
accordance with this section.
(2) In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city
council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates
are in accord with the standard.
(b) Request for confidentiality.
(1) A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the
information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be
attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
(2) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any
information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information
to which the request applies shall be identified.
(3) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a
statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based.
(4) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be
considered.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/225
(c) Action on request for confidentiality. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b) will
be acted upon by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents, by a
preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the
request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public
inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the
city council shall take one of the following actions:
(1) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable
operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city
will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires will the
information be made available for public inspection.
(2) If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be
made available for public inspection.
(d) Appeals. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of
that decision from the FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the
information will be stayed pending review.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.504)
Sec. 4.06.035 Automatic rate adjustments
(a) Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped
base per-channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
(b) Other external costs.
(1) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier
automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those
factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise
requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base
per-channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
(2) For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the
starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per-channel rate may
be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per-channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of
retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
(c) Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a
rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the
item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within thirty (30) days of
receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.505)
Sec. 4.06.036 Enforcement; penalty
(a) Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates
under the following circumstances:
(1) A portion of the previously paid rates has been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier
charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/225
(2) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(b) Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be
subject to a [fine] in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.506)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
(a) The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for information leading to the
arrest and conviction of any persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson, as defined in the Penal Code
of the state, within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) This reward is made a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general funds of the city.
(c) The city council shall be the sole, exclusive and final judge in determining eligibility for the reward
offered herein.
(1996 Code, art. 5.300)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created; appointment and removal; salary
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire
marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city council through the city manager. Such office shall be for a term
of one year, beginning at the time of appointment, and ending twelve months from the date of appointment. Such
office shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal
shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office and hold office for the length of the term herein provided.
The fire marshal may be removed from office at any time during his term, by the appointment of a qualified
successor as herein provided. He shall receive such salary as set by the city council, payable in twelve monthly
installments, as full compensation for his services. (1996 Code, sec. 5.101)
Sec. 5.02.002 Duties to investigate fires; record of fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss,
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1996 Code, sec. 5.102)
Sec. 5.02.003 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates arson
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/225
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall proceed only with reason and good
discretion and only with the prior concurrence of the city manager, and take or cause to be taken the testimony,
on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the
matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion
that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the
crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall make
known the results of his investigation to chief of police of the city, so that such person may be lawfully arrested
and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such
evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of
all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1996 Code, sec. 5.103)
Sec. 5.02.004 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of evidence
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1996 Code, sec. 5.104)
Sec. 5.02.005 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall
be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Provided,
however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. (1996 Code, sec. 5.105)
Sec. 5.02.006 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1996 Code, sec. 5.106)
Sec. 5.02.007 Authority to enter premises
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion and only
with the prior concurrence of the city manager. (1996 Code, sec. 5.107)
Sec. 5.02.008 Inspections for fire hazards; reports to state fire marshal
(a) The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent,
and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter
into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter
upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and
public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto.
(b) Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other
buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall
find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/225
whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous
arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and
refuse material, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or
create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and
such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided,
however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days,
appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his authority the order is
revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant.
(c) At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous
conditions, together with separate report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions [sic], together
with separate report on each fire in the city during the month.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.108)
Sec. 5.02.009 Penalty for maintaining dangerous building
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same
when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and
which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine
in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 5.109)
Sec. 5.02.010 Penalty for maintaining fire hazard
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or
health or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or
refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall
create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the
maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 5.110)
Sec. 5.02.011 Order required before prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 5.02.009 and 5.02.010 of this article until the order provided for
in section 5.02.008 be given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1996 Code, sec.
5.111)
Sec. 5.02.012 Recovery of penalties
The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the
enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city. (1996 Code, sec. 5.112)
Sec. 5.02.013 Continuing offenses
Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct
and separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 5.113)
Sec. 5.02.014 Enforcement
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/225
All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall
be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures,
penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city. (1996 Code, sec. 5.114)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.03.001 Findings
The city council does hereby find and determine that fireworks, defined as any composition or device designed
for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation,
including but not limited to fireworks, roman candles, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, flares and other
articles of like nature, when ignited and exploded within the city, create a hazard to the life and limb of both
pedestrians and vehicular traffic and also create a fire hazard to property, and that the prevention of the sale and
use of such fireworks within the city would greatly reduce, if not eliminate, such hazards and dangers. (1996
Code, sec. 5.201)
Sec. 5.03.002 Penalty
Every person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be penalized by a fine in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day that such fireworks are
offered for sale shall constitute a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 5.204)
Sec. 5.03.003 Manufacture or sale prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer for sale within the city limits fireworks
consisting of firecrackers, roman candles, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, flares and other articles of
like nature consisting of gunpowder and other explosive materials. (1996 Code, sec. 5.202)
Sec. 5.03.004 Use prohibited
Unless prior approval is obtained from the city council, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or explode
fireworks within the city. (1996 Code, sec. 5.203)
ARTICLE 5.04 OUTDOOR BURNING*
Sec. 5.04.001 Restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly ignite and burn, or to knowingly cause to be ignited and burned,
any trash, debris or other combustible materials, outdoors, upon any premises within the city, except as set forth
in section 5.04.002. (1996 Code, sec. 5.401)
Sec. 5.04.002 Allowable burning
Outdoor burning is authorized in each of the following instances when done in a manner that it does not pose a
threat to any other property or buildings, and does not contain electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics,
construction or demolition materials not made of wood, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive
materials, chemical wastes, or items containing natural or synthetic rubber:
(1) Pursuant to a written grant of authority from the regional office of the state commission on
environmental quality
(2) For the purpose of training firefighting personnel when authorized under the rules and
regulations of the state commission on environmental quality;
(3) For the purpose of preparation of food;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/225
(4) For the purpose of providing warmth;
(5) Solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes by school or other nonprofit organizations.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.402)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Mosquito control service charge
A monthly fee of $1.25 shall be collected as a line item charge on city water service bills for each water
customer located within the municipal boundaries of the city for the purposes of mosquito control services. Said
fee is in addition to the water rates in city code chapter 13, and attaches the same delinquency provisions set in
sections 13.04.062 and 13.04.063 of that chapter. (Ordinance 495, adopted 9/9/08)
ARTICLE 6.02 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.02.001–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Restaurants
Sec. 6.02.031 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this division:
Employee. Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with
any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
Health officer. The city health officer or his authorized representative.
Itinerant restaurant. One operating for a period temporarily in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public
exhibition or other similar gathering.
Person. Person, firm, corporation, or association.
Restaurant. Restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda
fountain and all other eating and drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food and
drink are prepared for sale elsewhere or consumption elsewhere.
Utensils. Includes any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers, or any other equipment
with which food or drink comes in contact during storage, preparation, or serving.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.401)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/225
Sec. 6.02.032 Enforcement generally
This division shall be enforced by the health officer in accordance with the interpretations thereof contained in
the 1962 edition of the U.S. Public Health Service Code Regulating Eating and Drinking Establishments, a
certified copy of which shall be on file at the city secretary's office. (1996 Code, sec. 4.412)
Sec. 6.02.033 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each and every violation of the provisions of
this division shall constitute a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 4.413)
Sec. 6.02.034 Violations declared nuisance
The operation or maintenance of any restaurant, or the preparation for sale or the sale of any food or drink for
human consumption within any restaurant, during any time when provisions of this division are not being
reasonably complied with shall constitute and such acts are declared to be nuisances subject to abatement by
injunction when conditions in any restaurant constitute a menace to public health, and this provision is
cumulative of all other enforcement remedies. (1996 Code, sec. 4.414)
Sec. 6.02.035 Permit required; application; renewal; revocation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the city or its police jurisdiction who does not
possess an unrevoked permit from the health officer. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only
persons who comply with the requirements of this division shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit.
(b) Application for a permit must be made in writing upon forms prescribed and furnished by the city health
department. The city health department shall issue a permit in writing when the applicant has complied with the
requirements of this division and rules and regulations of the city health department. This permit shall remain in
full force and effect for the fiscal year of the city unless sooner revoked for violations of any provisions of this
division and/or rules and regulations of the city health department. Such permit shall be renewed annually in like
manner as hereinbefore prescribed, and is valid for one full fiscal year of the city, or a fraction thereof. This
permit shall be nontransferable.
(c) Any permit granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation at the direction of the city health officer for
failure of the grantee named therein or any of his, her or its employees, agents or representatives, or any of them,
to carry on the business or activities described in such permit in accordance with all food and sanitary laws of
the state, ordinances of the city, rules and regulations of the health department of the city, and all official orders
pursuant thereto, and, upon such notice of such revocation, the operation of such business or activities shall
immediately be discontinued until the terms and provisions of this division are complied with.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.402)
Sec. 6.02.036 Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or adulterated food or drink
Samples of food, drink, and other substances may be taken and examined by the health officer as often as may
be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid
the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. (1996
Code, sec. 4.403)
Sec. 6.02.037 Inspections
(a) At least once every six months the health officer shall inspect every restaurant located within the city and
its police jurisdiction. In case the health officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall make a
second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/225
second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this division. Any violation
of the same item of this division on such second inspection shall call for immediate revocation of the permit.
(b) One copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the health officer upon an inside wall of the
restaurant, and said inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the health officer.
Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the health department.
(c) The person operating the restaurant shall upon request of the health officer permit access to all parts of the
establishment and shall permit copying of any or all records of food purchased.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.404)
Sec. 6.02.038 Sanitation requirements
All restaurants shall comply with all the following items of sanitation:
(1) Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared, or served, or in
which utensils are washed, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and
shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(2) Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All
walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared shall be finished in light
color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a
smooth, washable surface up to the level reached by splash or spray.
(3) Doors and windows. All openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened. Screen doors
shall be outward opening and self-closing, to prevent the entrance of flies or other insects.
(4) Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils
are washed, shall be well lighted.
(5) Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils
are washed, shall be ventilated.
(6) Toilet facilities. Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located
toilet facilities within or adjacent to the building for its employees, conforming with the ordinances
of the city. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food, drink, or utensils are
handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in
clean condition, in good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Hand washing signs shall be posted
in each toilet room used by employees. In case privies or earth closets are permitted and used, they
shall be separated from the restaurant building, and shall be of sanitary type constructed and operated
in conformity with the standards of the state board of health.
(7) Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which
food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water supply shall be adequate, and of safe, sanitary
quality.
(8) Lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided,
including hot and cold running water, soap, and approved sanitary towels. The use of a common
towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet rooms without first washing
his hands.
(9) Construction of utensils and equipment. All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases
or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils
used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/225
and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be
used; provided that solder containing lead may be used for jointing.
(10) Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment.
(A) All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables,
refrigerators, stoves, hoods, and sinks, shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects, and
other contaminating material. All clothes used by waiters, chefs, and other employees shall be
clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once.
(B) All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively
subjected to an approved hot water sterilization process after each usage. All multi-use utensils
used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively
subjected to an approved bactericidal process following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if
used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
(C) No article, polish, or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other
poisonous material shall be used for cleaning or polishing of utensils.
(11) Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be
stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination and shall be handled in
such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be
purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored within a clean, dry place until used, and shall be
handled in a sanitary manner.
(12) Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be
kept in suitable closed receptacles, in such manner as not to become a nuisance.
(13) Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below 50 degrees F.
except when being prepared or served. Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall be properly
disposed of.
(14) Wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from
spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice
cream, and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and approved milk
products shall be served in the individual original containers in which they are received from the
distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device; provided that this
requirement shall not apply to cream which may be served from the original bottle from a dispenser
approved for such service. All oysters, clams, and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if
shucked shall be kept until used in the containers in which they are placed at the shucking plant.
(15) Storage, display, and serving of food and drink. All food and drink shall be so stored,
displayed, and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by
rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage, and other contamination. No
animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food is prepared or stored. All means
necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches, and rodents shall be used.
(16) Cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their
hands clean at all times while engaging in handling food, drink, utensils or equipment. Employees
shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is prepared. Employees shall
use hairnets, headbands, or caps while engaged in handling food, drinks, utensils, and/or equipment.
(17) Miscellaneous requirements. The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of
litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room
used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/225
employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats, and aprons shall be kept in
containers provided for that purpose.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.405)
Sec. 6.02.039 Itinerant restaurants
Itinerant restaurants shall be constructed and operated in a manner approved by the city health officer. (1996
Code, sec. 4.406)
Sec. 6.02.040 Compliance
From and after three months from the date on which this division takes effect, no restaurant shall be operated
within the city or its police jurisdiction unless it conforms with the requirements of this division; provided that,
when any restaurant fails to qualify, the health officer is authorized to revoke the permit. (1996 Code, sec. 4.407)
Sec. 6.02.041 Reinstatement of permit
(a) Any restaurant, the permit of which has been suspended, may at any time make application for the
reinstatement of the permit.
(b) Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application, accompanied by a statement signed by the
applicant to the effect that the violated provision or provisions of this division have been conformed with, the
health officer shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional reinspections as he may deem
necessary to assure himself that the applicant is again complying with the requirements, and in case the findings
indicate compliance, shall reinstate the permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.408)
Sec. 6.02.042 Employees with infectious disease
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such disease shall work in
any restaurant, and no restaurant shall employ any such person or any person suspected of being affected with
any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the restaurant manager suspects that
any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, he
shall notify the health officer immediately. A sign containing this section shall be posted in all toilet rooms.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.409)
Sec. 6.02.043 Employee health certificates
(a) Every person whose work brings him or her in contact with the production, handling, storage or
transportation of food or food products shall hold a certificate from a licensed physician certifying to the fact
that within six months laboratory and other examinations have been made indicating that said person is free of
tuberculosis, that said person is not a carrier of typhoid fever and that said person is free of any disease capable
of being spread through food or food products.
(b) The health officer of the city, or his assistant, may cite the holder of any health certificate to a reexamination,
at any time the holder of such certificate is known or suspected to be afflicted with any of the
diseases or conditions as set out in the preceding subsection; such re-examination shall be without cost to the
holder, and shall not extend the time of such certificate beyond the date for which it was issued.
(c) Proprietors or managers of establishments where food or food products or drinks are prepared, handled,
served or dispensed will be held responsible for the health certificates of their employees and will be subject to
similar fines as imposed on the actual handlers of such foods or drinks.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/225
(d) The owner, lessee or operator of any food establishment shall notify the health officer within twenty-four
(24) hours of any food handler upon whose premises or in whose place of business any case of sickness or any
infectious, contagious or communicable disease occurs.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.410)
Sec. 6.02.044 Procedure when infectious disease suspected
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any restaurant employee, the health
officer is authorized to require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants;
(2) The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak
exists, in the opinion of the health officer;
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates, with such laboratory
examinations as may be indicated.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.411)
ARTICLE 6.03 WEEDS, RUBBISH AND OTHER OBJECTIONABLE MATTER*
Sec. 6.03.001 Prohibited conditions
A person commits an offense if he is an owner, occupant, or person who claims, supervises or controls occupied
or unoccupied real property within the city and permits weeds, grass, brush or any unsightly vegetation to grow
to an average height greater than twelve (12) inches upon any such real property or permits the accumulation of
any other objectionable, unsanitary or unsightly matter, including, but not limited to, dead grass, tree limbs,
stumps, waste paper, scrap wood or lumber, scrap metal, rags, rubber tires, bottles, appliances, furniture,
dismantled or disassembled vehicle parts, discarded or abandoned construction material and exposed or
uncovered fill materials. It shall be further provided that vegetation not regularly cultivated which exceeds ten
twelve (12) [twelve inches] in height shall be presumed to be objectionable, unsanitary and unsightly, and all
wood, metal, concrete, asphalt, equipment and appliances shall be presumed to be abandoned after remaining as
such for ten (10) days after first notice of noncompliance within the provisions of this article. Allegation and
evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this section.
Sec. 6.03.002 Maintenance of parkways adjacent to property line
It shall be the duty of any person owning, occupying, claiming or having supervision or control of any occupied
or unoccupied property within the city to keep the area adjacent to his property line, including the front or side
parkway between the property line or sidewalk and the curb and the rear or side parkway between the property
line and the alley pavement or traveled way, or if there is no curb then within ten (10) feet outside such property
line, free and clear of the matter referred to in section 6.03.001. Where the alleyway is not open to traffic, the
parkway in such cases shall be deemed to be between the property line and the centerline of the alleyway.
Sec. 6.03.003 Exemptions
The agricultural use of real property for the purpose of growing and harvesting vegetation for the purpose of
animal feed (hay) shall be exempt from the height restriction of section 6.03.001 of this article, providing such
property is one hundred (100) feet from any building or dwelling, the height of such vegetation does not
interfere with visibility at any intersection of public thoroughfares, the property is mowed and baled a minimum
of once each forty-five (45) days, and a permit is obtained from the city prior to growth in excess of the normal
twelve (12) inch limit. It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 6.03.001 of this article if the real
property is being agriculturally used for the purpose of growing and harvesting vegetation for the purpose of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/225
animal feed (hay). It shall be a further defense to prosecution under section 6.03.001 of this article if the weeds
and grass on the real property are maintained at or below a height of twelve (12) inches at all points within one
hundred (100) feet of its perimeters, provided that the remaining portions of the property do not present a fire
hazard.
Sec. 6.03.004 Enforcement officer
For purposes of this article, “enforcement officer” means the city manager or the person or department to whom
the city manager may delegate the enforcement responsibility. The enforcement officer shall enforce the
provisions of this article.
Sec. 6.03.005 Notice to remove
In the event any person owning, occupying, claiming or having supervision or control of any occupied or
unoccupied real property fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the
enforcement officer to issue a notice to such person, firm, or corporation describing the location and type of
violation and directing the abatement of violations of this article within a ten (10) day period. This notice shall
be in writing and may be served on the owner, and may be served on the occupant or agent, by handing it to him
in person, or by regular mail addressed to such owner, occupant or agent at his post office address as shown on
the tax roll or other official record of the city or county; or, if personal service cannot be obtained or the post
office address is unknown, by publication two (2) times within ten (10) days in the official newspaper of the city,
or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates,
or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the
violation relates if the property contains no buildings. In the event any person owning, occupying, claiming or
having supervision or control of any occupied or unoccupied real property fails to comply with the provisions of
this article, and in the event such person has been previously issued the ten-day notice described herein within
the calendar year, then the enforcement officer may issue a citation without additional notice.
Sec. 6.03.006 Right of city to cure violation; assessment of costs; special expense fees
In the event any person owning, occupying, claiming or having supervision or control of any occupied or
unoccupied real property fails to comply with the provisions of this article within ten (10) days after proper
notice or issuance of a citation, as provided in section 6.03.005, the city, or its duly authorized representative,
may do the work or make the improvements required and pay for the work done or improvements made and
charge the expenses to the owner of the property pursuant to section 342.006 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code. The expenses assessed to the owner shall be actual removal expenses of not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00), plus a special expense fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover administrative costs. A statement of
expenses which includes administrative fees shall be mailed to the property owner shown on the tax roll at the
time of service. This statement of expenses shall, in addition to giving the amount of such expense, provide the
date upon which work was done and a description of the lot or premises upon which such work was done.
Payment is due and considered delinquent if not received by the city within thirty (30) days. In the event the
owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses within thirty (30) days, the city is authorized to add a lien assessment
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the statement of expenses and to file said expenses with either the Lubbock
County or Hale County clerk's office, dependant on where the property is located, as a lien against the real
property in violation of this article. The city shall have a privileged lien against such lot or real estate upon
which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, pursuant to section
342.007 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, and such lien shall be inferior only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements. The lien shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the city incurs
the expense. The city may bring a suit for foreclosure to recover the expenditures and interest due, and the
statement of the expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by
the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
Sec. 6.03.007 Emergency abatement of weeds
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/225
The city may abate, without notice, weeds that have grown higher than 48 inches and are deemed to be an
immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. Not later than the 10th day after the date the city
abates weeds under this section, notice shall be given to the property owner in the manner required by section
6.03.005. The city shall conduct the hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the
30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city secretary a written
request for a hearing. The administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than
the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or
written information relating to the municipality's abatement of the weeds. The city may assess expenses and
create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 6.03.006. A lien created
under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 6.03.006.
Sec. 6.03.008 Injunctive relief
Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the
city, the enforcement officer or both for injunctive relief as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 6.03.009 Penalty
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of this article [shall] be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense. Upon a first conviction, the fine shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00). The minimum
fine established in this section shall be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any twentyfour-
monthperiod and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any twentyfour-
month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in this section.
(Ordinance 451 adopted 5/10/04)
ARTICLE 6.04 PRIVIES AND TOILETS*
Sec. 6.04.001 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, refuses or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 6.109)
Sec. 6.04.002 Right of entry
It shall be the duty of the health officer having jurisdiction or his duly authorized assistant to enter all premises
as may be necessary in the enforcement of this article, and he is hereby so empowered. (1996 Code, sec. 6.108)
Sec. 6.04.003 Disposal of human excreta
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any human excreta within the corporate limits of the city except
in a sanitary water-flush closet or a chemical toilet or concrete-vault toilet or an improved sanitary pit privy built
according to the specifications of the department of state health services, as set forth in section 6.04.005;
provided that in no instance shall a toilet of either of the types enumerated be permitted within 150 feet of a
water well. (1996 Code, sec. 6.101)
Sec. 6.04.004 Connection with public sewer
Every building intended for human habitation or occupancy abutting on a street or alley in which there is a
public sewer, or within 200 feet of a public sewer, shall be connected with the sewer by the owner or agent of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/225
premises in the most direct manner possible and with a separate connection for each house or building. (1996
Code, sec. 6.102)
Sec. 6.04.005 Standards for construction of privies
The minimum requirements of a privy are that it shall be so constructed, built, or rebuilt that:
(1) The excreta deposited therein shall not fall upon the surface of the ground but enter into a pit or
vault in the ground, or a compartment built for the purpose.
(2) The contents of said compartment, vault or pit shall be inaccessible to flies, fowl, or small
animals at all times.
(3) Self-closing lids shall be provided for each unit.
(4) (A) For a pit toilet, the pit shall consist of an excavated chamber conforming to the
following dimensions:
(i) Minimum width of inside curbing, 3 feet.
(ii) Minimum length of inside curbing, 4 feet.
(iii) Minimum depth from ground surface, 5 feet.
(B) The pit shall be provided with a box curbing, fitted to the sides of the pit.
(5) Over the pit shall be placed a flytight seat which shall be ventilated by a flue extending from
the pit to eight (8) inches above the roof of the building and screened at the top and bottom with
sixteen (16) inch mesh wire screen.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.103)
Sec. 6.04.006 Costs to be borne by owner
The cost of installing a sanitary flush toilet and connection to the public sewer system, or the construction of
sanitary pit privy, chemical toilet, or concrete-vault privy, shall be borne by the owner of the property on which
the improvement is to be located. (1996 Code, sec. 6.104)
Sec. 6.04.007 Use and maintenance of privies
All sanitary pit privies in the corporate limits of the city shall be kept in a clean condition at all times. Selfclosing
lids shall be kept closed when not in use. Such pits shall be used only for the disposal of human excreta,
and no washwater or garbage shall be deposited therein. (1996 Code, sec. 6.105)
Sec. 6.04.008 Repair of defects in privies
If any defects occur in the pit privy which would affect its sanitary condition, the defect shall immediately be
repaired. (1996 Code, sec. 6.106)
Sec. 6.04.009 Nonconforming privies declared nuisance
All privies existing or maintained within the corporate limits of the city after this article becomes effective
which do not conform to the requirements of this article shall be and are hereby declared a nuisance, dangerous,
and a menace to public health, and the city shall have the power and authority to abate such nuisance in
accordance with the ordinances of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 6.107)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/225
ARTICLE 6.05 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them
in this section. Whenever other terms are used in this article, including those used in parts incorporated herein by
reference, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in article 9 of the 1991 Uniform Fire Code,
which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
Container. Any vessel of 60 United States gallons or less capacity used for transporting or storing hazardous
materials.
Hazardous materials. Those chemicals or substances which are physical hazards or health hazards as defined
below, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition.
(1) Physical hazards. A classification of a chemical for which there is scientifically valid evidence
that it is a combustible liquid, compressed gas, cryogenic, explosive, flammable gas, flammable
liquid, flammable solid, organic peroxide, oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable (reactive), or water-reactive
material; explosives and blasting agents; petroleum waste products.
(2) Health hazards. A classification of chemicals for which there is statistically significant
evidence based on at least one study conducted in accordance with established scientific principles
that acute or chronic health effects may occur in exposed persons. Health hazards include chemicals
which are carcinogens, toxic or highly toxic materials (including highly toxic or toxic compressed
gases), reproductive toxins, irritants, corrosives, radioactive materials, sensitizers, hepatotoxins,
nephrotoxins, neurotoxins, agents which act on the hematopoietic system, and agents which damage
the lungs, skin and eyes or mucous membranes.
(3) Descriptions and examples. Descriptions and examples of materials included in the abovereferenced
hazard categories are contained in the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, appendix VI-A, part of
which is attached to Ordinance 356 and incorporated herein by reference.
Unauthorized discharge. A release or emission of materials in a manner which does not conform to the
provisions of this article or applicable public health and safety regulations.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.301)
Sec. 6.05.002 Restrictions
Hazardous materials shall not be released into a sewer, storm drain, ditch, drainage canal, lake, or flood control
channel, or upon the ground, sidewalk, street, or highway or in the atmosphere, except for pesticide products and
materials intended for use in weed abatement, erosion control, soil amendment, or similar applications, when
applied in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and label directions and in accordance with nationally
recognized standards, and except for materials released in accordance with federal, state or local governing
regulations or permits of the jurisdictional air quality management board with a National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit, with waste discharge requirements established by the jurisdictional water quality
control board or with local sewer pretreatment requirements for publicly owned treatment works. (1996 Code,
sec. 7.302)
Sec. 6.05.003 Unauthorized discharges
(a) Records. Accurate records of the unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials shall be kept by any and
all persons, firms or corporations storing, dispensing, using or handling hazardous material in any quantity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/225
(b) Notification. The city fire chief shall be notified immediately when an unauthorized discharge becomes
reportable under state, federal or local regulations.
(c) Preparation. Advance planning provisions shall be made by any and all persons, firms or corporations
storing, dispensing, using or handling hazardous material for controlling and mitigating unauthorized discharges
of such hazardous material.
(d) Defective containers. When an unauthorized discharge due to primary container failure is discovered, the
involved primary container shall be repaired or removed from service.
(e) Responsibility for cleanup. The person, firm or corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall
institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether
sudden or gradual, at no cost to the city. When deemed necessary by the city fire chief, cleanup may be initiated
by the city fire department or by an individual or firm authorized by the city. Costs associated with such cleanup
shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.303)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 JUDGE†
Sec. 7.02.001 Appointment
The judge of the municipal court of the city shall be appointed by the mayor of the city with the approval of the
city council. (1996 Code, art. 8.201)
Sec. 7.02.002 Residency in city
The judge of the municipal court need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city; however, during his tenure
of office he shall reside within the city. (1996 Code, art. 8.202)
Sec. 7.02.003 Term of office
The initial term of the judge of the municipal court of the city shall put the date of his appointment following the
date of the adoption of this article and shall continue for a period corresponding with the term of office of the
mayor of the city. Thereafter, the term of office of each judge so appointed shall be for two years, and in all
instances his term of office shall correspond with the term of office of the mayor of the city. (1996 Code, art.
8.203)
State law reference–Term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.005.
Sec. 7.02.004 Compensation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/225
The judge of the municipal court of the city shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council.
(1996 Code, art. 8.204)
ARTICLE 7.03 FEES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES**
Sec. 7.03.001 Collection fee
In accordance with article 103.0031 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, there shall be imposed an
additional fee of thirty percent (30%) on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e., fines, fees, restitution, other
debts, and costs that are more than sixty days past due and have been referred to a private firm for collection.
(Ordinance 512 adopted 3/8/10)
State law reference–Contracts for collection services, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 103.0031.
Sec. 7.03.002 Warrant fee
All special expenses described in article 45.203, Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, dealing with special
expenses for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under article 38.10 of the Penal Code,
or under section 543.009, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, after due notice, not to exceed twenty-five dollars
($25.00), shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. (1996 Code, art. 1.900(a))
Sec. 7.03.003 Driving safety course fee
All special expenses described in article 45.203, Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, dealing with the
dismissal of certain misdemeanor charges upon completing a driving safety course, not to exceed the actual
expenses incurred for the service or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is less, shall be paid into the city treasury for
the use and benefit of the city. (1996 Code, art. 1.900(b))
State law reference–Additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
Sec. 7.03.004 Building security fund
(a) Established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”)
pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in a special
revenue account.
(b) Amount of fee; assessment and collection.
(1) The municipal court of the city is authorized and required to assess a municipal court building
security fee (the “fee”) of three dollars ($3.00) as a cost of court, in addition to any other authorized
fees and costs.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from a defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the municipal court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(B) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate fee assessment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/225
(4) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after this section is
adopted.
(5) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the treasury of the city. All fees so
collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be accounted for separately in the accounting
records of the city.
(c) Use; administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only to finance security personnel for the municipal court or to finance
items when used for the purpose of providing security services for buildings housing the municipal
court, including:
(A) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(B) Hand-held metal detectors;
(C) Walk-through metal detectors;
(D) Identification cards and systems;
(E) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(F) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times
when they are providing appropriate security services;
(G) Signage;
(H) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(I) Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices;
(J) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass;
(K) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and
(L) As otherwise authorized by law.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 513, secs. 2–4, adopted 3/8/10)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.03.005 Technology fund
(a) Established.
(1) There is hereby continued and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as
the fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(b) Amount of fee; assessment and collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of four (4) dollars.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/225
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
(C) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after January 11, 2005.
(4) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city secretary, who shall
deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Use; administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain
technology enhancements for the municipal court of the city. “Technology enhancements” shall
include any items described in article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 459, secs. 1–3, adopted 1/10/05)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sec. 8.02.001 Penalty
Any person guilty of violating any of the prohibited acts in this article shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 7.206)
Sec. 8.02.002 Yelling, swearing, etc., in public place
It shall be unlawful for any person to holler, shriek, yell, swear, or use any vociferous, vulgar and indecent
language within any public place. (1996 Code, sec. 7.201)
State law reference–Disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01.
Sec. 8.02.003 Removing property without consent of owner
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/225
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from its accustomed place, or from the place where the owner left
it, and had the right to leave the same, any property of any description, without the consent of the owner. (1996
Code, sec. 7.203)
Sec. 8.02.004 Defacing property
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mark, scratch, or caricature with pen, pencil or by any other means
any public property or the property of any other person other than the person so offending. (1996 Code, sec.
7.204)
Sec. 8.02.005 Discharging firearms
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge, within the ordinary definition of such terms, any
gun, pistol, or other like firearms.
(b) Exception to this shall be made for law enforcement personnel acting in the normal course of duty, persons
firing in a lawfully operated target or shooting range, or persons acting in the lawful defense of life or property.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.202)
State law reference–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001.
Sec. 8.02.006 Pellet guns and air guns
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to carry on or about his person any pellet gun, air rifle or
air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas,
springs, or any other means is capable of discharging any shot, pellet, or any other solid object a distance of fifty
feet (50') or more.
(b) The preceding subsection shall not apply to a person on his own premises or place of business or on the
premises or place of business of another with the latter's permission or consent, nor to a person transporting such
weapon by a reasonably direct route between any two (2) locations where the possession is lawful under this
section.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.205)
ARTICLE 8.03 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.03.001–8.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew for Sub-Minors*
Sec. 8.03.031 Definitions
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/225
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a sub-minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a sub-minor has been placed by a court.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of
a sub-minor.
Public place. Any place in which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon, or park or cruise in or upon, any vehicle.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sub-minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Sec. 8.03.032 Offenses
(a) A sub-minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a sub-minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the sub-minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
sub-minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.03.033 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.03.032 that the sub-minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the sub-minor's parent, guardian, or adult spouse;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the sub-minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
sub-minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/225
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the sub-minor;
(6) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(7) A sub-minor who has had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the
Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.03.032(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a sub-minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 8.03.034 Enforcement
(a) Any police officer who finds a sub-minor violating any provisions of this division shall obtain information
from such sub-minor as to his name, address, and age and the name of his parent or parents. The sub-minor shall
thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith. Should the officer deem it necessary, the officer may
take or follow the sub-minor home. The information obtained from the sub-minor shall be forwarded to the chief
of the police department, who shall cause a written notice to be mailed to the parent or parents of the sub-minor,
advising of the violation of this division.
(b) Any parent who shall violate any provision of this division after having received notice of a prior violation
shall be fined upon conviction as provided herein.
(c) Any operator of an establishment and any agent or employee of any operator who shall violate the
provisions of this division shall be fined upon conviction as provided herein.
Sec. 8.03.035 Penalty
A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable
by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 595 adopted 1/8/18)
ARTICLE 8.04 ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this article:
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on
public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public
property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours; or a motor vehicle that has remained on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more than forty-eight (48)
hours; or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway
within this state for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or a motor vehicle left unattended for more than twentyfour
(24) hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike
Authority or a controlled access highway. For purposes of this definition, “controlled access highway” has the
meaning assigned by Texas Transportation Code section 541.302.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/225
Antique auto. A passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old.
Collector. A person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles who acquires, collects, trades, or
disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and
maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher. A person in the business of converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal or
otherwise wrecking or dismantling motor vehicles.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a storage facility.
Junked vehicle. A motor vehicle that is self-propelled and does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired
license plate or a valid motor vehicle inspection certificate and is either wrecked, dismantled or partially
dismantled, or discarded; or that is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property, or for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, if the
vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under chapter 501, Texas Transportation Code, or an
outboard motor or other watercraft vessel subject to registration under chapter 31, Parks and Wildlife Code.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Storage facility. A garage, parking lot, or establishment for the servicing, repairing, or parking of motor
vehicles.
Sec. 8.04.002 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
connection thereof, shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code. Each day in which any violation shall occur, or each occurrence of any violation, shall constitute a
separate offense.
Secs. 8.04.003–8.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 8.04.031 Authority to take possession
(a) The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private
property.
(b) The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or contract for other
personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle taken into
custody by the police department under this article.
Sec. 8.04.032 Notice to owner and lienholders
(a) If the police department takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, it shall send notice by certified
mail, not later than the tenth (10th) day after taking the motor vehicle into custody or receiving a report under
section 8.04.035 of this article, to the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of
record pursuant to chapter 501, Texas Transportation Code or chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code, that
the vehicle has been taken into custody.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/225
(b) The notice shall describe the year, make, model, and identification number of the abandoned motor
vehicle; set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held; inform the owner and any
lienholders of the right to claim the motor vehicle not later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date of the
notice; and that such right to claim the motor vehicle arises on payment of all towing, preservation, and storage
charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or garagekeeper's charges and fees if notice is under
section 8.04.035 of this article. The notice shall also state that failure of the owner or lienholders to claim the
abandoned motor vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by that person of all right, title, and
interest in the vehicle and consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction.
(c) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for
the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle
was abandoned is sufficient notice under this section. The notice by publication shall be published within the
time requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail and shall contain all of the information required for
notice by certified mail. The notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles.
Sec. 8.04.033 Auction of unclaimed vehicles
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 8.04.032 of this article, the
owner or lienholder waives all rights and interests in the item and consents to the sale of the item by public
auction. The police department shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction or use the motor
vehicle as provided by section 8.04.034. The public auction shall be preceded by a notice published once in one
(1) newspaper of general circulation in the county where the auction is to take place, at least three (3) weeks
prior to the date of the auction, and, in the case of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified by
certified mail. The notice shall describe the year, make, model, and vehicle identification number of the
abandoned motor vehicle, and set forth the time and place of the auction.
(b) The purchaser of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the purchased
vehicle and receive a certificate of title.
(c) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall reimburse itself
for the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from placing the
abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred under section 8.04.032 of this
article. Any remainder from the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of
auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from placing other abandoned
vehicles in custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet
these expenses and costs.
(d) The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the city's general revenue account
to be used by the police department,
Sec. 8.04.034 Use by police department
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle taken into custody has not been reclaimed as provided in section 8.04.032,
the police department may use the vehicle for police department purposes.
(b) The police department shall auction the vehicle as provided by section 8.04.033 if the police department
discontinues use of the vehicle.
(c) This section does not apply to an abandoned vehicle on which there is a garagekeeper's lien.
Sec. 8.04.035 Procedure when vehicle abandoned in storage facility
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/225
(a) A motor vehicle is abandoned if the vehicle is left in a storage facility operated for commercial purposes
after the 10th day after the date on which:
(1) The garagekeeper gives notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known registered owner of the vehicle and to each lienholder of record of the vehicle under
chapter 501, Texas Transportation Code, or chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code, to remove the
motor vehicle;
(2) A contract for the vehicle to remain on the premises of the facility expires; or
(3) The vehicle was left in the facility, if the vehicle was left by a person other than the registered
owner or a person authorized to have possession of the vehicle under a contract of use, service,
storage, or repair.
(b) If notice sent under subsection (a)(1) of this section is returned unclaimed by the post office, substituted
notice is sufficient if published in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was left.
(c) The garagekeeper shall report the abandonment of the motor vehicle to the police department and shall pay
a fee, as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, to be used by the police department for the
cost of the notice required by this article or other cost incurred in disposing of the vehicle.
(d) The garagekeeper shall retain custody of an abandoned motor vehicle until the police department takes the
vehicle into custody under section 8.04.037.
Sec. 8.04.036 Garagekeeper's fees when vehicle abandoned in storage facility
(a) A garagekeeper who acquires custody of a motor vehicle for a purpose other than repair is entitled to
towing, preservation, and notification charges and reasonable storage fees, in addition to storage fees earned
under a contract, for each day:
(1) Not to exceed five days, until the notice described by section 8.04.035(a) is mailed; and
(2) After notice is mailed, until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges are paid.
(b) A garagekeeper who fails to report an abandoned motor vehicle to the police department within seven days
after the date it is abandoned may not claim reimbursement for storage of the vehicle.
(c) This article does not impair any lien that a garagekeeper has on a vehicle except for the termination or
limitation of a claim for storage for the failure to report the vehicle to the police department.
Sec. 8.04.037 Disposition of vehicle abandoned in storage facility
(a) The police department shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility that has not
been claimed in the period provided by the notice under section 8.04.032.
(b) The police department may use the vehicle as authorized by section 8.04.034 or sell the vehicle at auction
as provided by section 8.04.033. If the vehicle is sold, the proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to a
garagekeeper's charges for service, storage, and repair of the vehicle.
(c) As compensation for expenses incurred in taking the vehicle into custody and selling it, the law
enforcement agency shall retain:
(1) Two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the sale of the vehicle; or
(2) All the proceeds if the gross proceeds of the sale are less than $10.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/225
(d) Surplus proceeds shall be distributed as provided by section 8.04.033(c).
(e) If the police department does not take the vehicle into custody before the 31st day after the date notice is
sent under section 8.04.032, the police department may not take the vehicle into custody and the storage facility
may dispose of the vehicle under chapter 70, Texas Property Code, except that notice under section 8.04.032
satisfies the notice requirements of that chapter.
Secs. 8.04.038–8.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 8.04.071 Declaration of nuisance
(a) A junked vehicle that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and
welfare of the public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, is an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, produces urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part:
(1) That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street
or other public or private property; or
(2) That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business
of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a
motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area,
if any, are maintained in an orderly manner, do not create a health hazard, and are screened from
ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance as described in this section.
Sec. 8.04.072 Abatement procedures
(a) Not less than ten (10) days' notice of the nature of the nuisance must be personally delivered or sent by
certified mail with a five (5) day return requested to the last known registered owner of the nuisance, each
lienholder of record of the nuisance, and the owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located,
or, if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the
right-of-way. The notice must state the nature of the nuisance, that the nuisance must be abated and removed not
later than the tenth (10th) day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed, and that any
request for a hearing must be made before that ten (10) day period expires. If the post office address of the last
known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is
located, personally delivered. If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to
a date not earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date of the return.
(b) A vehicle removed under these procedures shall not be reconstructed or made operable after it has been
removed.
(c) A public hearing is required before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The
hearing shall be held before the city council no earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date of the service of
notice. At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be
inoperable. If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal
of the nuisance must include the vehicle's description, vehicle identification number and license plate number.
(d) Notice identifying the vehicle or vehicle part shall be given to the state department of transportation not
later than the fifth (5th) day after the date of removal. On receipt of notice of removal, the state department of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/225
transportation shall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle.
(e) The municipal court may issue necessary orders to enforce these procedures.
(f) These procedures for abatement and removal of such a public nuisance must be administered by a regularly
salaried, full-time employee of the city, except that any authorized person may remove the nuisance.
(g) A person authorized to administer the procedures may enter private property to examine a public nuisance,
to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(h) Relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a proceeding
for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the
junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
Sec. 8.04.073 Disposal
When the junked vehicle, or part thereof, remains on the property after ordered removed as provided by this
article, the city shall cause the same to be removed and sold for the best price obtainable to a scrap yard or
demolisher for processing as scrap or salvage. All sums received from the sale shall be deposited in the general
fund of the city.
Sec. 8.04.074 Immediate removal of vehicle obstructing traffic
This article does not affect any law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle
left on public property.
(Ordinance 441-B adopted 3/10/03)
ARTICLE 8.05 SEX OFFENDERS RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.05.001 Purpose, intent
The city council finds that sex offenders who are required to register as a sexual predator under V.T.C.A., Texas
Code of Criminal Procedure, chapter 62, present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children.
It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited
from loitering or prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency.
Sec. 8.05.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words and the derivations thereof shall have the meaning
given herein.
Child. Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
Child-care facility. A family day-care home which provides regular care to no more than four (4) children under
fourteen (14) years of age, excluding children related to the caretaker, and provides care after school hours for
not more than six (6) additional elementary school children, but the total number of children, including those
related to the caretaker, shall not exceed twelve (12) at any given time.
Child-care institution. A commercial day-care center provides regular care to any number of adults or children
for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day.
Child safety zone. Public parks, private and public schools, public library, amusement arcades, video arcades,
indoor and outdoor amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimming
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/225
pools, child-care facility, child-care institution, public or private youth soccer or baseball field, crisis center or
shelter, skate park or rink, public or private youth center, movie theater, bowling alley, and scouting facilities.
Database. The Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database or the sex offender registration files
maintained by the sex offender registration officer of the police department.
Loiter. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around an area.
Park or playground. One of the following:
(1) Any land, including improvements to the land that is administered, operated or managed by the
city for the use of the general public as a recreational area.
(2) City recreational areas include, but are not limited to, conservation area, jogging trail, hiking
trail, bicycle trail, recreational center, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field.
Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Places where children regularly congregate. Same as child safety zone.
Public way. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, shopping centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops and similar areas
that are open to the use of the public.
School. A private or public preschool, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school.
Sex offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense
involving a person under seventeen (17) years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex
offender under chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more
days in the aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place
where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
Sec. 8.05.003 Offenses
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a school, child-care facility, child-care institution, park or
playground or other places where children regularly congregate.
(b) It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a child safety zone.
(c) It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within 300 feet of a child safety
zone.
(d) A sex offender, shall not, on each October 30th and 31st (or any other date set by the city for trick-ortreaters)
between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite
trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises.
Sec. 8.05.004 Property owners prohibited from renting real property to registered sex offenders
It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or any other
conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any
person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/225
this article, if such place, structure, or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located
within 1,000 feet from a child safety zone, as defined in section 8.05.002.
Sec. 8.05.005 Measurements
For the purpose of this article, the distance between a permanent or temporary residence and the premises shall
be determined by a straight line from the outer property line of such permanent or temporary residence in closest
proximity to the nearest property line of the premises. In the case of apartment complexes or other multiple
residences, the distance shall be determined by a straight line from the outer property line of such apartment
complex or other multiple residences in closest proximity to the nearest property line of the premises.
Sec. 8.05.006 Evidentiary matters
(a) If a sex offender that is prohibited from being in a child safety zone is found in a child safety zone by a
police officer, the sex offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this article.
(b) It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears
in/on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age.
(c) The distance of three hundred (300) feet from a child safety zone shall be measured on a straight line from
the closest boundary of the child safety zone.
(d) The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from a place where children congregate shall be measured on a
straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the
school, child-care facility, child-care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly
congregate.
(e) In the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the
residences to the nearest property line of the school, child-care facility, child-care institution, park or playground
or other places where children regularly congregate.
(f) In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the
measurement to prove otherwise.
(g) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the city and maintained by the police department.
The city shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the police
department or available on the city's website or the city's police department website.
Sec. 8.05.007 Exceptions
(a) The person required to register in/on the database established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and residency prior to the adoption of this article, has been consistently maintained and the person has
complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state, prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
(b) The place where children regularly congregate, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on/in the database was opened after the
person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of
the state.
(c) The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the
person who was erroneously listed on/in the database.
(d) The person required to register on/in the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense
requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/225
(e) The person required to register is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who
resides with a parent or guardian.
(f) The person required to register has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender
under chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; or
(g) The person required to register has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required,
reversed on appeal or pardoned.
(h) The person's duty to register on/in the database has expired.
(i) Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home
acquired or owned prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender.
Sec. 8.05.008 Penalties
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 as
allowed by law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
Sec. 8.05.009 Nonliability
The city and its officers, agents and employees shall have no liability of any nature for any actions, omissions, or
other matters in any way concerning the subject matter of this article.
(Ordinance 572 adopted 7/13/15)
Sec. 8.05.010 Appeal
(a) Option to appeal. A sex offender may seek an exemption from this article by appealing to the city council.
(b) Appeal procedure.
(1) The city secretary shall prepare an official appeal form.
(2) A sex offender shall completely fill in the official form and submit it to the city secretary, who
shall forward it to the mayor.
(3) The mayor, upon receiving the completed appeal form, shall schedule a public hearing before
the city council.
(4) The city council shall conduct a public hearing, during which they may review any pertinent
information and may accept oral and written statements from any person.
(5) Following the public hearing, the city council shall decide, by majority vote, whether to grant
or deny an exemption. An exemption may be unconditional or limited to a certain address or time.
The decision on whether or not to grant an exemption may be based on whether the sex offender has
shown remorse, has rehabilitated, could re-offend, and any other factor related to the city's interest in
promoting, protecting, and improving the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(6) A written copy of the official minutes of the meeting shall detail the decision, and shall, upon
written request, be provided to the sex offender.
(Ordinance 593 adopted 9/11/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/225
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Social security
(a) The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the
Employees Retirement System of Texas for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of House Bill 603, Acts
52nd Leg., R.S. 1951, and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, ch. 809, 2d, H.R. 6000.
(b) The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary
agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and the city.
(c) The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections,
payments, and reports, as required by the Employees Retirement System of Texas.
(d) A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city
social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository.
(1996 Code, art. 8.300)
State law reference–Social security, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 606.
Sec. 9.01.002 Health benefits coverage
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its employees, dependents and retirees.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition of employee, dependent and retiree for purposes of this
section:
Dependent. Any legal spouse, natural child, stepchild, or foster child of an employee or any other child for
which the employee has acquired legal guardianship or conservatorship.
Employee. Any person actively employed by the city who works at least 30 hours per work week.
Retiree. Any former employee who was eligible and enrolled in the TML health plan at the time of retirement
from the city.
(c) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through TML
intergovernmental employee benefits pool:
(1) Medicare Supplement w/RX for over age 65 retirees.
(2) Dental Plan III.
(d) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the TML intergovernmental employee benefits
pool provides that the board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the TML
intergovernmental employee benefits pool allow the participating member entity to provide retiree medical
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/225
coverage to offer over age 65 retirees a Medicare Supplement w/RX for the coverages the benefit pool offers this
year. Other coverages will be as established annually by the TML intergovernmental employee benefits pool
board of trustees.
(e) This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date or to employees which retired
under a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify they must
enroll for this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement.
(f) This section may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring
while it is in effect.
(Ordinance 466, secs. 1–7, adopted 8/8/05)
Sec. 9.01.003 Nepotism policy
(a) No employee of the city who occupies a position as a head of any department or office in the city shall
employ or cause to be employed within the same department or office any person related to such employee
within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity.
(b) Violation of the provisions of this section shall, at the option of the city council, be grounds for removal of
the employee from his office or employment with the city.
(1996 Code, art. 8.500)
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.02.001 Ordinances on file
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this article, but they shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Editorially supplied)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Chief of Police
Sec. 9.03.041 Office of marshal abolished
The office of marshal in the city is hereby abolished and dispensed with. (1996 Code, sec. 8.601)
Sec. 9.03.042 Office created; appointment; term
There is hereby created the position of city police officer, to be appointed by the city council, with the person
holding such office to be known as the chief of police for the city. Such city police officer shall have no term of
office, but shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 8.602)
Sec. 9.03.043 Powers and duties
Such city police officer shall be a peace officer as defined in article 2.12, Code of Criminal Procedure of Texas,
with all of the powers and duties conferred upon peace officers under the laws of the state. (1996 Code, sec.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/225
8.603)
Sec. 9.03.044 Qualifications
Such city police officer shall hold a certificate as a qualified law enforcement officer from the state commission
on law enforcement officer standards and education as provided in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1701,
unless serving under a temporary or probationary appointment as provided in said act. He may reside within or
without the corporate limits of the city, as the city council may authorize and direct. (1996 Code, sec. 8.604)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Sec. 10.02.001 Short title
The following regulations shall be and the same are adopted and approved and shall be known as and may be
cited as the “City of Abernathy Subdivision Ordinance.”
Sec. 10.02.002 General purpose of article
This article, shall govern every person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity owning
any tract of land within the corporate limits of the City of Abernathy, Lubbock County, Texas and Hale County,
Texas within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of this City as prescribed by the Texas Local Government Code in
chapters 211 and 212, as from time to time amended, who may hereafter divide any tract into two (2) or more
parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to said city, or for laying
out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, and alleys or parks or other portions indicated for
public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
Sec. 10.02.003 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined; terms not defined herein shall be
construed in accordance with other ordinances of the city, other codes, Texas state statutes, or their customary
usage and meaning.
Building code. The latest revision of the building regulations adopted by the Abernathy city council. Information
is available at city hall when requesting building permits.
Building inspector. That person so designated by the city council or his designee.
City. The City of Abernathy, Lubbock County, Texas and the City of Abernathy, Hale County, Texas.
City engineer. A duly qualified and licensed engineer(s) retained by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/225
Extraterritorial jurisdiction. That area adjacent to the corporate limits of the city, extending out one-half of one
mile, over which the city is authorized to control among other things, subdivisions, building codes, public
utilities, or as prescribed or defined by Texas state law.
General plan. A map or plat designed to illustrate the overall general design features and street layout of a
proposed subdivision which is proposed to be developed and platted in sections.
Legal lot. Any singular lot, platted, surveyed, legally divided by metes and bounds, and recorded for legal title
with the Lubbock County clerk's office or the Hale County clerk's office, before the date of this article.
Planning documents. A written report, map, or other document developed by the city, the city's consultants or
staff, or other entities and has been adopted and amended by the city council.
Plat. A map or chart of the subdivision. It shall include the plan, plat or replat, both singular and plural.
Major street. A principal traffic thoroughfare, which continues, or is intended to continue, across the city and
which serves to connect remote parts of the city. It may also be a principal connecting street with state or federal
highways.
Minor or residential streets. All streets not otherwise indicated.
Revised plat. A plat which has been previously submitted and is being resubmitted with changes.
Secondary or collector street. A continuous street through several residential districts intended as a connecting
street between residence districts and major streets or business districts.
Shall or may. The word “shall” shall be deemed mandatory; the word “may” shall be deemed permissive.
Subdivision. Any land division regulated as authorized by the Texas Local Government Code and further
described herein. The provisions contained herein shall apply to any of the following forms or types of land
subdivision and development activity within the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(1) The following conditions constitute a subdivision and require subdivision approval:
(A) The division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) of [or] more lots of [or] sites
for the purpose of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, whether immediately
or in the future.
(B) The resubdivision of land or lots previously divided or platted whether the approval was
by Lubbock County, the City of Abernathy, Hale County, or was legally recorded in Lubbock
County or Hale County, Texas with no documented approval.
(C) The combining of two or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites, or parcels for the purpose of
creating one legal lot for the development or sale for the purposes of the construction of a
structure or structures.
(D) Division of land into parcels of any size which requires the creation of streets or public
access on right-of-ways.
(2) The following conditions shall be exempt from subdivision approval:
(A) Land legally platted and filed for record and provided with public streets, right-of-ways
and utility service prior to the date of this article.
(B) Inheritance, or testamentary division of property for wills, trusts, estates, or gifts of land
by metes and bounds of tracts on which no improvements or alterations are occurring.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/225
(C) Divisions of land created by court orders of competent jurisdiction, of lands on which no
improvements are made, no change in utility service is required and no access by additional
public street or right-of-way is created.
Utility commitment. A letter from the city documenting that a proposed plat can be adequately served with water
and sewer according to historical events on record, regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) or enforcement actions thereof, and any utility planning documents approved by the city
council.
Sec. 10.02.004 Purpose and jurisdiction
(a) Regulations to control subdivision of land. The city council of the City of Abernathy does hereby adopt the
following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of
Abernathy and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, in order to provide for the safe, orderly and
healthful development of the community and to secure adequate provisions for traffic, light, air, recreation,
transportation, water, drainage, sewage, public safety, and other public facilities.
(b) Territorial limits of regulations. The territorial jurisdiction under this article shall include all land located
within the corporate limits of the city and all land lying within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction which is
currently one-half of one mile beyond its city limits.
State law references–Extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities in counties that regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 242.001; extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.003.
Sec. 10.02.005 Application
(a) City council approval required. It shall be unlawful for any landowner, or the agent of any landowner, to
lay out, identify and divide by metes and bounds, subdivide, plat, or replat any land into lots, blocks, and streets
within the jurisdictional limits of the city without the approval of the city council. It shall also be unlawful for
any such owner or agent to offer for sale or to sell, or to otherwise transfer ownership of any such property
therein or thereby which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted, or replatted in accordance with this article.
(b) City improvements withheld. The city will make no improvements nor will the city maintain any streets or
furnish any public utility service in any addition or subdivision for which an approved final plat is not on file
with the city secretary and legally recorded at appropriate county clerk's office.
(c) Building permits withheld. No street number or building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building on any piece of property subdivided after the date hereof, unless said property has been subdivided or
resubdivided in accordance with this article.
Sec. 10.02.006 Processing procedure
(a) Preliminary plat.
(1) Required copies. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan of the entire area being
subdivided. Ten legible copies shall be submitted to the city secretary for review by the city council.
(2) Plat requirements. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100')
and shall show and be accompanied by the following information:
(A) Name of subdivision;
(B) Complete legal description by metes and bounds;
(C) Total acreage and numbers of lots and blocks;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/225
(D) Name and address of the owner and the owner's agent;
(E) Name and seal number of registered engineers or surveyors responsible for the project;
(F) Scale 1" = 100' unless otherwise approved in writing;
(G) North point;
(H) Date and date of each revision;
(I) Boundary dimensions and bearings;
(J) A survey tie to the original survey of which said land is a part;
(K) Name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, easements, pipelines, watercourses,
etc., and the property lines and name of adjoining property owners in unsubdivided tracts;
(L) Existing and proposed topographic and planimetric features within the subdivision,
including watercourses and ravines, high banks, width of existing or proposed easements,
contour lines at one (1) foot intervals, and any other physical features pertinent to the
subdivision;
(M) Existing transportation features within the subdivision including the location and width
of rights-of-way, streets, alleys and easements;
(N) Proposed features including location, width, surfacing, and name of streets; approximate
width and depth of all lots, location of building lines, alleys and easements; and schematic plans
and outline specifications for drainage, sanitary facilities and, utilities.
(O) Designation of any sites for special uses including churches, sewage disposal plants,
water plants, business, industry, or other special land uses. If proposed use is unknown, show as
undesignated. Where a proposed site in the area taken in by a proposed addition or subdivision
is planned for a school, park or public building such site shall be reserved on the preliminary
plat for the proposed facility.
(P) Limits of the 25-year and 100-year floodplain for all drainageways draining into or away
from a ten (10.0) acres or more subdivision before and after the development. If the subject
subdivision is proposed to be located on a tract contributing to downstream drainageways
where damage to structures is known to occur, the aforementioned requirement shall pertain to
subdivision tracts of one (1.0) acre of more.
(Q) Statement outlining the estimated average single-family lot size; and the estimated range
of lot sizes by groupings of:
(i) Less than 7,000 square feet;
(ii) 7,001 - 8,000 square feet;
(iii) 8,001 - 10,000 square feet;
(iv) 10,001 - 120,000 square feet;
(v) 20,000+ square feet.
(3) Utility commitment letters. The subdivider shall submit copies of utility commitment letters
from all the utilities including the City of Abernathy, that will provide utilities for the subdivision.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/225
(4) Building inspector to check for complete information. The building inspector or other staff so
designated is to check that the above information has been included in the submittal. If the submittal
is not complete, it will be returned prior to further review.
(5) City council to review within thirty (30) days. The city council shall review the preliminary
plat, and within thirty (30) days, act upon said plat as submitted or as modified and, if approved
without conditions, shall express its approval as “approved”; if conditionally approved, shall express
its approval as “conditionally approved” and state the conditions of such approval, or if disapproved,
shall express its disapproval and the reasons therefor. At the meeting during which the preliminary
plat comes up for review, the party submitting such plat shall appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
(6) City council to note its action. The city council shall note its action and conditions, if any, on
four (4) copies of the preliminary plat.
(7) Distribution of plat copies. Of the four (4) copies, one (1) shall be returned to the subdivider,
two (2) shall be filed with the city secretary, one (1) shall be furnished to the building inspector or his
equivalent.
(8) Authority to proceed. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of the
subdivision, but is authority to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. Any work done on the
subdivision before a final plat is accepted and recorded is done at the subdivider's risk and is
discouraged. All approved preliminary plats expire at the end of one (1) year. The city council may, if
written request from the subdivider is received prior to the end of the one-year period, grant an
extension for up to one (1) additional year. If any major changes are required by the city council, the
city council may require submission of a revised preliminary plat for approval.
(b) Final plat.
(1) Required copies; filing deadline. Subdivider shall provide one (1) reproducible copy and ten
(10) legible white print copies of the final plat to the city council after the preliminary plat has been
approved and all required changes and alterations thereto have been made.
(2) Plat requirements. The final plat shall be drawn on substrate of the type, size and configuration
as currently required for filing at the county clerk's office of Lubbock County or at the county clerk's
office of Hale County to a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1 - 100"). Where more than one (1)
sheet is required, an index sheet of similar size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. All
restrictive covenants are to be shown on the index sheet or separate sheet. The currently accepted size
is 18 inches by 24 inches and the material is mylar. The following information will be shown on or
will accompany the plat:
(A) A title including the name of the subdivision; the name of the landowners or owners; the
name of the registered public land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat; the scale
and location of the subdivision with reference to an original corner of the original survey of
which said land is a part; the date, north point, and total acres in the subdivision.
(B) The certificate of the registered public land surveyor who surveyed, mapped and
monumented the land shall be placed on the face of the plat as follows:
THE STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF LUBBOCK §
KNOW ALL BY THESE PRESENTS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/225
That, I, ____________ R.P.L.S. do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual
and accurate on the ground survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown
thereon were properly placed by current “Minimum Standards for Professional Land
Surveyors” as adopted by the Texas Board Of Professional Land Surveying, under my
personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of
Abernathy, Texas.
Original Signature and Seal of Registered Professional Land Surveyor
Registration Number
(C) A certificate of ownership and dedication to the public of all streets, easements, alleys,
parks, playgrounds, or other dedicated public uses, signed and acknowledged before a notary
public by the owners and any holders of liens against the land.
(D) An accurate on-the-ground boundary survey of the property with bearings and distances
and showing the lines of all adjacent land, streets, easements, and alleys with their names and
width. (Street, alleys, and lot lines in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown dashed.) All
necessary data to reproduce the plat on the ground must be shown on the plat.
(E) A certificate of approval to be signed by the mayor and the city secretary shall be placed
on the face of the plat. The plat shall show all existing features within the area being
subdivided, such as existing watercourses, railroads, width of streets, alleys and easements to be
retained and other physical features deemed pertinent to the subdivision.
(F) Streets, alleys and easements that are to be dedicated shall be shown with the following
engineering data:
(i) For streets: Complete curve data (delta, length of curve, point of tangency) shown on
the centerline of on each side of the street: length and bearing of all tangents; dimensions
from all angle points of curve to an adjacent side lot line shall be provided. The number of
feet of roadway shall also be shown on the plat.
(ii) For watercourses and easements: Distances to be provided along the side lot lines
from the front lot line or the high bank of a stream. Traverse line distances are to be
provided along the side lot lines from the front lot line along the edge of all large
watercourses in a convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if paralleling
the drainage easement of stream.
(G) Lot and block lines and numbers of all proposed lots and blocks with complete
dimensions for front, rear and side lot lines.
(H) Building setback lines shall be shown on all lots.
(I) Two (2) sets of plans and specifications prepared by a registered engineer shall be
provided for the installation of water, sewer, paving and drainage, and said plans and
specifications must be approved by the city engineer or designated city official prior to the
beginning of any construction of the subdivision.
(J) A receipt showing that all taxes have been paid shall be submitted with the final plat.
(K) The city council shall be satisfied that the subdivider will be in a financial position to
install or cause to be installed at his own cost, risk and expense all of the improvements herein
required. The city council may require such security as it in its sole and absolute discretion may
deem best in order to insure the orderly development within any subdivision.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/225
(L) It is expressly understood that as a condition to the approval of said subdivision, no sales
will be completed until all utilities are installed and all other improvements required by this
article are made by subdivider and verified by the building inspector within the block in which
said lot is contained.
(M) Drainage easements to cover the limits of the 25-year floodplain.
(N) Limits of the 100-year floodplain and a citation of the source of floodplain data.
(O) Minimum finished floor slab elevations, at a minimum of two (2) feet above the 100-year
floodplain level, for all lots adjacent to or affected by the floodplain.
(P) Slab elevations on all structures are to be a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) feet
above the top of the curb along any point along the front lot line.
(Q) A certificate of a registered professional engineer shall be placed on the face of the plat
as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF LUBBOCK §
I, ____________, do hereby certify that the information contained on this plat complies
with the Subdivision Ordinances and any stormwater drainage policy adopted by the City
of Abernathy, Texas.
Original Signature and Seal of Registered Professional Engineer
Registration Number
(3) City council to review final plat. The city council shall review the final plat, and when satisfied
that all conditions and requirements have been met, the city council shall approve said plat, using the
following format:
Approved this day of ____________, 20___, by the City Council of the City of
Abernathy, Texas.
Mayor
City Secretary
(4) Disapproval of the final plat. Should the final plat, as submitted, fail to meet the conditions and
requirements of this article, the city council shall disapprove said plat and note its disapproval
thereon, and attach thereto a statement of the reasons for disapproval. In the event of disapproval, the
city may withhold all city improvements of whatever nature, including furnishing of sewer facilities
and water service from all additions which have not been approved as provided by law, and further
permits may not be issued by the building inspector or designated public official of the city on any
piece of property other than an original or a resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded
subdivision.
(5) Time of approval. Approval or disapproval of the final plat shall be voted upon by the city
council within thirty (30) days after submission of said final plat. Failure to act within thirty (30)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/225
days of the regularly scheduled meeting at which the plat would have been presented, shall constitute
approval by the city council unless additional time is requested by the developer.
(c) Only one (1) plat required. If the preliminary plat of a subdivision meets with the requirements
hereinbefore set forth for a final plat, the city council may, on request of the subdivider, consider such plat as a
final plat and approve or disapprove the same as such. If the preliminary plat is approved only as such, a final
plat shall be filed in accordance with the other provisions of this article. If the subdivider elects to use this
alternative, then he shall provide one (1) reproducible tracing and ten (10) white-print copies of the plat to the
city council.
(d) Utilities. If a subdivider or developer wishes to obtain city water, sewerage, or other services for his
proposed or revised subdivision, he shall be required to obtain approval in writing for the number of proposed or
revised lots prior to submitting a final plat or revised plat to the city council for its approval pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this article.
(1) After a proposed final or revised plat has been issued, approved for utilities and has received
final approval by the city council, no additional approval shall be required for the final issuance of
building permits for lots located within the approved subdivision.
(2) Application for utilities.
(A) With respect to an application for utilities, the city engineer will be primarily guided by
the most current planning documents approved by the city council.
(B) The city engineer shall issue an opinion to the city council based [on] his interpretations
of regulations by the TCEQ, historical performance of the utility, and sound engineering
practice. The city council shall issue a utility commitment letter in accordance with action taken
by the council.
(C) Any participation in off-site utilities by the City of Abernathy shall be approved by the
city council.
(e) Minor amendments. The building inspector shall have the authority to approve the following plat
amendments which may be recorded and shall be controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that
plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one or more of the following
purposes:
(1) To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the
engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character
or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
city council, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded
plats;
(7) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
(A) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/225
(B) Neither lot is abolished;
(C) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(D) The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the
other owners in the plat;
(8) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The amendment does not increase or decrease the number of lots;
Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an
amended plat under this subsection.
Sec. 10.02.007 Requirements and standards
(a) The subdivider shall retain the service of a qualified Texas licensed professional engineer in the State of
Texas.
(1) The engineer shall design the items as follows:
(A) Utilities.
(B) Streets, pavement design.
(C) Drainage.
(D) Calculation of floodplains.
(E) Set slab elevations in relationship to floodplains.
(2) The following must be included on the plans:
(A) Vicinity map of project on title sheet.
(B) Plat of subdivision signed by registered surveyor.
(C) Location of existing utilities.
(D) Stationing along road and/or sewer line where applicable.
(E) Location of sewer, water and other proposed utilities with respect to road or utility
easement centerlines.
(F) Benchmark datum - NAVD 88.
(G). All utility representatives' names and phone numbers.
(3) Arrangement of the improvement plans shall conform to the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/225
(A) Title sheet.
(B) Plat of subdivision.
(C) Plan and profile sheets at a legible scale.
(D) Typical miscellaneous details.
(E) Specifications.
(F) Drainage evaluation.
(G) Engineering estimates of quantities and costs.
(b) The engineer's utility plans shall meet the minimum requirements for submittal to the TCEQ and shall be
on 24" by 36" paper. They are to be signed and sealed by the engineer and to include all information for the
construction of the project. Specifications are to be in bound sets or on the face of the plans to assure that all city
requirements are followed.
(c) The licensed engineer responsible for the project is to perform periodic inspections to determine if the
work is performed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
(d) When the project is complete, and tested, the engineer is to certify to the City of Abernathy that the work
both on and off site, if any, has been performed in substantial conformance with the approved plans,
specifications, and change orders. Engineer is to deliver to the city a reproducible copy of record plans for the
project and three (3) sets of blue-lines. The plans are to be clearly marked as “RECORD” drawings with all
record changes signed by the responsible engineer.
(e) The subdivider shall provide a one (1) year warranty on all work located in dedicated city right-of-ways or
easements including all utilities, streets, drainage, streetlights, or other improvements. The warranty is to begin
at final acceptance by the city.
(f) The subdivider shall be responsible for constructing paved streets and curbs and gutters within the
subdivision, subject to the conditions contained herein.
(1) Arrangement.
(A) Unless otherwise approved by the city council, provision shall be made for the extension
of major streets through any new subdivision. Collector streets shall be provided as required by
the city council for the circulation of traffic through the subdivision and the connection thereof
to the major streets. Adequate minor streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision.
Off-center street intersections with streets in adjacent subdivision should be avoided. All major
and collector streets shall be continuous or in alignment with existing streets unless variations
are deemed advisable by the commission due to topography and requirements of traffic
circulation. A minimum of one future access, by street, to all adjacent tracts is to be maintained
through stub-out streets as approved by the city council.
(B) Residential developments which introduce new street systems shall be encouraged within
the framework of applicable ordinances, to plan street systems that offer curvilinear design
while facilitating safe and adequate traffic circulation and drainage compatible with existing
patterns.
(2) Street design criteria.
(A) Soils investigation. The subdivider shall, at his own expense, cause to be made a soils
investigation by a qualified and independent State of Texas licensed geotechnical engineer. The
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/225
field investigation shall include test borings or profile holes within the right-of-ways of all
proposed streets. The number of locations of such borings or holes shall be submitted to the city
engineer for review. Acceptance of the boring plan by the city engineer does not constitute
approval of the plan. The geotechnical engineer of record is the responsible engineer for this
work. A minimum depth of holes is to be ten (10) feet. For each individual soil layer identified
in each boring, the Atterberg limits, plasticity index (PI), moisture content, and other required
data and information to quantify the bearing capacity, shrink-swell potential, and other
characteristics necessary for a pavement design shall be determined. The method used for these
determinations shall be the same as those used by the Texas Department of Transportation
(TxDOT) using their latest Manual of Testing; Procedures, 100-E Series test methods. The
results of the soils investigation shall be presented to the subdivider and to the city engineer in
written report form.
(B) Pavement design. Pavement design for collector and residential streets shall consist of
surface pavement, flexible base, asphalt stabilized base (as applicable), and compacted
subgrade and shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practices for the
conditions and expected traffic loads. In no case shall a hot mix asphaltic cement surface course
be less than one and one-half (1.5) inches in thickness nor shall a flexible base course be less
than six (6) inches in thickness even though an engineered pavement design demonstrates that a
lesser thickness would be sufficient. Flexible base and asphalt stabilized base (as applicable)
courses shall be carried at full thickness to a distance of one (1) foot outside of the back of the
curb and gutter section. For major thoroughfare streets, a pavement design is required and shall
be based on the TxDOT triaxial design criteria as follows:
Type of Street Total Equivalent
18 Kip
Single Axle
Load Frequency
Design Factor
Load
Application
Wheel Design
Load Kips
ATDH
Major
thoroughfare
1,500,000 1.15 12
A written report containing pavement design data and recommendations based on the soils
investigation shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a State of Texas licensed
geotechnical engineer and shall be presented to the subdivider and to the city engineer.
The report shall state the load criteria and the soil classifications used.
(C) Curb and gutter. All streets shall have reinforced concrete curbs (minimum concrete
strength of 4000 psi) described as follows:
(i) Height above pavement 6"
(ii) Thickness 6"
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/225
(iii) Concrete gutter width 18"
(iv) Overall width 24"
(v) Overall height above subgrade 12"
(vi) Valley gutters (minimum concrete strength 4,000 psi)
a. Thickness 6" min.
b. Width 6'-0" min.
c. Reinforcement 4000 psi fiber
Drive-over curb and gutter may be used upon submittal and approval by the city and
engineer.
(D) Minimum radii.
(i) Street intersections 20'
(ii) Alleys 10'
(iii) Commercial driveways 20'
(iv) Residential driveways 10'
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/225
(3) Street widths. Note all widths are back to back of curb unless otherwise noted.
(A) Major streets R.O.W. 80' Pavement 56'
(B) Collector streets R.O.W. 60' Pavement 40'
(C) Minor or residential streets R.O.W. 50' Pavement 36'
(D) 50' either side of major intersections Widened per council approval
(4) Curve centerline radii.
(A) Major streets Radius 2,000' or less based on design speed and
good engineering practice as approved by the
commission
(B) Collector streets Radius 400'
(C) Minor streets Max. 150'
(D) Reverse curves Min. connecting tangent 100'
(5) Intersection separation.
Minimum 150' centerline to centerline
(6) Intersections.
(A) Intersecting angle 80 degrees without variance
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/225
(B) Acute angles Curb radii min., 20'
(7) Cul-de-sacs.
(A) Maximum length dead-end street 600'.
(B) Dead-end streets at boundaries to adjacent tracts that are developable will be allowed
with proper signage.
(C) Minimum diameter 80' pavement.
(D) Minimum diameter 100' R.O.W.
(E) Temporary turnaround required on stubbed-out future streets in excess of 400' long.
(8) Street names. Similar street names are to be avoided. List to be submitted to city and U.S. post
office prior to putting on plat.
(g) Sidewalks. Sidewalks are to be included in deed restrictions for residential subdivisions. All sidewalks are
to be solely within the R.O.W. and 48" wide unless the sidewalk is immediately adjacent to the back of curb at
which it will be 60" in width with minimum building code reinforcement. Fibrous reinforcement is permitted.
Minimum concrete strength shall be 3,500 psi. Sidewalks are required in deed restrictions for commercial/retail
subdivisions, unless concrete paving is used in appropriate areas. Sidewalks and all handicap access ramps at all
street intersections shall meet the requirements of the Texas Accessibility Standards of the Architectural Barriers
Act as administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation.
(h) Lots.
(1) Area 7,000 square feet minimum
(2) Sizes Further described in zoning ordinances
(3) Width 60 feet minimum
(4) Facing Minimum frontage 50' unless in cul-de-sacs
(i) Blocks.
(1) Block length:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/225
(A) Through streets Minimum 1,350 feet
(B) Major streets Minimum 1,500 feet
(j) Building lines. Building lines shall be as established in the City of Abernathy zoning ordinance.
(k) Easements.
(1) Drainage and public utility easements are to be:
(A) Front lot 10'
(B) Rear lot 10'
(C) Side lot 5'
(2) Easements shall contain 25-year design storms flows.
(3) Easements shall provide as is otherwise necessary for reasonable maintenance.
(l) Drainage and storm sewers.
(1) Storm sewers and drainageways are to contain 25-year storms.
(2) Storm flows into and out of a tract are to be controlled to prevent flooding of existing structures
and facilities, and increasing 100-year storm elevations up or down grade of the tract resulting in
damage.
(3) 100-year floodplains are to be shown on all site plans and plats.
(m) Existing or major streams. Major streams shall not be modified without consent of applicable state and
federal agencies.
(n) Sedimentation controls. Brush berms, hay bales, sedimentation basins and similar recognized techniques
and materials shall be employed during construction to prevent point source sedimentation loading of
downstream facilities.
(o) Water systems. The subdivider shall provide all water lines necessary to properly serve each lot of the
subdivision and insure that existing and/or new water facilities can supply the required demand for domestic use
and for fire protection at the desired pressure. The subdivider shall install all mains and shall extend the service
to all lots terminating thereon with a curb stop and meter box. The subdivider shall submit a certificate to the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/225
city council certifying that the system has been designed in accordance with the requirements of the TCEQ and
rules of the Texas [Fire] Insurance Commission.
(1) Water mains.
(A) Piping for water mains and connections shall be ductile iron class 150, or PVC AWWA
C-900 class 150, either mechanical or single rubber gasket joint. Service piping shall be highdensity
polyethylene (HDPE) or copper as approved by the building code.
(B) Water mains smaller than six inches (6") shall not be permitted.
(2) Fire hydrants.
(A) Fire hydrants are to be compatible with the existing equipment in the city to assure
availability of parts.
(B) Fire hydrant nozzles, threads, and thread type to be compatible with fire department
equipment and nozzles.
(C) Fire hydrant shall be equipped with Stortz quick-connections with solid metal caps.
(3) Intersection valves and line valves.
(A) All water system valves are to be AWWA gate valves with operator boxes as designed for
buried service. A list of approved manufacturers are available at city hall.
(B) Three valves are required at four-way intersections unless four-direction feed is possible.
A minimum of two valves are required at tees. Location of the valves shall be reviewed with the
City of Abernathy water utilities staff.
(p) Sanitary sewer system. All subdivisions shall be provided with a sewage disposal system approved by the
TCEQ.
(1) Connection with sanitary sewer system requirement. Connection with the sanitary sewer
system shall be required.
(2) Materials of construction.
(A) Gravity sewer in normal, buried services shall be a minimum diameter of 8" and shall be
SDR 26 PVC solid-walled gravity sewer pipe that complies with ASTM D-3034. The cell
classification shall be 12454B as described in ASTM D-1784. Elevated crossing, bores, road
crossings, and conflicts with water lines, pipe may be ductile iron or other type pipe as required
by other agencies, such as the TxDOT, or as approved in writing by the building inspector. Any
sewer crossing a TxDOT roadway must have a permit issued by the TxDOT district office in
Lubbock, Texas.
(B) Sewers shall be constructed according to the TCEQ regulations. Sewer lines will be
properly bedded in a bedding material suitable for the depth and location of the sewer. All
bedding designs will be included on the plans that are submitted to the city for review.
(3) Piping size. Eight-inch (8") diameter pipe shall be the minimum acceptable for sewer mains
and lines. All sewer mains shall be graded to minimum acceptable grades as allowed by TCEQ.
(4) Manholes. Manholes shall be spaced at all changes in direction and not more than 400 feet
apart. Manholes shall be constructed of precast concrete sections with poured floors, or concrete
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/225
precast complete manholes and shall comply with ASTM C-470. Neoprene gaskets are required in all
penetrations. Minimum concrete strength for all manhole components shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Force mains. Force mains shall be pressure class 150 PVC pipe and fittings. Pressure class pipe
shall have either mechanical joints or rubber gasket joints, approved by the building official.
(q) Street lighting. Street lighting shall be provided by the developer and shall conform to the current edition
of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook. Lighting levels shall be as recommended for very light
traffic lit [in] residential areas; medium traffic on feeder streets; and heavy traffic on thoroughfares.
(r) Traffic-control signs, street signs and water meter boxes. All traffic-control signs shall be provided and
installed by the developer and shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, Vols. 1 and 2. All street signs and water meter boxes shall be provided and installed by
the developer, and said street signs and water meter boxes must meet the specifications set forth by the City of
Abernathy.
(s) Flood regulation. All floodplain calculations, and the design of changes to the floodplain shall be in
accordance with the emergency phase of the National Flood Insurance Program, article 8280-13, V.A.C.S. The
city shall review each proposed subdivision to assure the following:
(1) Proposals to minimize flood damage. All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) Public facilities to minimize flood damage. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewage,
gas, electrical and water systems shall be located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage to be provided. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
(t) Financial security.
(1) Abeyance. If the final plat is approved, the city may order that the plat be held in abeyance and
not recorded until the city engineer certifies that the construction of the streets and drainage is
complete or that the subdivider has provided appropriate financial security in one of the following
methods:
(A) Construction bond. A construction bond filed by the subdivider payable to the city in the
amount determined by the city council or its designated representative to be adequate to ensure
proper construction of the utilities, streets, and drainage improvements in the subdivision. The
bond should not exceed the estimated cost of construction of the utilities, streets, and drainage
improvements. The bond must be a surety company licensed to operate in the State of Texas
and approved by the city council or its designated representative. The bond must be
condition[ed] that the utilities, streets and drainage will be constructed in accordance with the
plans and specifications approved by the city council or its designated representative.
OR
(B) Funds. The owner may provide funds in escrow, certificate of deposit, an irrevocable
letter of credit or other financial instrument satisfactory to the city council or its designated
representative in the amount of the cost of construction. If a letter of credit is used, it must list
as the sole beneficiary, the city, and be conditioned that the owner of the tract of land
subdivided will construct all utilities, streets, and drainage improvements in the subdivision in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city council and within a
reasonable time set by the city council or its designated representative.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/225
Upon approval by the city and satisfaction of such security requirements, the final plat
will be filed of record in the plat record of the county along with any applicable covenants
and/or restrictions, at the owner's expense. If any requirements set by the city council are
not met, approval may be withdrawn.
AND
(2) Maintenance bond. During the entire warranty period (12 months), the subdivider must provide
appropriate financial security in accordance with these regulations. Financial security may be
arranged in one of the following methods:
(A) A maintenance bond may be filed by the subdivider payable to the city in the amount
determined by the city council or its designated representative to be adequate to ensure proper
maintenance of the utilities, streets, and drainage improvements in the subdivision during the
twelve months before final acceptance of the improvements but not to exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the cost of construction of the improvements in the subdivision. The bond must be
conditioned that the improvements will be maintained in accordance with the specifications
adopted by the city council.
OR
(B) The owner may provide funds in escrow, certificate of deposit, an irrevocable letter of
credit or other financial instrument satisfactory to the city council or its designated
representative to be adequate to ensure proper maintenance of the improvements in the
subdivision during the twelve (12) months before final acceptance of the improvements in the
subdivision. If a letter of credit is used, it must list as the sole beneficiary, the city, and be
conditioned that the improvements within the subdivision will be maintained in accordance
with the plans and specifications adopted by the city council.
Sec. 10.02.008 Penalties
(a) Violation of any provision of article. Violation of any provision or provisions of this article by any
subdivider shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction of such violation in municipal court of the City
of Abernathy shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Furthermore, each violation shall constitute
a separate offense, and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Other legal remedies. No conviction or convictions under the penal provision of this article or under the
Texas Penal Code, shall ever be considered as any bar to any injunctive or other legal remedy, relief, right or
power existing in the City of Abernathy, Texas, to enforce the application and provisions of this article by virtue
of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
(c) Compliance with other laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to
relieve the obligation of the subdivider to comply with ordinances, rules and regulations, and laws of any other
jurisdiction including Lubbock County, Hale County, the State of Texas, or the federal government.
Sec. 10.02.009 Variances
When a subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly
adhered to and where, because of some condition peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the city council, a
departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions and does not establish undesirable
precedence, the city council may authorize a variance. Variances shall not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare, and shall not be injurious to other property. All requested variances must be fully described in
writing along with the full justification including citations from laws, policies, design manuals, regulations and
other documentation, and submitted along with the plat submittals. Exhibits of data and documentation may be
required. The city council shall have the authority to hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and formally
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/225
notify adjacent or otherwise directly affected property owners and take the resulting testimony, and any other
data into consideration in their recommendation to the city council. A variance may be granted conditionally
based on agreed-to conditions that may be affected by future actions. Conditional variances granted during or
before the preliminary plat may be denied during the final plat approval, if the conditions or future actions do
not occur.
Sec. 10.02.010 Record drawings
The engineer representing the subdivider shall present to the city council, reproducible complete “record
drawings” for all paving, drainage structures, water lines, and sewer lines within thirty (30) days after
completion of each contract. All drawings shall be obviously marked as built or record drawings, and signed and
dated by the licensed engineer of record.
Sec. 10.02.011 Filing fees
(a) The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Abernathy
when any map or plat is tendered to the planning department, and each of the fees and charges provided herein
shall be paid in advance and no action of the city council or any other board or any other agency shall be valid
until the fee shall have been paid.
(1) There will be a $1,500.00 fee for review of preliminary and final plat and engineering plans.
This would cover all involved expenses, with any overage being refunded and any shortage being
billed to the developer.
Sec. 10.02.012 Amendments
The city council may at any time recommend amendments to any section of this article. The city council shall
approve or disapprove any amendment at a public meeting. The city council may hold one or more public
hearings to consider testimony regarding any amendments to this article.
(Ordinance 449 adopted 12/8/03)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX*
Sec. 11.02.001 Limitation of tax on homesteads of disabled and elderly persons
(a) Authorized. The city hereby adopts the limitation of municipal tax on the homesteads of disabled and
elderly in accordance with section 11.261 of the Texas Tax Code. Ad valorem taxes imposed on property
qualified for a residential homestead exemption under the provisions of article 8, section 1-b of the state
constitution which is the residential homestead of a person who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or
older or that person's spouse may not be increased while the property remains the residential homestead of that
person or that person's spouse except as may be provided in section 11.261 of the Texas Tax Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/225
(b) Surviving spouse of qualified person. If a person is entitled to the exemption and the disabled person or a
person sixty-five (65) years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead
exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the homestead by the city may not be increased
while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is fifty-five (55) years of
age or older at the time of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by state law.
(c) Improvements to homestead. Ad valorem taxes limited by the city under this section may be increased to
the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than
improvements made to comply with governmental requirements.
(Ordinance 463, secs. 1–3, adopted 7/11/05)
State law reference–Limitation of municipal tax on homesteads of disabled and elderly, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.261.
Sec. 11.02.002 Additional penalty for costs of collection of delinquent taxes
(a) Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed the city are given its tax attorney for collection, on or
after July 1 of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect, an additional
penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any interest owed) due on each
delinquent property at the time of collection, either before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale, as provided by
section 33.07 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (a) above, the city shall be entitled to
collect the actual expenses incurred by the city in providing all data and information as to the name, identity, and
location of necessary parties and the legal description of property necessary to the filing of any suit for
delinquent taxes.
(1996 Code, art. 1.500)
State law references–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.003 Tangible personal property in transit
Goods in transit, as defined by Texas Tax Code section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted by
the 82th Texas Legislature in Special Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city. (Ordinance 532
adopted 10/10/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Residential use of gas and electricity
The one percent (1%) city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity shall continue in effect after the
state-set date of discontinuance of October 1, 1979. (1996 Code, art. 1.400)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/225
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Uniform traffic code adopted
(a) Adoption. The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (V.A.C.S. art. 6701d) shall be in force within
the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
established in this section shall, upon conviction, be fined as prescribed in section 143 of said act.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.100)
Editor's note–Since adoption of this provision, the regulations contained in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.S., article 6701d) have been recodified and are now located in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.02.001–12.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Stop Signs
Sec. 12.02.031 Purpose
This division is adopted so that the city council may promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare within the city through the regulation of vehicular traffic. By providing for stop signs as traffic-control
devices, the city council seeks to prevent bodily injury, death, and property damage within the city limits.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 2, adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.032 Definitions
(a) Generally. Words and phrases used in this division shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words
and phrases which are not defined in this division but are defined in other ordinances of the city shall be given
the meanings set forth in those ordinances. Other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary
meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only,
and shall not be used in the interpretation of this division.
(b) Specific definitions.
City limits. The municipal boundaries (i.e., city limits) of the City of Abernathy.
Emergency vehicle. Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state,
county or municipal employee in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporations on an emergency call.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government agency, business, trust, partnership, association, or
any other legal entity.
Street. All public streets of the city, and any portions of such streets.
Stop.
(1) When required, to completely cease movement; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/225
(2) When prohibited, to halt, including momentarily halting, an occupied or unoccupied vehicle,
unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police
officer or a traffic-control sign or signal.
Stop sign. A sign placed by a public body having jurisdiction that directs traffic to stop.
Vehicle. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a street, including but not limited
to a moped, power-driven bicycle, motorcycle, motor scooter, automobile, truck, golf cart, tractor, and all-terrain
vehicle. The term does not include:
(1) A device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; or
(2) Manufactured housing as that term is defined by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards
Act.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 3, adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.033 Conformance with state manual
All stop signs within the city shall conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, as amended, and specifications adopted under the Texas Transportation Code. (Ordinance 511,
sec. 4(A), adopted –/–/10)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.034 Compliance
The operator of a vehicle shall comply with an applicable stop sign placed as provided by this division unless the
person is:
(1) Otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer; or
(2) Operating an authorized emergency vehicle and is subject to exceptions under this division.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 4(B), adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.035 Enforcement if sign not in place
A provision of this division requiring a stop sign may not be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time
and place of the alleged violation the stop sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily
observant person. (Ordinance 511, sec. 4(C), adopted –/–/10)
State law reference–No enforcement against alleged violator if traffic-control device not in proper position or sufficiently legible,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004(b).
Sec. 12.02.036 Interference, unauthorized signs, and other prohibited acts
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, without city authority, to alter, injure, knock down, or remove or
attempt to alter, injure, knock down, or remove a stop sign.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or display an unauthorized stop sign.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display advertising on a stop sign.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or display any item in such a way that it hides from
view or hinders the effectiveness of a stop sign.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/225
(e) It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow trees, shrubbery, or any other types of vegetation to
grow in such a way that it hides from view or hinders the effectiveness of a stop sign.
(f) Any item prohibited under this division is a public nuisance, and the chief of police, or the chief of police's
designee, is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 4(D), adopted –/–/10)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
Sec. 12.02.037 Installation
(a) The chief of police shall determine the location and placement of all stop signs.
(b) The chief of police shall, by written designation, recommend to the city council the location [and]
placement of stop signs. Upon council approval, such designation shall be filed with the city secretary, stating
the location and placement of the stop sign. The designation shall become an exhibit to this division by way of
amendment.
(c) For the purposes of this division, the chief of police does, by written designation, determine the list of
locations of stop signs and the placement of each as detailed in section 12.02.041.
(d) Such signs shall be installed immediately, or as soon as they can be procured. The city shall not place or
maintain a stop sign on a highway under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation (TxDOT)
without that department's permission.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 4(E), adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.038 Evidence of authorized installation
Any stop sign actually in place shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the city
pursuant to the authority of this division. (Ordinance 511, sec. 4(F), adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.039 Exceptions for emergency vehicles
(a) Privileges of driver of emergency vehicle. The driver of an emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to a fire
alarm, may proceed past a stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(b) Audible signal required. The exceptions herein granted shall apply only when an emergency vehicle
sounds audible signal by bell or siren. An emergency vehicle shall be equipped with at least two lighted lamps
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500')
forward. Emergency vehicles operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light
visible in front of the vehicle. Nothing in this division shall relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons or protect the driver from the consequences of his
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 5, adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.040 Penalties; additional remedies
(a) Generally. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this division as may
be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this division is subject to suit for injunctive
relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this division is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/225
(b) Criminal penalty. Any person violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined a
sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less
than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day that a provision
of this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Civil remedies. Nothing in this division shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil
action to enforce the provisions of this division and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not
limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this division or to require specific
conduct that is necessary for compliance with this division;
(2) A civil penalty up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) a day when it is shown that the
defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this division and after receiving notice committed
acts in violation of this division or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this division;
and
(3) Other available relief.
(Ordinance 511, sec. 7, adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 12.02.041 Locations
1st Place and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 1st Place.
1st Place and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
1st Place and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 1st Place.
1st Place and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
2nd Place and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Place.
2nd Place and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
2nd Place and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Place.
3rd Place and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Place.
3rd Place and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
3rd Place and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Place.
1st Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue A.
1st Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 1st Street.
1st Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
1st Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
1st Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
1st Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue H.
1st Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/225
1st Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
1st Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
1st Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
1st Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue N.
1st Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on East Street.
1st Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 1st Street.
1st Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 1st Street.
1st Street and Railroad Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Railroad Avenue.
2nd Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
2nd Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
2nd Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
2nd Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
2nd Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
2nd Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
2nd Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
2nd Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
2nd Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
2nd Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
2nd Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
2nd Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
2nd Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
2nd Street and Railroad Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 2nd Street.
3rd Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
3rd Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
3rd Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
3rd Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
3rd Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
3rd Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
3rd Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/225
3rd Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
3rd Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
3rd Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
3rd Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
3rd Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
3rd Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
3rd Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
3rd Street and Railroad Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 3rd Street.
4th Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
4th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
4th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
4th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
4th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
4th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
4th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
4th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
4th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
4th Street and Railroad Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 4th Street.
5th Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
5th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
5th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
5th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/225
5th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
5th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
5th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
5th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
5th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
5th Street and Railroad Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 5th Street.
6th Street and Avenue A, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 6th Street.
6th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
6th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 6th Street.
6th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
6th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
6th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
6th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
6th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
6th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
6th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
6th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
6th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 6th Street.
6th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 6th Street.
6th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 6th Street.
7th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
7th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 7th Street.
7th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
7th Street and East [IH-27 East Svc. Rd.], with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 7th Street.
7th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 7th Street.
8th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 8th Street.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/225
8th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
8th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
9th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 9th Street.
9th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
9th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
9th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
9th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
10th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
10th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 10th Street.
10th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
10th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
10th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
10th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 10th Street.
10th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 10th Street.
10th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 10th Street.
10th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 10th Street.
11th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
11th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 11th Street.
11th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
11th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
11th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
11th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 11th Street.
11th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 11th Street.
11th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 11th Street.
11th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 11th Street.
12th Street and Antelope Court, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Antelope Court.
12th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
12th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
12th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/225
12th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
12th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
12th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
12th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
12th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
12th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
12th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
12th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
12th Street and Buffalo Court, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Buffalo Court.
12th Street and Deer Court, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Deer Court.
12th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
12th Street and Elk Court, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Elk Court.
12th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
12th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
12th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 12th Street.
13th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
13th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
13th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
13th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
13th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
13th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
13th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
13th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
13th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/225
13th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
13th Street and Texas Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 13th Street.
14th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
14th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
14th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
14th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
14th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
14th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
14th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
14th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
14th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
14th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
14th Street and Texas Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 14th Street.
15th Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
15th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
15th Street and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
15th Street and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
15th Street and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
15th Street and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
15th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
15th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
15th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
15th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
15th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/225
15th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
15th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
15th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
15th Street and Texas Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
16th Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 16th Street.
16th Street and Avenue E (both), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
16th Street and Avenue F (both), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
16th Street and Avenue G (both), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
16th Street and Avenue H (both), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th [16th] Street.
16th Street and Avenue J (both), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue J.
16th Street and Avenue K, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue K.
16th Street and Avenue L, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue L.
16th Street and Avenue M, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue M.
16th Street and Avenue N, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 16th Street.
16th Street and East Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 16th Street.
16th Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 15th Street.
16th Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 16th Street.
16th Street and Jerome Street, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Jerome Street.
16th Street and Texas Avenue, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Texas Avenue.
20th Street and Avenue J, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on 20th Street.
Avenue C and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
Avenue J and Velray Drive, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Velray Drive.
East Avenue H and North Avenue H (an intersection of cul-de-sacs north of the intersection of Phillips
Boulevard and Avenue H), with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on East Avenue H.
East Street and F.M. 2060, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on East Street.
F.M. 2060 and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on F.M. 2060.
Main Street and Avenue C, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue C.
Main Street and Avenue D, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Main Street.
Main Street and IH-27 East Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/225
Main Street and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic all ways.
North Drive and Avenue E, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue E.
North Drive and Avenue F, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue F.
North Drive and Avenue G, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Avenue G.
North Drive and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on North Drive.
North Drive and Phillips Boulevard, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on North Drive.
Phillips Boulevard and Avenue H, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Phillips Boulevard.
Phillips Boulevard and IH-27 West Svc. Rd., with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Phillips
Boulevard.
Railroad Avenue and F.M. 2060, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Railroad Avenue.
Texas Avenue and F.M. 2060, with the stop signs placed in a position to stop traffic on Texas Avenue.
(Ordinance 511, ex. A, adopted –/–/10; Ordinance 531 adopted 10/10/11)
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Yielding to pedestrian in crosswalk
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a
pedestrian crossing a roadway within a designated crosswalk when the pedestrian is on the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of
the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or
run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. Whenever any vehicle
is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped
vehicle. (1996 Code, sec. 10.303)
State law reference–Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalk, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.003.
Secs. 12.03.002–12.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits(
Sec. 12.03.051 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance
with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 10.202)
Sec. 12.03.052 Reasonable and prudent speed required
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any street, roadway or
highway in the city limits at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing,
having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching and crossing an intersection or a railway
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/225
grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon
any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrian or other traffic or by
reason of weather or highway conditions; and, in every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary
to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with
legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. (1996 Code, sec. 10.201(a))
State law reference–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351.
Sec. 12.03.053 Speed zones on specific streets
Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with section 12.03.052, the speed of
any vehicle not in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be
lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall
be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
(1) U.S. 87. The speed zones established by this division shall include all of both the west service
road and the east service road for U.S. 87 within the corporate limits of the city:
(A) Beginning on the west service road at the point of intersection with the north city limit, a
point 0.003 mile north of the point of intersection with the centerline of 16th Street, the
maximum legal speed for southbound traffic only shall be 40 miles per hour for a distance of
1.023 miles to the point of intersection with the south city limit, this point being identical with
the point of intersection with the centerline of 1st Street, F.M. 597.
(B) Beginning on the west service road at the point of intersection with the south city limit,
this point being identical with the point of intersection with the centerline of 1st Street, F.M.
597, the maximum legal speed for northbound traffic only shall be 40 mph for a distance of
0.328 mile to the point of intersection with the centerline of 6th Street, thence 35 mph for a
distance of 0.695 mile to the point of intersection with the north city limit, this point being
0.003 mile north of the point of intersection with the centerline of 16th Street.
(C) Beginning on the east service road at the point of intersection with the north city limit,
this point being 0.003 mile north of the point of intersection with the centerline of 16th Street,
the maximum legal speed for both southbound traffic and northbound traffic shall be 40 mph
for a distance of 1.022 miles to the point of intersection with the south city limit, this point
being identical with the point of intersection with the centerline of 1st Street, F.M. 597.
(2) Loop 369 (Avenue D). The speed zones established by this division shall include all of Loop
369, Avenue D, within the corporate limits of the city; the maximum legal speed shall be as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection with the north city limit, a point 0.003 mile north of the point of
intersection with the centerline of 16th Street, the maximum legal speed for both southbound traffic
and northbound traffic shall be 35 mph for a distance of 0.751 mile to the point of intersection with
the centerline of 5th Street, thence 40 mph for a distance of 0.264 mile to the point of intersection
with the south city limit, this point being identical with the point of intersection with the centerline of
1st Street, F.M. 597.
(3) F.M. 597 (1st Street). The speed zones established by this division shall include all of F.M. 597,
1st Street, within the corporate limits of the city; the maximum legal speed shall be as follows:
(A) Beginning at the point of intersection with the west city limit, this being the point of
intersection with the centerline of a county road (Avenue N), the maximum legal speed for
eastbound traffic only shall be 50 mph for a distance of 0.221 mile to the point of intersection
with the centerline of Avenue K extending northerly, thence 40 mph for a distance of 0.405 mile
to the point of intersection with the east city limit, a point 0.009 mile west of the point of
intersection with the centerline of Avenue D, Loop 369.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/225
(B) Beginning at the east city limit, a point 0.036 mile east of the point of intersection with
the centerline of the main track of the P&SF Railroad, the maximum legal speed for westbound
traffic only shall be 45 mph for a distance of 0.155 mile to a point, thence 40 mph for a distance
of 0.621 mile to the point of intersection with the centerline of Avenue K extending northerly,
thence 45 mph for a distance of 0.221 mile to the point of intersection with the west city limit,
this being the point of intersection with the centerline of a county road (Avenue N).
(4) F.M. 2060. The speed zones established by this division shall include all of F.M. 2060 within
the corporate limits of the city; the maximum legal speed shall be as follows: Beginning at the point
of intersection with the centerline of the east service road for U.S. 87, the maximum legal speed for
both eastbound traffic and westbound traffic shall be 35 mph for a distance of 0.227 mile to the point
of intersection with the east city limit, a point 0.067 mile east of the point of intersection with the
centerline of Texas Avenue.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.201(b); Ordinance 554 adopted 6/9/14)
Secs. 12.03.054–12.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Stop Intersections*
Sec. 12.03.081 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this division shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 for each offense. (1996
Code, sec. 10.304)
Sec. 12.03.082 Manner of stopping
The driver of the vehicle shall stop in obedience to the stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at
one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.301)
State law references–Manner of stopping at stop or yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering stop or
yield intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Secs. 12.03.083–12.03.110 Reserved
Division 4. School Zones
Sec. 12.03.111 Penalty
Any person violating the prima facie speed limit established by this division shall, upon conviction, be fined as
prescribed by the provisions of Texas Transportation Code, and any person violating section 12.03.117 of this
division shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 10.407)
Sec. 12.03.112 Locations
The following designated locations and streets and areas are declared to be school zones:
(1) That part of Avenue D lying between maximum distant terminal points 500 feet north and south
of a point 40 feet north of Main Street on Avenue D.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/225
(2) That part of Avenue E lying between maximum distant terminal points 500 feet north and south
of the intersection of 8th Street with Avenue E.
(3) That part of 9th [8th] Street lying between maximum distant terminal points 500 feet east and
west of the intersection of Avenue E with 8th Street.
(4) On Sixth Street from the east curbline of Avenue E to the west curbline of Avenue H.
(5) On Eighth Street from the west curbline of Avenue G to the east curbline of Avenue E.
(6) On Ninth Street from the west curbline of Avenue H to the east curbline of Avenue G.
(7) On Avenue H from the south curbline of Sixth Street to the north curbline of Ninth Street.
(8) On Avenue G from the north curbline of Ninth Street to the south curbline of Eighth Street.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.401)
Sec. 12.03.113 Terminal points
The maximum distant terminal points of each of the school zones designated and established in section
12.03.112 of this division shall be determined by the city manager, taking into consideration the vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, intersections, crosswalks, and the type and condition of such streets. The actual terminal
points of such school zones, within which the provisions of this division apply, shall be the points within the
maximum distances actually determined by the city manager as herein required and at which the portable trafficcontrol
signs provided for in section [12.03.114] shall be placed. (1996 Code, sec. 10.402)
Sec. 12.03.114 Placement of signs
The city council is hereby authorized and directed to cause the placement of portable traffic-control signs and
markers at the following locations:
(1) An 18" x 24" sign, rectangular in shape, having a white background with red lettering, bearing
the inscription “Stop for Pedestrians in Crosswalks,” at the designated crosswalks located at or
nearest the midpoint of the school zone designated and established by sections 12.03.112 and
12.03.113 of this division. Such signs shall be placed facing approaching vehicular traffic from each
direction and shall be situated in the center of the street or at the most advantageous point within the
traffic lanes of such street, to warn such approaching vehicular traffic.
(2) A 24" x 24" diamond-shaped sign (square with one diagonal vertical), having a yellow
background with black lettering, bearing the inscription “No Passing - School Zone,” and on the
same standard or post, directly below the above sign, a 10" x 14" sign having a white background,
with black lettering, bearing the inscription “20 M.P.H.,” shall be placed in the center of the street or
at the most advantageous point within the traffic lanes for approaching vehicular traffic at each of the
terminal points established as provided in sections 12.03.112 and 12.03.113 of this division.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.406)
Sec. 12.03.115 “School hours” defined
“School hours,” as that term is used herein, shall be the hours 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. of every day falling within
the school season. “School season,” as that term is used herein, shall mean each day of the calendar year except
Saturdays, Sundays and all other days when the public school nearest the school zone is not in session. (1996
Code, sec. 10.404)
Sec. 12.03.116 Speed limit
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/225
The prima facie speed limit established by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 545.356, as amended, of
vehicles driven upon the public streets within the school zones designated and established in sections 12.03.112
and 12.03.113 of this division during school hours, as that term is described herein, is hereby established, and
shall be twenty miles per hour for all vehicles. (1996 Code, sec. 10.403)
Sec. 12.03.117 Passing prohibited
No person shall drive or operate a vehicle through a school zone designated and established by sections
12.03.112 and 12.03.113 of this division during school hours of the school season in such a manner as to
overtake and pass another vehicle being driven in the same direction upon the same street within said school
zone. (1996 Code, sec. 10.405)
Secs. 12.03.118–12.03.140 Reserved
Division 5. One-Way Streets*
Sec. 12.03.141 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division, or shall fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to pay a fine, and upon
conviction of any such violation shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 10.703)
Sec. 12.03.142 Locations
The following designated streets are declared one-way streets:
(1) Avenue G: From the south side of the intersection of Avenue G and Ninth (9th) Street, traffic
shall flow one-way only to the south, to the north side of the intersection of Avenue G and Eighth
(8th) Street.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.701)
(2) Eighth (8th) Street: From the west side of the intersection of Avenue G and Eighth Street,
traffic shall flow one-way only to the east, to the west side of the intersection of Avenue F and Eighth
(8th) Street. (Ordinance 510, sec. II, adopted 10/12/09)
Sec. 12.03.143 Placement of signs
Standard signs, conforming with state Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, bearing the legend “ONE
WAY,” shall be erected at the proper locations to adequately inform the public that the designated street is oneway.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.702)
Secs. 12.03.144–12.03.170 Reserved
Division 6. Golf Cart Use on Public Streets
Sec. 12.03.171 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Driver. The person driving and having physical control over the golf cart.
Driver's license. An authorization issued by a state for the operation of a motor vehicle. The term includes:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/225
(1) A temporary license or instruction permit; and
(2) An occupational license.
Golf cart. Shall have the meaning assigned by the Texas Transportation Code section 502.001(7), as amended,
and means a motor vehicle commonly referred to as a golf cart, which must have an attainable top speed not
greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured primarily for transporting
persons on a golf course and in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed
vehicles. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly referred to as
all-terrain vehicles (“ATVs”), off-road vehicles, four-wheelers, mules, gators and design-altered golf carts which
have been altered to allow them to travel at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour.
Golf cart registration permit. A privilege granted, upon compliance with the terms of this division, to legally
operate a golf cart upon a public street or roadway within the corporate boundaries of the city during the period
when granted.
Golf cart registration permit decal. A certificate for attachment to a golf cart carrying a serial number
corresponding to the number of the golf cart license for such golf cart and showing the month and calendar year
the license shall expire.
Golf cart registration permit fee. An administrative charge imposed as specified in this division for the granting
of a golf cart registration permit and the issuance of a golf cart registration permit decal.
Motorized cart. Those electric and gasoline powered carts, commonly referred to as golf carts, but which must
have a minimum of three wheels and which have an attainable top speed not greater than 25 miles per hour on a
paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards
for low-speed vehicles. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly
referred to as ATV's, four-wheelers, mules, and gators.
Owner. The person holding title to the golf cart.
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
Parking area. Those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for
temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots.
Permit. A certificate/decal of authorization issued to the applicant by the city authorizing the operation of the
golf cart for which the permit was issued. The decal will display the month and year of expiration.
Permit holder. The person to whom a golf cart permit has been issued.
Public safety personnel. Any employee or officer of a governmental law enforcement agency or the city or its
department(s).
Public street. The public roadways of the city by whatever name, e.g. road, alley, avenue, highway, route,
boulevard, etc. within the corporate boundaries of the city that:
(1) Has a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less;
(2) Provides for no more than one lane of vehicular traffic per direction;
(3) Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system.
Sidewalk. The portion of a street that is between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line
and intended for pedestrian use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/225
Slow-moving-vehicle-emblem. A triangular emblem that conforms to standards and specifications adopted by the
director of the Texas Department of Transportation under section 547.104 of the Texas Transportation Code and
is displayed in accordance with section 547.703 of the Texas Transportation Code.
Texas Transportation Code. The code as it currently exists or may be amended.
Traffic way. Any land way open to the public as a matter of right or custom for moving persons or property from
one place to another. The traffic way includes all property, both improved and unimproved, between the property
lines of a roadway system.
Sec. 12.03.172 Golf carts permitted and restricted
A person, other than public safety personnel, may operate a golf cart on a public street, parking area and/or
traffic way if the person obtains a registration permit, affixes a registration decal, and meets the following
requirements:
(1) The maximum speed limit on the public street is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less;
(2) The person has a valid driver's license;
(3) The person maintains current financial responsibility for the golf cart, as required of other
passenger vehicles in section 601.051 of the Texas Transportation Code;
(4) The person complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances;
(5) The golf cart has the following equipment, which must continuously remain in good working
and operational order:
(A) Two (2) headlamps;
(B) Two (2) tail lamps;
(C) Side reflectors (two (2) front, amber in color and two (2) rear, red in color);
(D) Parking brake;
(E) Rearview mirror(s), capable of a clear, unobstructed view of at least two hundred feet
(200') to the rear;
(F) Slow-moving vehicle emblem(s) having a reflective surface designed to be clearly visible
in daylight or at night from the light of standard headlamps at a distance of at least 500 feet and
shall be mounted base down on the rear of the vehicle at a height from three to five feet above
the road surface and shall be maintained in a clean reflective condition;
(6) While the golf cart is in motion, the driver and every passenger in a golf cart is seated in a seat
designed to hold passengers. No person may stand or ride in the lap of the driver and/or other
passenger of a golf cart while it is moving; and
(7) The equipment described herein meets the state and federal motor vehicle safety standards, as
they exist or may be amended.
Sec. 12.03.173 Additional requirements for golf carts powered by gasoline
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, every golf cart powered by gasoline shall at all times be
equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation and meet the following
specifications:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/225
(1) The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to
and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or including any and all parts specified by the
manufacturer;
(2) The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened with brackets or hangers, which
are designed for the particular purpose of fastening golf cart exhaust systems;
(3) The engine and powered mechanism of every golf cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned
so that the exhaust is in good working order; and
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any golf cart to operate or permit the operation of
such golf cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions which is placed on a golf
cart by the manufacturer is rendered unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its
operation.
Sec. 12.03.174 Additional operational regulations for all golf carts
(a) Except for public safety personnel, golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway,
jogging path, park trail or any location normally used for pedestrian traffic.
(b) All golf carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic
ways of the city, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any golf cart of the full use
of a lane.
(c) The driver of a golf cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being
overtaken.
(d) No driver shall operate a golf cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(e) The driver of a golf cart operating the golf cart on a public street may only cross a multi-lane federal,
county or state route at an intersection controlled by an official traffic-control device which stops traffic from all
directions. The driver of a golf cart may cross a multi-lane road, other than a federal, state, or county route, if it
is required to cross from one portion of a golf course to another portion of the same golf course. If a golf cart
crossing path is provided for transition between one section of a golf course to another section of the same golf
course across a multi-lane road, the operator shall cross at and within the golf cart crossing path.
(f) The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating
is installed and provided on the golf cart.
(g) Children must be properly seated while a golf cart is in motion and may not be transported in a reckless or
negligent manner. No person younger than six (6) years of age may be transported in a golf cart unless restrained
by a safety belt restraint.
(h) Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another golf cart, trailer or vehicle of any kind
including, without limitation, a person on roller skates, skateboard or bicycle. A person employed by a golf
course may tow a golf cart(s) for the purpose of relocating the cart(s) from one portion of a golf course to
another portion of the same golf course.
(i) Golf carts shall not be operated during inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke,
fog, or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the
roadway at a distance of five hundred feet (500').
Sec. 12.03.175 Liability
(a) Nothing in this division shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries
(including death) to persons, pets or property which may result from the operation of a golf cart by an authorized
driver.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/225
(b) Owners are fully liable and accountable for the action of any individual that they provide permission to
operate and drive said golf cart, both on personal and/or any authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic
ways. This described liability responsibility especially applies to personal injuries (including death) or property
damage resulting from golf cart drivers who are minors under the age of twenty-one (21) with or without a
current and valid driver's license.
Sec. 12.03.176 Registration permit required
(a) No person shall operate, cause to be operated or allow the operation of a golf cart on any authorized public
streets, parking areas and traffic ways unless a valid registration permit has been issued for the golf cart or
otherwise allowed by law.
(b) Application for a permit authorizing the operation of a golf cart shall be made by a person who owns,
leases or otherwise uses a golf cart. Such application shall be made in writing to the city on a form designated
for that purpose. On such application shall be set forth the following:
(1) The name, address, telephone number and state driver's license number, if applicable, of the
permit holder;
(2) The street address where the golf cart is kept, including the particular suite or apartment
number, if applicable;
(3) The business name used for the premises where the golf cart is kept, if applicable;
(4) The year, make, model, color, vehicle identification number or serial number if no vehicle
identification number has been issued to the golf cart, electric or gasoline;
(5) The person(s) and location, designated by the city, that inspected the golf cart, including a
certification by said inspector that the golf cart complies with the requirements of this division before
the issuance of a permit;
(6) Statement that all operators are required to be licensed pursuant to Texas Transportation Code
sections 521.001(3) and 521.021, as amended, and that all equipment required herein is installed and
will be kept operational during the permit period;
(7) Statement that the registration permit holder and any user shall indemnify and hold harmless
the city for any and all civil liability associated with said registration waives any and all rights to sue
or allow subrogation by insurance company; and
(8) Other information which the city may require.
(c) The registration permit decal shall be permanently affixed on the left side of the golf cart in such a manner
that it is clearly visible from fifty feet (50'). The permit must not be damaged, altered, obstructed or otherwise
made illegible. The permit holder shall apply for replacement permit and pay all applicable cost associated with
the issuance and inspection of the golf cart.
(d) The registration permit decal shall only be placed upon the golf cart for which it was issued.
(e) A permit issued to a golf cart shall become invalid if the golf cart is altered in a manner that fails to
comply with any requirement of this division.
(f) Registration permits/decals are valid for a period of two (2) years and each shall expire on December 31st
of odd-numbered years. The registration permit fee shall be prorated to the number of yearly quarters remaining
in the permit period. The following fee shall apply:
(1) Registration permit: $48.00 (includes inspection and decal).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/225
(2) Re-inspection if a cart fails the initial inspection: $20.00.
(3) Governmental entities applying for a registration permit are exempt from any fees.
(g) The permit holder shall notify the city within ten (10) working days if the golf cart transfers ownership or
the address of the normal storage location has changed. The information shall be submitted on a form designated
by the city.
(h) Lost or stolen permit/decals are the responsibility of the owner. A police report must be filed in the event
of a lost or stolen permit/decal. If no record can be found of a previous application, or the receipt of a
permit/decal, the city may direct the applicant to reapply, and also resubmit any and all fees necessary before a
replacement permit/decal is issued.
(i) Any person who operates a golf cart and fails to receive and properly display a city permit/decal will be
subject to all applicable state laws, in addition to being in violation of this division.
(j) A permit may be revoked at any time by the city, or its designee(s), if:
(1) There is any evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a golf cart on any authorized
public streets, parking areas and traffic ways of the city in compliance with this division.
(2) The owner or driver fails to abide by the rules and regulations of this division.
(3) The owner fails to maintain proof of financial responsibility during the entire permit
registration period.
(k) The commission of any of the violations described herein constitutes evidence that the permit holder
cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the street within the city.
(l) The permit is not transferable. Upon transfer of ownership of the golf cart to a person who intends to
operate it over authorized streets and parking areas, the new owner must register the golf cart and pay the
registration permit fee as outlined hereinabove.
Sec. 12.03.177 Public safety personnel
Public safety personnel may operate a golf cart on any public street, parking area and traffic way without any
further restrictions when the golf cart is used in the performance of his/her duties or on official business of the
city or on city-owned property and city-leased property, including but not limited to, a parade, a festival or other
special events.
Sec. 12.03.178 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm, entity or corporation who violates any provision of this division, as it exists or may be
amended, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each continuing day's violation under this division shall constitute a
separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to
enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state, and
federal law.
(b) In addition to the misdemeanor for traffic violations of the driver of the motorized cart may be subject to
pursuant to state law [sic], the owner and/or permit holder of the motorized cart shall be subject to the following
civil penalties:
(1) For the first offense, a fine of not less than $25.00.
(2) For the second and any subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $50.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/225
(Ordinance 552 adopted 10/14/13)
ARTICLE 12.04 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Sec. 12.04.001 Parking for longer than 48 hours
(a) Prohibited. No person driving or in charge of any motor vehicle, automobile, truck, tractor, or trailer shall
park or cause to be parked such vehicle in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of
the city for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours.
(b) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and
each and every day this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(1996 Code, art. 10.500)
Sec. 12.04.002 Parking on F.M. 597
(a) Prohibited areas. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within the rights-of-way provided for F.M. 597,
1st Street, in the areas defined as follows:
(1) For the north side of the roadway, the north one-half of the rights-of-way provided, beginning
at the point of intersection with the centerline of the north approach of Avenue F and extending
easterly for 750 feet more or less to the point of intersection with the centerline of Avenue D.
(2) For the south side of the roadway, the south one-half of the rights-of-way provided, beginning
at the point of intersection with the centerline of the south approach of Avenue F easterly for 700 feet
more or less to the point of intersection with the centerline of Avenue D.
(b) Placement of signs. Standard signs, white reflectorized background with red legend, bearing the legend
“No Parking Any Time,” shall be erected on both sides of F.M. 597, 1st Street, accordingly spaced to adequately
inform the public that the privilege of vehicular parking has been removed.
(c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or shall fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to
pay a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1996 Code, art. 10.600)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Electrical service rates
Electric rates charged by the electric utility shall continue as they are at the time this code goes into effect until
changed in accordance with law. (1996 Code, art. 11.600)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/225
State law reference–Municipal jurisdiction over electric utility, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 33.
Sec. 13.01.002 Gas service rates
Energas Natural Gas Company, its successors and assigns may make charges under its general service rate for
the sale of natural gas and natural gas service to its customers who use natural gas within the city as provided for
in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (1996 Code, art. 11.700)
State law reference–Municipal jurisdiction over rates, operations and services of gas utility, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 103.
ARTICLE 13.02 STREET RENTAL†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Report of gross receipts
All persons, associations, organizations, and corporations, except distributors of natural gas, using or
maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, and other fixtures in any of the streets,
highways, easements, alleys, parks, or other places within the corporate limits of the city shall, on the 1st day of
August of each and every year, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the
business conducted by such persons, associations, organizations and corporations within the corporate limits of
the city for the preceding year ending June 30th. (1996 Code, sec. 11.801)
Sec. 13.02.002 Examination of books and records
The city council may when it may see fit have the books and records of the person, association, organization, or
corporation rendering the statement required in section 13.02.001 of this division examined by a representative
of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this division shall be construed to
prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. (1996 Code, sec. 11.802)
Sec. 13.02.003 Due date for payment; amount
Upon the 1st day of August of each and every year, every person, association, organization, or corporation,
except distributors of natural gas, occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other
public places in the city with poles and other fixtures shall as a condition to such further occupancy pay to the
city annually for such privileges a rental equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received by such person,
association, organization, or corporation from its business conducted in the corporate limits of the city for the
preceding year, which sums shall be paid to the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.803)
Sec. 13.02.004 Receipt for payment
Upon receipt of the above rental, the city secretary shall deliver to the person, association, organization, or
corporation paying the same a receipt for such rental, which receipt shall authorize such person, association,
organization, or corporation to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public
ways of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12) months from August 1st of such year. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.804)
Sec. 13.02.005 Charges additional to taxes
The rental for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements, and public places of the city
provided for in this division is not charged as a tax but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed
by such persons, associations, organizations, and corporations of using the streets, easements, alleys, and other
public ways of the city in the conduct of their respective businesses; and such charges are additional to all ad
valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against the persons, associations,
organizations or corporations mentioned herein. (1996 Code, sec. 11.805)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/225
Sec. 13.02.006 Applicability of other laws
Nothing herein is intended to relieve any person, association, organization, or corporation of any condition,
restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.806)
Sec. 13.02.007 Provisions do not grant franchise
This division does not grant a franchise to any utility or person, association, organization or corporation to use
the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways, and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise,
and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid the
city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.807)
Sec. 13.02.008 Right of city to impose other regulations
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the
erection and maintenance of poles, wires, and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and other
public ways of the city and from time to time to require such poles, wires and other property, equipment and
fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city
may deem proper. (1996 Code, sec. 11.808)
Sec. 13.02.009 Penalty for operating without payment
Every person, association, organization, and corporation who shall operate any business without payment of the
rentals provided for herein shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision found
in section 1.01.009 of this code for each and every day that such person, association, organization, or corporation
shall conduct such business using and occupying the streets, easements, alleys, or other public ways of the city
without the payment of said rentals, which sum may be recovered by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction
by a suit filed therein. (1996 Code, sec. 11.809)
Sec. 13.02.010 Penalty for failure to make report or permit examination of records
Every person, association, organization, or corporation and the local manager or agent of every such person,
association, organization or corporation failing or refusing to make the report required by section 13.02.001 of
this division, or failing or refusing to allow the examination provided for in section 13.02.002 herein, shall, upon
conviction in the municipal court of the city, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code, and every day's failure or refusal, as mentioned in this section, shall be deemed a
separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 11.810)
Sec. 13.02.011 Inspection of fixtures; unsafe or unsuitable fixtures
The city fire marshal, building inspector, and electrical inspector, the city's police officers, and such other
persons designated by the city shall have power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time to
time all telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, and other fixtures in the public places within the city
for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is
found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining
same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. (1996 Code, sec. 11.811)
Secs. 13.02.012–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Natural Gas Corporations*
Sec. 13.02.041 Assessment; applicability
Each person, firm or corporation owning, operating, or maintaining any natural gas plant, pipelines, pipeline
facilities, distribution system and other facilities, fixtures and equipment which are located, operated, maintained
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/225
or used within the corporate limits of the city and/or used for the sale and distribution in said corporate limits of
natural gas and charging for same, and using in any manner, either on, along, under, over or across, or otherwise,
any part of any street, alley, highway, easement, park, thoroughfare or other public way or ground within said
corporate limits for locating, placing, erecting, operating, maintaining or using any line, gas line, pipeline, pipe,
pole, wire, or other fixture or equipment, shall, from and after the effective date of this division, pay to the city
quarterly, each year, a sum of money equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts (as said term “gross
receipts” is hereinafter defined) of such person, firm or corporation from the sale and distribution within the
corporate limits of the city of natural gas service, which said sum of money and charge is hereby fixed and
assessed, and shall be collected, as a reasonable rental and charge for the use of said streets, alleys, highways,
easements, parks, thoroughfares or other public ways or grounds, or any part thereof, and such rental and charge
is not in excess of a reasonable rental and charge. (1996 Code, sec. 11.901)
Sec. 13.02.042 “Gross receipts” defined
The term “gross receipts” is defined as the total gross receipts from the sale of natural gas within said corporate
limits, for the particular quarter of year involved. (1996 Code, sec. 11.902)
Sec. 13.02.043 Due date for payment
The quarterly payments provided for herein shall become due and shall be collected and paid as follows: The
payment for the first quarter of each year (ending March 31) shall be paid on or before the first day of May
following, for the second quarter of each year (ending June 30) on or before the first day of August following,
for the third quarter of each year (ending September 30) on or before the first day of November following, and
for the fourth quarter of each year (ending December 31) on or before the first day of February following. No
charges are fixed and no charges shall be paid hereunder on any receipts from the sale of merchandise or any
receipts of any character except those derived from sale within said corporate limits of natural gas. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.903)
Sec. 13.02.044 Statement of gross receipts
Such person, firm or corporation shall, at the time of making any quarterly payment, furnish to the city a
statement, certified by a duly authorized officer or agent, showing the quarterly gross receipts as heretofore
defined and the amount of deductions as heretofore provided for. (1996 Code, sec. 11.904)
Sec. 13.02.045 Acceptance of provisions; effective date
(a) Upon final passage hereof, such person, firm or corporation shall file with the city secretary a written
statement filed in its name and behalf by a duly authorized officer in substantially the following form:
The Honorable Mayor and City Council of the City of Abernathy:
The undersigned, for itself, its successors and assigns, hereby accepts the City's Ordinance No.
159 finally passed by the City Council on the 9th day of October, 1967, and agrees to pay to the
City the three percent charges and rentals on gross receipts from the sale of gas as provided for
in the ordinance for the use of the streets, alleys, highways, easements, parks, thoroughfares and
other public ways and grounds or any part thereof within the corporate limits of said City.
(Person, firm or corporation)
By
(Title)
Dated the ______ day of ____________, 19___.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/225
(b) The charges and rentals provided for herein shall become effective on the first day of the payment period
provided for in section 13.02.043 hereof which next follows the final passage of this division and the acceptance
and agreement in writing by any such person, firm or corporation to pay such rentals and charges as provided for
in this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.905)
ARTICLE 13.03 SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 13.03.001 Purpose
The accumulation of garbage and trash in the city on the premises of private residences or business, commercial
or other institutions and in the streets and alleys constitutes a public menace and nuisance and greatly increases
the danger of the spread of infectious, contagious, and epidemic diseases, and it is imperative and urgent for the
preservation of health, safety, sanitation, peace and public welfare that proper and adequate regulations be
adopted to require property owners, tenants, occupants or lessees to secure containers and receptacles of
sufficient size and material in which to deposit garbage and trash for collection and removal at regular intervals.
Sec. 13.03.002 Definitions
As used herein:
City. The City of Abernathy, Texas.
Garbage. All animal or vegetable matter, such as waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery
stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, motels, and rooming and boardinghouses, and other deleterious
substances, not to include dirt, concrete, tile, plaster, rocks, and other such substances.
Person. Shall include both singular and plural and shall mean and embrace any person, firm or corporation, their
agents, servants, tenants, and employees.
Trash. Rubbish, such as ashes, feathers, coffee grounds, tin cans, paper bags, boxes, glass, newspaper,
magazines, and other such paper products, grass, shrubs, flowers, yard cleaning, grass clippings, and tree
trimmings, but not to include dirt, concrete, tile plaster, rocks, and other such substances.
Sec. 13.03.003 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code, and each day's failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Sec. 13.03.004 Placement of containers for collection
(a) The city or its designated refuse collection contractor will furnish a container or containers as may be
required to be used by each person in the collection and removal of garbage and trash.
(b) Garbage and trash shall be collected and removed by the city as often as deemed necessary by the city to
protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(c) The city will determine the placement locations for all containers and it shall be unlawful for any person to
disturb or move a container without consent from the city.
(d) It shall be unlawful to block the access to any sanitation container.
Sec. 13.03.005 Requirements for Disposal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/225
Every person using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the city for
residences, churches, schools, colleges, lodges, commercial, industrial, business, or other purposes shall comply
with the following requirements:
(1) All persons shall be required to use containers provided by the city for garbage and trash
disposal if containers are available.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation (other than the owner, occupant,
resident, or lessee of the premises for which the container has been furnished and who is currently
paying the monthly charge therefor) to place anything in a sanitation container.
(3) All persons shall be required to first reduce the size of any bulky object before placing it in the
container for disposal. Bulky objects shall include, but not be limited to, cardboard boxes, paper
containers, wooden boxes and crates and other such objects that can be reduced in size.
(4) All persons shall be required to first bag and tie grass clippings before placing them in the
container for disposal.
(5) It shall be the duty of every person placing garbage in any container to eliminate as far as
possible all water and liquid from such garbage and it shall be unlawful to pour water or any liquid
over said garbage.
(6) Lids of all containers shall be kept closed at all times except when the container is being filled.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb a sanitation container furnished by the city or to in
any way disturb the contents of said container; however, this subsection shall not apply to the owner
or occupant of the premises for which such container has been furnished, or their employees, or to the
duly authorized employees of the city.
(8) It shall be unlawful to make a fire or burn any material in a sanitation container furnished by
the city or paint or mark upon same or to place any poster, placard or signs upon same or to damage
said container in any way.
Sec. 13.03.006 Materials not to be deposited in containers
(a) The following items shall not be placed in collection containers:
(1) Heavy material, including but not limited to: broken concrete, rocks, tree stumps and metal;
(2) Manure from cow lots, horse stables or poultry yards and similar material;
(3) Dead animals;
(4) Brush limbs, leaves and cuttings from trees and shrubs which have been trimmed or removed
by commercial tree trimmers;
(5) Construction materials;
(6) Hazardous or regulated waste such as batteries, tires, lead paint, pesticides, petroleum products
and related materials;
(7) Waste generated beyond the city limits of the city and brought into the city for disposal.
(b) Commercial waste shall not be placed in residential collection containers. Commercial accounts may place
waste only in containers assigned to their specific account.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/225
Sec. 13.03.007 Construction, remodeling or property cleanup waste
Rock, waste, scrap building materials or other trash resulting from construction or major remodeling, or from a
general cleanup of vacant or improved property prior to its occupancy, or resulting from cleaning up of trees,
brush and debris from property in preparation for construction, will not be removed by the city as regular
service. The owner or other person in charge of such premises shall have such materials removed at his expense.
Sec. 13.03.008 Dumping prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, haul, throw, or deposit any garbage, trash, dirt, concrete, rocks,
brick, plaster, tile, stagnant water or dead animals into, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, parkway,
street or vacant lot, or upon any public or private premises within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 13.03.009 Service charge
(a) In order to defray the cost and expense of solid waste disposal services including but not limited to the
collecting garbage, trash and rubbish, maintenance of alley surfaces, brush chipping, equipment repairs, bulk
waste disposal and convenience center operations, a monthly service charge is hereby levied and assessed which
shall be charged and collected from each and every person, firm, or corporation, owning, leasing, managing,
occupying or operating any premises within the business and residential districts, for making such collection and
removals of garbage, trash and rubbish.
(b) The service charge per month for collection and removal of garbage and trash from houses, buildings and
premises used for commercial and business purposes shall be provided for in appendix A of this code.
(c) The city will collect sales taxes as required by state law on garbage and trash collections.
Sec. 13.03.010 Billing
To avoid duplication of billing for sanitation services and as a convenience to the public:
(1) The service fees herein provided for shall be billed by the city utility billing department and
collected from the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee in whose name the water account is carried.
Where the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee has no water account with the city, then billing for
garbage and trash collection shall be rendered to the person, firm or corporation receiving such
service.
(2) It shall be the duty of the city utility billing department to notify each residential user and bill
them for service each month with their water bill, and the bill shall be due and payable in the same
manner as water bills and shall be subject to the same penalties for failure to pay as water bills.
Failure to pay any monthly bill when due shall authorize the city to discontinue the service, and such
discontinuance of service shall not relieve any person from the duty and obligation to remove trash,
rubbish, and garbage and the refusal to so remove shall constitute a violation of this article.
Sec. 13.03.011 Trash not in containers
In the event that trash is of such a nature that it cannot be put in the regulation containers provided by the city, it
shall be placed in neat and orderly piles, upon the property of the generator of the waste adjacent to the alley or
the edge of the alley in order that it may be removed conveniently. Tree limbs and hedge clippings shall not
exceed four (4) feet in length, and any single tree limb, stump, or cutting shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds each.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place trash or any other materials on or adjacent to another person's
property, or in the alley, street or sidewalk area so as to obstruct or hamper the emptying of regulation
containers, vehicles, or pedestrian traffic.
Sec. 13.03.012 Hauling of waste by owner or occupant
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/225
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the owner or occupant of any premises within the
hereinabove described area or within the city from himself disposing of or hauling away any garbage or waste
materials from his premises in accordance with the terms and provisions herein. All vehicles used for hauling
garbage and trash shall have sufficient covering, or so closely fitted as to prevent escape or flying about of any
of the contents therefrom.
(Ordinance 550, sec. 1, adopted 8/12/13)
ARTICLE 13.04 WATER SERVICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.04.001 “City waterworks” defined
All property owned and controlled by the city for the purpose of providing water service to the people of the
city, including its water plants, water supply, mains and system, shall constitute and be known as the city
waterworks. (1996 Code, sec. 11.201)
Sec. 13.04.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any of the rules, regulations or terms of the city
waterworks as set in this division, or doing or causing to be done by any person or persons, firms, association or
corporation of any of the things or acts forbidden or made unlawful in any of the sections of this division, shall
be deemed to be guilty of a violation of this division, and an offense, and punishable as such, and for each and
every violation of the terms of this division the person, persons, firm, association or corporation shall, upon
conviction thereof in the municipal court, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day such violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense and be punishable as such. (1996 Code, sec. 11.224)
Sec. 13.04.003 Provisions to be incorporated in contracts
All of the provisions of this division shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the city
waterworks and its consumers, and each consumer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of this
division and, by applying and accepting water from the city waterworks, to have assented to the provisions
hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 11.225)
Sec. 13.04.004 Meters required; ownership of meters
All water furnished by the city waterworks to its consumers shall be measured by meters. The size, type and
right to own and control all meters installed or used by consumers of its water shall be determined by the city
waterworks, which shall keep all meters owned by it in repair without expense to consumers. When it is
impractical to meter water for special occasions, water may be sold and charged for on estimated consumption
upon written permit under the same permit issued under the same conditions as prescribed in the following
section. (1996 Code, sec. 11.202)
Sec. 13.04.005 Meters 1-1/4 inches and larger
All meters 1-1/4 inches and larger shall be furnished by water user. The owner thereof shall have his meter
repaired when notified to do so, and in event of his failure or refusal to repair same, the city waterworks shall
repair the meter and charge the cost of same to said consumer and shall add it to his water bill, and the same
rules applying to accounts due on water furnished shall apply to these repair bills. (1996 Code, sec. 11.203)
Sec. 13.04.006 Meters failing to register properly
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/225
Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a consumer since the previous reading,
the right shall exist on the part of the city waterworks to average the month and charge for the water on the basis
of three months' previous average. (1996 Code, sec. 11.204)
Sec. 13.04.007 Reading of meters
Meters shall be read monthly, and the consumer notified in writing. (1996 Code, sec. 11.205)
Sec. 13.04.008 Service outside city
The city waterworks shall be authorized to furnish water at or inside the city limits to consumers outside the city
limits upon such terms, conditions and rates as may from time to time be prescribed by the city council, except
that in no event shall such rate be lower than the schedule of water charged consumers within the city limits.
Nothing in this section shall compel the city waterworks to furnish consumers beyond the corporate limits or to
continue such supply once begun, and the city waterworks reserves the right to furnish such customers as it
deems advisable and at any time wholly or partially to discontinue the supply upon violation of any terms of this
article as if such consumer had resided in the city limits. (1996 Code, sec. 11.206)
Sec. 13.04.009 Deposit
Before any consumer may have water service from the city waterworks he must deposit with the city waterworks
$75.00. Said deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he shall have discontinued the use of city water and
shall have [paid] all bills and accounts due the city waterworks for any account whatsoever connected with the
water service, and shall return the receipt. If the receipt is not returned, then the records on books of the city
waterworks shall be the basis of adjustment. This deposit is required and made in the nature of a guarantee for
payment of water service accounts, and damage to service connections or meters caused through neglect, abuse
or failure to properly care for the same by the consumer or his agent, and the deposit or any part thereof may be
applied by the city waterworks to the payment of any such account when it becomes past due. This deposit shall
not be made nor accepted in the nature of a payment, but only as a guarantee. Failure to pay the water bill before
it becomes delinquent is considered notice from the consumer to discontinue service and apply so much of the
deposit as is necessary for the payment of the then past due account. In case any deposit or any part thereof shall
have been applied in payment of past due accounts, no service may be re-established until the deposit shall have
been brought back up to the full amount required. (Ordinance 442 adopted 9/23/02)
Sec. 13.04.010 Leakage
All property owners, their agents and tenants shall be held responsible as consumer for loss of water due to
leakage in pipes or plumbing inside the discharge side of the meter or on said property, and if the water is not
paid for according to the rates then in effect, when it becomes due, the water shall be cut off by the city
waterworks and not turned on again until all claims are paid or adjusted to the satisfaction of the city
waterworks. In the event of any change of tenant or consumer, in rented property, and there exists, at the time, a
non-paid account for past leakage, the landlord and property owner shall be held to account for payment for this
leakage before service will be extended and water furnished to the second tenant. (Ordinance 442 adopted
9/23/02)
Sec. 13.04.011 Turning water on and off
No plumber, or any other person, shall turn on or off water from the street stopcock without a written permit first
obtained from the city waterworks superintendent, except only in case of repair. (1996 Code, sec. 11.208)
Sec. 13.04.012 Supplying water to others
No consumer shall supply water to other persons or to other families or suffer them to take it, except for use on
the premises, without the permission of the city waterworks. (1996 Code, sec. 11.209)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/225
Sec. 13.04.013 Extending service to other premises
After water is introduced into a building or upon any premises, the same shall not be extended by any plumber
or any other persons to any other premises for additional fixtures. (1996 Code, sec. 11.210)
Sec. 13.04.014 Separate service pipe and meter required for each premises
Two houses shall not be permitted to be supplied with one service pipe where there is a service main in front of
the premises or on either side thereof, but shall have separate service pipes. Two or more houses fronting on a
street or streets where there is no water main may be supplied with one [pipe of] sufficient size to insure ample
supply, but in such cases each of said houses shall have a separate service pipe, stopcock and meter. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.211)
Sec. 13.04.015 Right of entry
Every person taking water from the city waterworks shall at all reasonable times permit the superintendent or his
agents to enter the premises and buildings for the purpose of examination of pipes and fixtures, and the manner
in which the water is used, and refusal by any consumer shall result in refusal of water supply from the city
waterworks until such permission be granted. (1996 Code, sec. 11.212)
Sec. 13.04.016 Repair of service pipes from main to curb
The city waterworks reserves the right to make all repairs and renewal of service pipes from main to curb, and it
shall be unlawful for any other person, or persons, to repair or renew service pipes from main to curb. (1996
Code, sec. 11.213)
Sec. 13.04.017 Protection of meters from hot water
All boilers for heating water shall be provided with a safety valve and a check valve shall be placed on service
pipes to protect the meter from hot water. Also, all water heaters not equipped with a thermostat shall be
provided with safety valves and a check valve placed on service pipes to protect the meter from hot water. Any
consumer failing to comply with these provisions shall have his water supply cut off and not turned on again
until such valves have been installed. All steam boilers connecting direct with the city supply are required to
provide a tank for at least twelve hours' storage. (1996 Code, sec. 11.214)
Sec. 13.04.018 Elevated tanks
All elevated tanks located on elevated towers or otherwise for distribution below may be constructed with one
connection direct with the main and said tank, and a check valve shall be placed on said service line to the tank
as near the entrance of the building or tower as possible. In no case shall a connection larger than two inches be
made with the city main. (1996 Code, sec. 11.215)
Sec. 13.04.019 New service connections
When a new service connection with the mains is necessary, the consumer or the property owner or his agent
must pay to the city waterworks a reasonable amount as in the opinion of the city waterworks might be
necessary to pay costs of connection. The term “connection” shall mean that the city waterworks furnish all
material and labor necessary to supply water to the consumer from the water mains through the meter, and shall
include tapping the water main, pipe, pipe fittings, meter box, meter yoke, meter and labor. The meter is to be set
inside the nearest curbline to the main in the general direction of the consumer's premises. It shall be unlawful
for any plumber or person or persons other than the tapper employed by the city waterworks to tap any street
mains or to extend service pipes from mains, and all this material and equipment shall be under the exclusive
control of the city waterworks. (1996 Code, sec. 11.216)
Sec. 13.04.020 Right of city to temporarily discontinue service
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/225
The right is reserved by the city waterworks to temporarily discontinue and to reconnect without notice water
supply to all consumers for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions and cleaning of mains,
machinery, reservoirs or any part of the system in emergency cases. If not an emergency, adequate notice shall
be provided to affected consumers. (1996 Code, sec. 11.217)
Sec. 13.04.021 Standards for service pipes
All service pipes shall be laid eighteen inches under the ground and provided with stop and waste inside the
property line, such as to properly drain all pipes above ground. (1996 Code, sec. 11.218)
Sec. 13.04.022 Opening or using water from hydrants
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire department or other employee of the city, to
open hydrants or use water therefrom. (1996 Code, sec. 11.219)
Sec. 13.04.023 Defacing waterworks property
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to deface the houses, walls, machinery or fixtures connected
with or pertaining to the city waterworks and its system. (1996 Code, sec. 11.220)
Sec. 13.04.024 Hose attachments, stopcock boxes and meter boxes to be flush with surface
All hose attachments when located on the sidewalk, as well as stopcock boxes and meter boxes, must have a
suitable iron cover with the top flush with the surface of the sidewalk or ground level. (1996 Code, sec. 11.221)
Sec. 13.04.025 Injuring or interfering with system
It shall be unlawful for any person to individually, or in association with others, willfully break, injure or tamper
with any part of the waterworks system for any purpose whatsoever, or in any other manner maliciously to
interfere with or prevent the running and operation of such system and the water supply therein. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.222)
Sec. 13.04.026 Unlawful taking of water
Whoever intentionally by any means or device prevents water from passing through any meter belonging to the
city waterworks or used in connection with the supply of water to any consumer by the city waterworks to
register the amount of water passing through meters, or intentionally prevents a meter from duly registering the
quantity of water supplied, or in any way interferes with its proper action or just registration, or without the
consent in writing of the superintendent of the city waterworks intentionally diverts any water from any pipe of
the city waterworks, or otherwise intentionally uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the city
waterworks, any water produced or distributed by the city waterworks, or any person who retains possession of
or refuses to deliver any meter or other appliance loaned to him by the city waterworks for the purpose of
furnishing water through same, with intent to defraud the city waterworks, shall for every such offense be fined
as hereinafter provided. The presence at any time on or about any such meter or pipe of any device or pipes
resulting in the diversion of water or preventing of its free passage and registration by the meter or diverting
from the meter as above defined or resulting in the prevention in water reaching the meter, or preventing the just
registration of the meter or meters or the taking of any water except through a meter as above set forth, shall
constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person owning or having custody and control of
the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is of the existence thereof and knowledge of
such existence to the person who would be benefited by the failure of the water to be properly metered, and shall
further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such a person or persons to defraud and shall
bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalty of this division. (1996 Code, sec. 11.223)
Secs. 13.04.027–13.04.060 Reserved
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/225
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.04.061 Established
The schedule of monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the city's waterworks system shall be and
such is hereby adopted and established as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.401)
Sec. 13.04.062 Due date; late payment penalty
Such rates and charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid by the user to the secretary of the city in
advance of the 10th day of each month, which shall be the date such rates or charges shall become due and
payable, and in case any user or customer of such service does not pay the amount due by the date the same
becomes due and payable, then it is hereby made the duty of the city secretary to add a ten percent (10%)
penalty to the amount past due and unpaid. (Ordinance 448 adopted 9/8/03)
Sec. 13.04.063 Failure to pay charges; disconnection of service
(a) It shall be the obligation of each consumer receiving water from the city to pay for all water furnished,
whether same is furnished through one or more water meters to one or more premises. Statements for water
furnished shall be based upon water furnished through each meter. In the event of the failure of a consumer to
pay for water furnished through any one meter, whereby it is necessary for the city to disconnect water service to
such consumer for failure to pay such charges, then all meters through which water is being furnished to such
consumer, whether at one or more locations, shall be disconnected.
(b) If, within seven days from the date the same becomes due, the amount due for water furnished the
consumer through any meter shall not be paid, it will be sufficient notice from the consumer to discontinue
service through any meter whatsoever connected with the water service of the city through which water is being
furnished such consumer.
(c) Where water service is discontinued as to any consumer, at one or more premises, on account of
nonpayment for water furnished at one or more premises, water shall not again be furnished the consumer at any
premises until the full amount delinquent shall have been paid together with all fees and charges herein
provided. In such event water service shall not be again furnished the consumer until payment in full of all
delinquent amounts plus an additional charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code for turning water back on at each meter disconnected; provided that, in the event of the reconnection or
turning water back on (where same has been discontinued) by anyone other than a duly authorized employee or
agent of the city, a reconnection and inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of
this code, as to each such meter, shall be paid prior to furnishing water to such consumer again.
(d) In the event that any meter is tampered with by any person other than a duly authorized employee or agent
of the city, the consumer shall pay to the city an inspection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code.
(e) Where the city has discontinued water service to any consumer, if deemed necessary by the city to remove
the meter or meters in order to stop use of water at any one or more locations to which water was furnished, until
past due amounts are paid, then in this event an additional charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code, for each meter, for removing and resetting the meter, shall be made.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.403)
Sec. 13.04.064 Free service prohibited
No free service shall be allowed, and to the extent that the city or any of its agencies or instrumentalities avail
themselves of the services and facilities provided, they shall pay therefor the same rates and charges herein
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/225
prescribed. (1996 Code, sec. 11.404)
Secs. 13.04.065–13.04.090 Reserved
Division 3. Service to Nonresidents
Sec. 13.04.091 Title
This division shall be known as the water ordinance for nonresidents of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.301)
Sec. 13.04.092 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to provide the terms and conditions for the furnishing, by the city, to nonresidents
of the city, of water for domestic use of such nonresidents. (1996 Code, sec. 11.302)
Sec. 13.04.093 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
City attorney. The city attorney for the City of Abernathy, Texas.
City council. The city council of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
Consumer. A nonresident or non-inhabitant user of water furnished by the city.
Excess water. Water of the city over that necessary from time to time to adequately supply the residents and
inhabitants of the city.
Nonresident or non-inhabitant. A person residing outside of the city limits.
Resident or inhabitant. A person residing within the city.
Water distribution system. The system of meters, pipes, fittings, etc., required to take water from the water mains
of the city to the consumers.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.303)
Sec. 13.04.094 Policy
(a) Effective January 1, 2013, the city will no longer furnish water or excess water to any new location outside
of its municipal boundary limits, whether such location is within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) or
otherwise, for nongovernmental purposes. (Ordinance 541 adopted 12/10/12)
(b) For locations outside of the municipal boundary limits where water service with the city was established
prior to January 1, 2013, the city may, subject to the city's sole discretion and determination of availability,
furnish to nonresidents and noninhabitants of the city, water for domestic, commercial, or industrial use, under
the terms and provisions of this section or any amendments hereto, subject at all times, however, to the right of
the city to discontinue furnishing of such water to nonresidents and noninhabitants of the city, at any time.
(Ordinance 570 adopted 5/11/15)
Sec. 13.04.095 User agreement
Before the city will furnish water to any nonresident, such nonresident will execute a nonresident water user
agreement containing such terms and being in such form as may be prescribed from time to time by the city
council. (1996 Code, sec. 11.305)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/225
Sec. 13.04.096 Tapping fee; costs of construction to be paid by users
Nonresident users are required to pay to the city a tapping fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code. Additionally, nonresident users shall pay all costs of constructing a water distribution
system extending from the water mains of the city to the points of use, with such costs to include, but not be
limited to, costs of individual meters, water taps, all supplies of every kind and character, all labor involved,
master meters, installation fees and all other costs and expenses of similar nature, either required, necessary or
convenient in extending service to such nonresident users. (1996 Code, sec. 11.306)
Sec. 13.04.097 Deposit of estimated costs of construction
The engineer designated by the city council or water superintendent of the city shall lay out the water
distribution system for nonresident users beginning at the city mains and shall estimate the cost of construction
of such systems. The nonresident users shall deposit with the city this estimated cost. Such estimated cost will
include all engineering fees. The city will advertise for bids, award all contracts for construction of water
distribution systems provided for herein, supervise construction and pay the contractor or contractors from funds
deposited by such nonresident users. If the engineer's estimate is too low, the nonresident users will, upon
demand of the city by its duly authorized officials, deposit the difference required. Any funds left over after
completion of construction of the water distribution systems and the purchase and installation of all meters,
fittings, valves, risers, etc., required will be refunded to such nonresident users. Costs shall include reasonable
charges for time of the water superintendent in design and supervision. (1996 Code, sec. 11.307)
Sec. 13.04.098 Easements
The city shall be furnished with easements satisfactory to the city attorney covering all property upon which the
water distribution systems are to be installed. (1996 Code, sec. 11.308)
Sec. 13.04.099 Disconnection of private water systems
Prior to connecting a consumer to any water distribution system, such consumer shall disconnect his private
water supply, so that there will be no cross-connection between the two water supplies. The city shall have the
right to inspect the premises of such consumer to see that this provision is complied with and shall have the right
of ingress and egress at all times for this purpose. (1996 Code, sec. 11.309)
Sec. 13.04.100 Costs of maintenance to be paid by users
Maintenance of the water distribution system shall be at the expense of the consumers connected to such water
distribution systems. The city may require, prior to performing such maintenance, that such consumers deposit
with the city a sum sufficient to cover estimated costs of repairs and maintenance, or, in the event no deposit is
required by the city, such consumers shall pay the city upon completion of such maintenance and repairs the
costs of same. (1996 Code, sec. 11.310)
Sec. 13.04.101 Payment of charges
All charges for water use, and all charges for maintenance and repairs, shall be paid to the city at city hall in the
city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.311)
Sec. 13.04.102 Master meters
Where one individual meter, but not in excess of ten individual meters, are installed on any water distribution
system, a two-inch master meter shall be installed on such line. Where there are more than ten individual meters
installed on such water distribution system, a three-inch master meter shall be installed. In determining the
deposit to be made by consumers for construction of the water distribution system, the costs of the master meter
shall be prorated among those who will have individual connections to such system. No more than ten individual
meters shall ever be connected to a water distribution system having only a two-inch master meter. In the event,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/225
after initial construction of the water distribution system, additional connections are desired by non-inhabitants,
they shall file application with the city and execute the nonresident water user agreement. Such persons desiring
to make connections to a water distribution system after construction of same shall, in addition to other costs,
pay a pro-rata portion of the master meter originally installed, which the city shall refund to the original
consumers connected to the system as originally constructed. (1996 Code, sec. 11.312)
Sec. 13.04.103 Reading of meters
The city shall read the master meter and the individual meters on such water distribution system at regular
monthly intervals and shall render a monthly bill to each consumer for the quantity of water determined in
accordance with the provisions of section 13.04.104 hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 11.313)
Sec. 13.04.104 Quantity of water billed; payment for leakage water
The quantity of water billed monthly to each consumer shall be the consumption registered by his individual
meter plus an equal share of “leakage water,” if any. “Leakage water” shall be the difference between the
cumulative total consumption of all individual meters on any one water distribution system and the consumption
recorded by the master meter. “Equal share” shall be the total “leakage water” divided by the number of
individual meters on such water distribution system regardless of whether or not such individual meter registered
any consumption. Each consumer shall pay for water as determined by this section at the rate and in accordance
with the terms and conditions of this division. (1996 Code, sec. 11.314)
Sec. 13.04.105 Rates established
Water rates to be charged consumers shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this
code. (1996 Code, sec. 11.315)
Sec. 13.04.106 Right of city to cut off, interrupt or reduce water supply
The city shall only furnish water to nonresidents and non-inhabitants to the extent it may have water in excess of
that required from time to time by inhabitants of the city. Water furnished under the provisions of this division to
consumers shall be subject to curtailment or interruption or termination at any time, on any one or more water
distribution systems, when, in the sole judgment of the city, such curtailment, interruption or termination,
regardless of cause, is necessary to maintain sufficient water to furnish to inhabitants of the city. The city shall
be the sole and exclusive judge as to the necessity or desirability of cutting off, interrupting or reducing the
supply of water furnished consumers from time to time and as to which consumers shall have their water supply
cut off, interrupted or reduced, and the exercise of this right by the city or the restoration of service shall not be
the basis of any claims for damage sustained by any consumer. In non-emergency situations, adequate notice of
the intended cut-off shall be provided to affected consumers. (1996 Code, sec. 11.316)
Sec. 13.04.107 Failure to pay charges
Failure by any consumer to pay for water furnished or to pay maintenance or repair charges or any other sums
due the city under the provisions of this division shall entitle the city to disconnect such consumer's water. The
city shall further have the right in such event to disconnect the water distribution system serving such consumer
at the master meter until such delinquent charges are paid. (1996 Code, sec. 11.317)
Sec. 13.04.108 Responsibility for maintenance of system
The repairing or maintenance of the water distribution systems shall be the responsibility of the consumers
connected to such system, and no liability shall exist on the city for failure to maintain or repair, even though the
city will, to the extent it has available personnel, maintain such water distribution system. In the event the city
does not maintain nor repair such water distribution system (and city is not obligated to do so), the consumers
connected to such system will repair and maintain same in accordance with standards set by the proper officials
of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.318)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/225
Sec. 13.04.109 Indemnity agreement
Title to water shall pass to consumers at the outlet side of the master meter and consumers shall be liable for all
loss, if any, and damage occasioned by, or in any manner resulting from, the use and transmission of such water
in their water distribution system. Consumers agree and assume full liability for any injuries or damages and
each agree, jointly and severally, to hold the city harmless for any such injury, damage or loss to persons or
property which may result. (1996 Code, sec. 11.319)
Sec. 13.04.110 Measurement of quantity of water delivered; defective meters
Water supplied hereunder shall be supplied through the master meter set by the city at a point to be mutually
agreed upon and at which point the city shall be furnished with a license or permit to set such master meter, if
such is required. The quantity of water delivered hereunder shall be ascertained by the measurement of such
master meter and the quantity recorded thereby, computed by the city according to its standard operating
practice, and shall be conclusive upon both the city and consumers, except if such master meter is found
defective or ceases to register, in which case, until repaired or replaced, the quantity of water delivered shall be
ascertained by correcting the error, if the percentage of error is ascertainable by calibration test or mathematical
calculations. If not so ascertainable, then it should be determined by estimating the quantity on a basis of
deliveries during a preceding period under similar conditions when the meter was registering accurately. The
measuring equipment installed by the city shall be accurate at the time of installation and the accuracy thereof
shall be verified by tests by the city at reasonable intervals thereafter or upon the consumer's request; provided
that, if requested by a consumer, he shall pay a service fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix
A of this code. Such provisions as to inspection and verification by the city on its own initiative or at the request
of a consumer as to individual meters shall be upon the same basis and fees. (1996 Code, sec. 11.320)
Sec. 13.04.111 Prevention of waste; liability for loss or damage
The consumer shall use due care to prevent any waste of water and agrees to assume and become liable for all
loss and damage caused by failure, deficiency or leakage of water. (1996 Code, sec. 11.321)
Sec. 13.04.112 Right of access
The city and its officers, agents, employees, or accredited representatives shall at all reasonable hours have free
access to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of reading meters, stopping leaks, and examining pipes,
connections and fittings and the use made of the water by the consumer. All easements required hereunder to the
city shall contain similar provisions. (1996 Code, sec. 11.322)
Sec. 13.04.113 Furnishing water to others
The water supplied hereunder is for the use of the consumer alone, who agrees not to pipe the same off the
premises or furnish or sell same to any other consumer or person whomsoever. (1996 Code, sec. 11.323)
Sec. 13.04.114 Termination of service by city; liability of city limited
The city shall not be liable for damages for failure to deliver water, whether such failure results from natural
causes, accidents or any other cause beyond the power and control of the city. The city may immediately cut off
all water to any consumer or any group of consumers or to any water distribution system for any of the
following reasons:
(1) For repairs.
(2) For shortage or failure of water.
(3) For fraudulent representation in relation to use of water or the amount consumed.
(4) For removal of the consumer from the premises served.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/225
(5) For discontinuance of the use of water on the premises.
(6) For nonpayment, when due, of any bill for water, maintenance charges or any other charges
provided for hereunder or under the terms of the nonresident water user agreement.
(7) For violation of any part of this division or of the nonresident water user agreement.
(8) For reason of change by the city in its nonresident user water policy.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.324)
Sec. 13.04.115 Deposit for payment of account
Before any consumer may have water service from the city waterworks he must deposit with the city waterworks
an amount as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. Said deposit shall be refunded to
the depositor when he shall have discontinued the use of the city water and shall have [paid] all bills and
accounts due the city waterworks for any account whatever connected with the water service, and shall return
the receipt. If the receipt is not returned, then the records on books of the city waterworks shall be the basis of
adjustment. This deposit is required and made in the nature of a guarantee for payment of water service
accounts, and damage to service connections or meters caused through neglect, abuse or failure to properly care
for the same by the consumer or his agent, and the deposit or any part thereof may be applied by the city
waterworks to the payment of any such account when it becomes past due. This deposit shall not be made nor
accepted in the nature of a payment, but only as a guarantee. Failure to pay the water bill before it becomes
delinquent is considered notice from the consumer to discontinue service and apply so much of the deposit as is
necessary for the payment of the then past due account. In case any deposit or any part thereof shall have been
applied in payment of past due accounts, no service may be re-established until the deposit shall have been
brought back up to the full amount required. (1996 Code, sec. 11.325)
Sec. 13.04.116 Representations by city employees not binding
No agent, officer, employee, elected official or representative of the city has authority to make any promise,
agreement or representation not incorporated in this division or in the nonresident water user agreement, and any
such promise, agreement or representation not incorporated in this division or in such nonresident water user
agreement shall not bind the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.326)
Sec. 13.04.117 Changes in rates
The rates charged for water furnished hereunder are subject to change at any time by amendment of this division
without notice to the consumer. (1996 Code, sec. 11.327)
Sec. 13.04.118 Termination of service by consumer
The consumer may, in the event he does not desire to continue to receive water, terminate his right to receive
water by giving 30 days' written notice to the city and the other consumers on such water distribution system and
by paying the city for all bills incurred as of the date of termination. Termination by a consumer shall not be a
termination by other consumers connected to the water distribution system to which the terminating consumer is
connected. (1996 Code, sec. 11.328)
Sec. 13.04.119 Use of water for non-domestic purposes
All water supplied under the provisions of this division is for domestic purposes only, and in the event a
consumer uses water for any purpose other than domestic purposes, his rights to use water may be curtailed,
discontinued or terminated by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.329)
Sec. 13.04.120 Right of city to refuse service
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/225
The city has the right to refuse service or to refuse increased service to any consumer in the sole judgment and
discretion of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.330)
Secs. 13.04.121–13.04.150 Reserved
Division 4. Customer Service Agreement Regarding Improper Plumbing Practices
Sec. 13.04.151 Agreement required
The city water department is responsible for protecting the drinking water supply from contamination or
pollution which could result from improper plumbing practices. The purpose of this service agreement is to
notify each customer of plumbing restrictions which are in place to provide this protection. The utility enforces
these restrictions to ensure the public health [and] welfare. Each customer must sign this agreement before the
city will begin service. In addition, when service to an existing connection has been suspended or terminated, the
water system will not re-establish service unless it has a signed copy of this agreement. (1996 Code, sec.
11.1301)
Sec. 13.04.152 Plumbing restrictions
The following undesirable plumbing practices are prohibited by state regulations:
(1) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of
contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water
system by an air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention device.
(2) No cross-connection between the public drinking water supply and a private water system is
permitted. These potential threats to the public drinking water supply shall be eliminated at the
service connection by the installation of an air gap or a reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention
device.
(3) No connection which allows condensing, cooling, or industrial process water to be returned to
the public drinking water supply is permitted.
(4) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8.0% lead may be used for the installation or
repair of plumbing at any connection which provides water for human use.
(5) No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead can be used for the installation or repair
of plumbing at any connection which provides water for human use.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1302)
Sec. 13.04.153 Terms
The following are the terms of the service agreement between the city and the customer:
(1) The water department will maintain a copy of this agreement as long as the customer and/or the
premises is connected to the water system.
(2) The customer shall allow his or her property to be inspected for possible cross-connections and
other undesirable plumbing practices. These inspections shall be conducted by the water department
or its designated agent on initiating service and periodically thereafter. The inspections shall be
conducted during the city water department normal business hours.
(3) The water department shall notify the customer in writing of any cross-connection or other
undesirable plumbing practice which has been identified during the initial inspection or the periodic
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/225
reinspections.
(4) The customer shall immediately correct any undesirable plumbing on his or her premises.
(5) The customer shall, at his or her expense, properly install, test, and maintain any backflow
prevention device required by the city. Copies of all testing and maintenance records shall be
provided to the city water department at 811 Avenue D, Abernathy, Texas 79311.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1303)
Sec. 13.04.154 Enforcement
If the customer fails to comply with the terms of the service agreement, the city shall, at its option, either
terminate service or properly install, test and maintain an appropriate backflow prevention device at the service
connection. Any expenses associated with the enforcement of this agreement shall be billed to the customer.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1304)
ARTICLE 13.05 SEWER SERVICE*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.05.001–13.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.05.051 Established
(a) The monthly rates or charges for service furnished by the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(b) When more than one business or residence is served by one sewer tap, then each business or residence
shall pay a separate sewer user fee in accordance with the rate schedule established by the city.
(c) A monthly user fee will be determined by the city utility department for each account not otherwise
classified by this division.
(d) A charge for paving cuts on water and sewer taps is set as provided for in the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code.
(e) In addition to all other sewer fees charged by the city, each user who uses less than 750,000 gallons of
water per month will be assessed an administrative fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A
of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.501)
Sec. 13.05.052 Due date; late payment penalty
Such rates and charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid by the users of the sanitary sewer system to the
city secretary in advance of the 10th day of each month, which shall be the date such rates or charges shall
become due and payable, and in case any user or customer of such system does not pay the amount due by such
user or customer within fifteen (15) days from the date the same became due and payable, then it is hereby made
the duty of the city secretary to add a ten percent (10%) penalty to the amount past due and unpaid. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.502)
Sec. 13.05.053 Free service prohibited
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/225
No free service shall be allowed, and to the extent the city and its various departments avail themselves of the
services afforded by the sanitary sewer system they shall pay therefor the same rates charged other consumers.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.503)
ARTICLE 13.06 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
Sec. 13.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of section 13.06.002, section 13.06.003 and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the
city, and section 312.9 and section 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code, sections P2503.7 and P2902 of
the 2009 International Residential Code, and the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, American Water
Works Association M14 Manual, the following definitions shall apply. In the event of a conflict between the
definitions set forth below and the definitions provided in the 2009 International Plumbing Code, the 2009
International Residential Code, the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, American Water Works
Association M14 Manual, for the purposes of sections 13.06.002, 13.06.003 and 13.06.004 of the Code of
Ordinances of the city, the definitions set forth below shall control.
Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any
pipe or faucet conveying water to a tank, fixture, receptor, sink, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the
receptacle. The vertical physical separation must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, but
never less than 1.0 inch. An air gap may also be a horizontal space between two pipes at no less than 6.0 inches.
Approved. Accepted by the authority responsible as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this
article or as suitable for the proposed use.
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved
public water supply that presents a potential contamination hazard of the public water system. These auxiliary
waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well,
spring, river or stream or used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they
may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have
sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow in a public water distribution system as a result of a crossconnection.
Backflow prevention assembly. An approved assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage.
Backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report. The report required for each backflow prevention
assembly upon initial installation and periodically thereafter as required, giving evidence that the backflow
prevention assembly has been properly selected based on the degree of hazard, and has been properly installed
and tested in accordance with applicable standards, and showing the results of this test. The completed form will
be forwarded to the building inspection department of the city for documentation and forwarded to the water
purveyor for annual recordkeeping.
Backflow prevention assembly tester, backflow tester, or general tester. A backflow assembly device tester who
is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation service
(excepting fire-lines). This person must be licensed by TCEQ and registered with the city.
Backpressure. Pressure created by any means in the water distribution system, which by being in excess of the
pressure in the water supply mains causes a potential backflow condition.
Backsiphonage. The backflow of potentially contaminated water into the potable water system as a result of the
pressure in the potable water system falling below atmospheric pressure of the plumbing, fixtures, pools, tanks
or vats connected to the potable water distribution piping.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/225
Building official. The officer charged with the enforcement of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical,
fuel gas, and energy conservation codes of the city, or his duly authorized representative. For purposes of this
article, all Texas-licensed plumbing inspectors under the supervision of the building official are his duly
authorized representatives.
Bypass arrangements. Any jumper connections, removable section, unions, swivels or change-over devices and
other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can occur.
Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the potable water that creates an actual hazard to the public
health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste.
Cross-connection. A physical connection or bypass arrangement between a public water system and either
another supply of unknown or questionable quality, or another source that may contain contaminating or
polluting substances, any source of water treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process, or any steam, gas or
chemical system.
Cross-connection control by containment. The installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the
water service connection to any customer's premises, where it is physically or economically unfeasible to find
and permanently eliminate or control all cross-connections or potential contamination hazards within the
customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the
service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are cross-connections or
potential contamination hazards that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the crossconnection.
Cross-connection control device. Any nationally approved or recognized device placed upon any connection,
physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle,
equipment or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water,
or other substance, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of
conditions.
Cross-connection, controlled. A connection between a public water system and a nonpublic water system with
an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford
the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
Customer/property owner. The owner, as determined by the real property records of the county, or the agent of
the owner in responsible charge of the subject premises. For purposes of this article, a licensed plumber and/or
irrigator shall be deemed to be an agent of the owner when performing work under the scope of this article
pursuant to a plumbing and/or irrigation permit.
Customer service inspection. An inspection designed to detect any actual or potential point of contamination of
the potable water system and/or cross-connection hazards.
Degree of hazard. The non-health hazard or health hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or
potential cross-connections.
(1) Non-health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance
that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable, if introduced into a public water supply.
(2) Health hazard. The classification assigned to a cross-connection or potential contamination
hazard or other situation involving any substance that can cause illness, death, or spread of disease or
has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable drinking water supply.
Double check valve backflow assembly (DCVA), double check assembly, and double check (DC). An assembly
consisting of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/225
valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly
shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard.
Fire-line tester. A tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on fire-lines. This person must
be licensed by TCEQ and registered with the city.
Licensed professional. Any individual, or their representative, that must maintain a license obtained through a
professional licensing board in order to conduct their business under state law.
Nonpotable water. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary utilization.
Point of use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Pollution. An impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the
public health but that does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for
domestic use.
Potable water. Water free from impurities present in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful
physiological effects and conforming to the bacteriological and chemical quality requirements of the public
health service drinking water standards or the regulations of any public health authority having jurisdiction over
such matters.
Potential contamination hazard. A condition which, by its location, piping or configuration, has a reasonable
probability of being used incorrectly, through carelessness, ignorance, or negligence, to create or cause to be
created a backflow condition by which contamination can be introduced into the public water supply. Examples
of potential contamination hazards are:
(1) Bypass arrangements;
(2) Jumper connections;
(3) Removable sections or spools; and
(4) Swivel or changeover assemblies.
Public health service drinking water standards. The standards set forth in 30 TAC 290 subchapter F, as may be
amended from time to time.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPBA), reduced pressure principle assembly, RPZ or
RP assembly. A backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting check valves, internally
force-loaded to a normally closed position and separated by an intermediate chamber (or zone) in which there is
an automatic relief means of venting to the atmosphere, internally loaded to a normally open position between
two tightly closing shutoff valves and with a means for testing for tightness of the checks and opening of the
relief means.
Repair of an irrigation system. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing irrigation system,
including, without limitation, installation of a backflow prevention device, adding additional irrigation zones,
reparation of a main irrigation line and valve replacement. For the purpose hereof, the replacement of a control
box or sprinkler head(s) shall not be deemed to be a repair.
Service connection. The point of delivery where the water purveyor loses control over the water.
Used water. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water system to a consumer's water system
after it has passed through the point of delivery or service connection and is no longer under the sanitary control
of the water purveyor.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/225
Water purveyor. The director in charge of the water department of the city, who is vested with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement
of the provisions of this article.
Sec. 13.06.002 Conflicting regulations
Section 13.06.002, section 13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city are intended
to supplement the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, American Water Works Association M14 Manual,
section 312.9, Inspection and Testing of Backflow Prevention Assemblies, and section 608, Protection of
Potable Water Supply, of the 2009 International Plumbing Code, as well as sections P2503.7 and P2905 of the
2009 International Residential Code, both codes having been previously adopted as a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the city. In the event of any conflict between the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control,
American Water Works Association M14 Manual, section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code
or section P2503.7 or P2905 of the 2009 International Residential Code and section 13.06.002, section
13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city, the provisions of section 13.06.002,
section 13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city shall control. Section 13.06.002,
section 13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city shall be liberally construed to
protect the public health and safety of the citizens of the city.
Sec. 13.06.003 Responsibilities of water purveyor, customer and backflow prevention assembly tester
(a) Responsibilities of water purveyor.
(1) (A) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the
water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state law, including, without
limitation, 30 TAC 290.44(h), 30 TAC 290.46(j), 30 TAC 290.47(i), 30 TAC 344.73 and 30
TAC 344.75, as same may be amended from time to time. Service of water subject to the
provisions of section 13.06.002, 13.06.003, or 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city,
or section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code, or section P2503.7 or P2902
of the 2009 International Residential Code, as applicable, to any premises shall be discontinued
by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article is not installed
properly, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will
not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(B) For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all testable
backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where the
testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal
production or auxiliary equipment, the city shall not approve any certificate of occupancy until
all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational.
(2) Customer service inspections.
(A) A customer service inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the city
water purveyor prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following
circumstances:
(i) Water service to a newly constructed facility, in which case the customer service
inspection shall be performed in conjunction with or near the same time as the plumbing
final inspection conducted by the building official.
(ii) Any correction, addition or improvement to the water service or water distribution
plumbing of any facility or premises, except for minor repair and maintenance work
exempted from permitting by section 106.2 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code, or
in cases where an approved RPBA backflow prevention device has been installed at the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/225
point of water service connection such that premises isolation is achieved, and said device
has been verified as having been properly tested and maintained as provided herein.
Where non-exempt plumbing work has been performed upon the water service or water
distribution plumbing of any facility or premises, and approved premises isolation has
been provided as described herein, the building official shall be solely responsible for
ensuring compliance of any such work on the customer side of the backflow device.
(B) A permanent water service shall not be established with regard to a newly constructed
facility until after the customer service inspection is completed.
(C) Temporary water service, for construction or other purposes, that is found to pose a
potential cross-connection threat to the potable water due to the unknown use of the water
therefor, or other reasons or causes, shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention
assembly.
(3) If, in the judgment of the water purveyor or building official, an approved backflow prevention
assembly is required at the customer's/property owner's water service connection or within the
customer's/property owner's private water system for the safety of the public water system, the water
purveyor or the designated agent shall:
(A) Give notice in writing to the customer/property owner to install an approved backflow
prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) at his/her expense, and, depending on the severity
of the threat to the public water supply, within the time frame required by the city and in all
instances within thirty (30) days.
(B) In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the water purveyor and/or building
official, an imminent health threat is posed due to cross-connection or a potential contamination
hazard, water service to the facility may immediately be discontinued without prior written
notice to the customer/property owner. Although the city will attempt to provide notice as is
reasonably practical, no notice shall be required prior to discontinuance.
(4) Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer/property owner to install, have tested
and maintain the backflow prevention assembly(s) shall be grounds for discontinuing water service to
the premises until such requirements have been met as required by this article.
(5) Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of backflow prevention assembly
devices shall not be the responsibility of the city.
(b) Responsibilities of customer/property owner. The customer's/property owner's system shall include those
parts of the potable water conveyance facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system that are
conveying potable water to the points of use of the customer/property owner.
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed within the customer's/property owner's
system at the customer's/property owner's expense at any time required by section 13.06.002,
13.06.003, or 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city and/or section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009
International Plumbing Code, or section P2503.7 or P2902 of the 2009 International Residential
Code, or the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, American Water Works Association M14
Manual, as applicable. All backflow prevention devices must be installed and tested as required by:
(A) Section 13.06.002, section 13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances
of the city;
(B) Section 312.9 and section 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code; and
(C) 30 TAC 290.44(h), 30 TAC 290.46(j) and 30 TAC 290.47(i).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/225
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the customer/property owner to verify that all applicable city
plumbing and/or irrigation permits are obtained and that the customer/property owner, or licensed
plumber or irrigator, as applicable, is in compliance with all of the provisions of those permits. In
addition to the remedies provided herein, in the event the backflow prevention assembly is installed
by a licensed professional, failure by such licensed professional to follow the provisions of such
permit will result in written notice to the applicable state licensing agency, in addition to being a
violation of this article.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the customer/property owner and backflow prevention assembly
tester performing the subject test(s) to send to the city the backflow prevention assembly test and
maintenance records. These materials shall be delivered to the water purveyor office of the city
within ten (10) days of installation of the backflow prevention assembly.
(4) The customer's/property owner's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to
authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-connections or potential
contamination hazards, including violations of section 13.06.002, 13.06.003, or 13.06.004 of the
Code of Ordinances of the city and/or section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code,
or section P2503.7 or P2902 of the International Residential Code, as applicable, exist.
(5) If the customer or premises wherein potable water from the city is supplied or provided has an
auxiliary water supply that is treated to a lesser degree than the public water supply or if the water
quality is unknown, and which is either cross-connected or poses a potential contamination hazard to
the public water system, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or
backsiphonage by an approved backflow prevention device. The described threat shall be deemed a
health hazard when determining the type of approved backflow required. If the auxiliary water supply
is used for irrigation purposes, the backflow assembly shall be subject to the requirements of 30 TAC
344.75(c), as same may be amended from time to time.
(6) In the event industrial fluids, any material dangerous to health or any other objectionable
substances are handled in such a fashion as to create potential contamination hazard to the public
water system, such condition shall be deemed a health hazard. The public water system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an air gap, a reduced pressure principle
backflow assembly, or such other backflow assembly device as may be required by 30 TAC
290.47(i), as same may be amended from time to time. See attachment A to Ordinance 514,
incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes.
(7) All new installations of or substantial alterations to fire suppression systems that utilize the
city's public water supply shall have installed a UL-approved backflow prevention device according
to the degree of hazard that exists. For purposes of this section, a “substantial alteration” is deemed to
be any alteration or expansion of the system that would trigger a requirement for review and approval
by the authority having jurisdiction, normally being the city fire marshal. All fire-line backflow
prevention assemblies must be installed inside the building as determined by section 13.06.003 of the
Code of Ordinances of the city. Upon the approved installation of the backflow prevention assembly,
a cross-connection test report completed by a licensed fire-line tester must be provided to the city as
required by subsection (b)(3) of this section.
(8) Subject to the conditions of this subsection (b)(8), a reduced pressure assembly shall be the
minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply
during construction or other uses which may pose a potential contamination hazard to the public
water supply. Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are
allowed to be used within the city limits. Failure to comply with this subsection (b)(8) will result in
the fire hydrant meter being removed from the premises by the water purveyor.
(9) It shall be the duty of the customer/property owner at any premises where backflow prevention
assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon installation and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/225
at least once every three years in non-health hazard conditions. In those instances where the water
purveyor and/or building official of the city deems the potential backflow to be a health hazard or a
potential health hazard, certified inspections shall be required annually or at more frequent intervals,
as deemed necessary by the water purveyor. All inspections and tests of backflow prevention
assemblies shall be at the expense of the customer/property owner and shall be performed by a
backflow tester who is licensed with the state commission on environmental quality and registered
with the water purveyor and meeting all conditions and criteria of section 13.06.002, section
13.06.003, and section 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city.
(10) It shall be the responsibility of the customer/property owner that all irrigation systems
installed after the effective date hereof and for an existing system, in the event of a repair, shall have
installed an approved backflow prevention assembly other than an atmospheric vacuum breaker
(AVB), in the event an existing irrigation system is repaired.
(11) It shall be the responsibility of the customer/property owner to have the backflow prevention
assembly device tested as described in this article. The backflow prevention assembly shall be
repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer/property owner whenever said
assemblies are found to be defective. Water service shall not be restored until repairs are complete.
(c) Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly tester. In addition to requirements of the backflow
prevention assembly tester set forth in other parts of this article, backflow prevention assembly testers shall also
comply with the following:
(1) The backflow prevention assembly tester shall perform competent tests, issuing complete,
accurate and legible reports of backflow prevention assemblies tested, and filing backflow prevention
assembly test and maintenance reports as prescribed by this article. Test reports shall be submitted to
the water purveyor office of the city within (10) ten days of the testing by the backflow prevention
assembly tester of the installation, replacement, or repair of the backflow assembly.
(2) Prior to performing any testing of backflow prevention assemblies within the city, a licensed
backflow prevention assembly tester must be registered annually with the city in accordance with this
section.
(A) Eligibility for registration shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing proof to the
city that they are currently licensed as a backflow prevention assembly tester by the state
commission on environmental quality.
(B) Each applicant for registration shall furnish evidence to the city to show that he/she has
available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test and certify such assemblies. Serial
numbers of all test gauges shall be registered with the city annually and shall be listed on tests
and maintenance reports prior to being submitted to the city. Each recorded test kit shall be
tested annually for accuracy and calibrated to maintain a two (2) percent accuracy factor.
(3) In the event the city has reason to believe that testing or reporting deficiencies exist in a
backflow prevention assembly tester's methods or report, the city shall notify the tester and
customer/property owner, and shall take one or more of the following actions:
(A) Require the subject customer/property owner to have retested any backflow prevention
assembly previously reported as operational;
(B) In the event the backflow prevention assembly tester has committed three (3) or more
inadvertent testing or reporting inaccuracies within a twelve (12) month period commencing
with the first inaccuracy, the backflow prevention assembly tester's registration with the city
may be suspended for a period of six (6) months;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/225
(C) In the event the backflow prevention assembly tester shall file with the city an intentional
or knowing falsified test report, the backflow prevention assembly tester's registration with the
city shall be revoked by the city.
Sec. 13.06.004 Approved backflow prevention device assembly and installation
(a) Any backflow prevention assembly required by section 13.06.002, 13.06.003, or 13.06.004 of the Code of
Ordinances of the city, or section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009 International Plumbing Code, or section P2503.7 or
P2902 of the International Residential Code, or the USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, American Water
Works Association M14 Manual, as applicable, shall be of a model and size approved by the water
purveyor/building official or as approved by 30 TAC 290.47(i), as same may be amended from time to time.
Backflow prevention devices must be approved by the city prior to installation. The city shall determine the type
and location of the backflow prevention assembly to be installed within the area served by the public water
system.
(b) The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” shall mean a backflow prevention assembly that has
been manufactured and installed in full conformance with the standards specified within the 2009 International
Plumbing Code and those established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the USC Manual
of Cross-Connection Control, American Water Works Association M14 Manual, titled AWWA C510 Standard
for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and AWWA C511 Standard for Reduced-Pressure
Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and has met completely the laboratory field performance specifications of the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCHR) and the University of Southern
California (USC) Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies, section 10 of the most current issue of the
Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
(c) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of testing and
inspection by the city or any certified general tester. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon
installation, relocation, or repair of same.
(d) Backflow prevention assemblies, in addition to other requirements set forth in section 13.06.002,
13.06.003, or 13.06.004 of the Code of Ordinances of the city, or section 312.9 or 608 of the 2009 International
Plumbing Code, section P2503.7 or P2902 of the 2009 International Residential Code, or the USC Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, American Water Works Association M14 Manual, shall be installed in accordance
with subsections (1) through (9) below. The clearance standards set forth in subsections (1) through (9) below
shall apply to all assemblies installed in enclosures and meter boxes.
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five
feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(2) All backflow prevention assemblies installed eight feet or higher above floor level must have
installed a suitable permanent ladder for use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(3) All backflow prevention assembly enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to
allow for the minimum clearance as established in this article. Removable protective enclosures may
be installed on smaller assemblies.
(4) Reduced pressure zone assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch
clearance on both ends and on top of the assembly. Additionally, there shall be twelve inches of
clearance below the relief valve and twelve inches of clearance on the test cock side of the assembly.
All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of twelve inches of clearance on the
back side, and twenty-four inches of clearance on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall
be at least twelve inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water
level.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/225
(5) Double check valve assemblies larger than two inches may be installed above finished grade in
a freeze-proof enclosure or below grade in a vault. If the assembly is installed below grade, the test
cocks must be plugged with corrosion-resistant watertight plugs, and shall be no less than twelve
inches below grade with a minimum of twelve inches clearance below the backflow assembly device.
There shall be at least a six-inch clearance on both ends of the assembly with a minimum clearance
of twelve inches on the back side and twenty-four inches on the test cock side. The top of the vault
shall be two inches above ground level. Double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the
checks are horizontal.
(6) Double check valve assemblies two inches and smaller may be installed above finished grade
in a freeze-proof enclosure or below grade in a box. If the assembly is installed below grade, the test
cocks must be plugged with corrosion-resistant watertight plugs, and shall be no less than twelve
inches below grade with a minimum of twelve inches clearance below the backflow assembly device.
There shall be at least a six-inch clearance on both ends of the assembly with a minimum clearance
of twelve inches on the back side and twelve inches on the test cock side. The top of the box shall be
two inches above ground level. Double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks
are horizontal.
(7) Bypass arrangements are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could reasonably be calculated to
constitute a means by which a backflow assembly could be bypassed and defeated shall not be
installed.
(8) All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a
backflow assembly must make provision for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type
so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
(9) All health hazard facilities shall have containment from the city's potable water system. For the
purposes of this section, “containment” shall mean protection of the public water supply at the
service connection.
(Ordinance 514 adopted 4/12/10)
ARTICLE 13.07 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Sec. 13.07.001 Definitions
Approving authority. The city manager or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature
of twenty (20) degrees centigrade.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called
the house lateral and house connection).
City. The City of Abernathy, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD (chemical oxygen demand). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter
present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not
necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/225
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from
the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business, or from the
development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct
from normal wastewater.
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewer
system.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million, and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-perliter
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary
sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and BOD is
not more than 200 mg/l.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
design capacity.
Person. Any individual, and includes any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Public sewer. A pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting
properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both,
and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent, or
in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of
analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved, and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Environment Federation.
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic
wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
Suspended solids (SS). Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/225
To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose
of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other
harmful substances.
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD as
determined by the state commission on environmental quality; and
(7) Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of
determination as specified in Standard Methods.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural, or industrial activities.
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and
industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and
industrial wastes.
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and
treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1001)
Sec. 13.07.002 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes
may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/225
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1002)
Sec. 13.07.003 Chemical discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32)
and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees centigrade);
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the approving authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the
provisions of section 13.07.002(a).
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than
5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odorproducing
substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After
treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by
state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1003)
Sec. 13.07.004 Hazardous metals and toxic materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection
(b) of this section.
(b) The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to
waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are:
Not To Exceed
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/225
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of sections
26.176 and 26.177, Texas Water Code and in accordance with state department of environmental quality rules.
(c) No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from
the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable
provisions.
(d) Prohibited hazardous materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony;
(2) Beryllium;
(3) Bismuth;
(4) Cobalt;
(5) Molybdenum;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/225
(6) Uranyl ion;
(7) Rhenium;
(8) Strontium;
(9) Tellurium;
(10) Herbicides;
(11) Fungicides; and
(12) Pesticides.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1004)
Sec. 13.07.005 Particulate size
(a) No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that
all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles
greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension are prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1005)
Sec. 13.07.006 Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters;
(4) Other unpolluted drainage, or make any new connections from inflow sources.
(b) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate
storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section
may be discharged.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1006)
Sec. 13.07.007 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater
treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total
increase of plant influent to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. (1996 Code, sec. 11.1007)
Sec. 13.07.008 Radioactive wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the
approving authority.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/225
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations,
regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1008)
Sec. 13.07.009 Impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which
exert or cause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries; and
(C) Lime residues;
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride; and
(B) Sodium sulfate;
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes; and
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment
processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/225
(e) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (d)
of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Slops;
(21) Chemical residues;
(22) Paint residues; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/225
(23) Bulk solids.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1009)
Sec. 13.07.010 Compliance
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by
all persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste;
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the state department of environmental quality, no person may deposit or discharge
any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property or into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer;
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive
suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules, and orders of federal, state and
local governments.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1010)
Sec. 13.07.011 Approving authority requirements
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the
approving authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does
not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1011)
Sec. 13.07.012 Pretreatment and control equipment
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and
installation of equipment and processes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/225
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes,
ordinances and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall
provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1012)
Sec. 13.07.013 Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease, or waste containing grease, in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public
sewers;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the
approving authority:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and
inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1013)
Sec. 13.07.014 Control manhole and sampling equipment
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own
expense and as required by the approving authority:
(1) Install an accessible control manhole;
(2) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the waste;
(3) Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps) where needed; and
(4) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1014)
Sec. 13.07.015 Sampling and testing methods
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
(Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite sample from
all outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/225
not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where
applicable, a 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine
pH and oil and grease.)
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point
authorized by the approving authority.
(c) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized
discharges.
(d) The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which
is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be
sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually.
(e) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if
necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available
and no other source of raw water is used.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1015)
Sec. 13.07.016 User charge system
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of
collection and treatment.
(b) When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its
authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing:
(1) Terms of acceptance by the city;
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as
established in subsection (e) of this section;
(3) Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Uniform
Plumbing Code as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials;
(4) A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and
(5) Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use.
(c) Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the
operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system.
(d) The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and
maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly.
(e) User charge system (see “instructions” and appendix B to 40 CFR part 35).
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1016)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/225
Sec. 13.07.017 Savings clause
A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue without
penalty so long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the
approving authority;
(2) Has discharged the waste at least 12 months prior to the effective date of this article; and
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 150 days after the effective date of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1017)
Sec. 13.07.018 Conditions of permits
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause
provided that the person:
(1) Submits an application within 120 days after the effective date of this article on forms supplied
by the approving authority;
(2) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when
required;
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including but not limited
to provisions for:
(A) Payment of charges;
(B) Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required; and
(C) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city; and
(4) Provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this article
and approval of the approving authority.
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1018)
Sec. 13.07.019 Right of entry
(a) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning
safety, internal security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of person(s) to maintain safe conditions, the city shall
indemnify the person(s) against loss or damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/225
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person(s) and growing out of the
sampling operation.
(d) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for
the purposes of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within the easements; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance
with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1019)
Sec. 13.07.020 Authority to disconnect service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system
when:
(1) Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the
sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper
conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is
no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is
delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that
is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) The customer:
(A) Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving
authority;
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an
imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections
13.07.002 through 13.07.009 as stated above.
(b) If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all
pertinent information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/ additional
pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/225
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1020)
Sec. 13.07.021 Notice
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. (1996 Code, sec. 11.1021)
Sec. 13.07.022 Continuing prohibited discharge
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1022)
Sec. 13.07.023 Penalty for discharge violations
(a) A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is
punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all
other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a
person continuing prohibited discharges.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.1023)
Sec. 13.07.024 Failure to pay charges
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the
other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.1024)
Sec. 13.07.025 Penalty for criminal mischief
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled unless [under] authority of statutes and
ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying
public sewers or treatment facilities. (1996 Code, sec. 11.1025)
ARTICLE 13.08 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.08.001 Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and
consumption of water.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be
nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply
condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in
section 13.08.010 of this plan.
Sec. 13.08.002 Public involvement
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city, by
conducting two (2) public hearings conducted before the city council, notice of which was provided in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/225
Sec. 13.08.003 Public education
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the
conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures
to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases and city website
postings.
Sec. 13.08.004 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the High Plains Underground Water Conservation District #1. The
city shall provide a copy of this plan to the High Plains Underground Water Conservation District #1.
Sec. 13.08.005 Authorization
The mayor, or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this
plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The
mayor or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply
emergency response measures as described in this plan.
Sec. 13.08.006 Application
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the
city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in this plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities.
Sec. 13.08.007 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit
establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and
office buildings.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8
and locations without addresses.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way
and medians.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/225
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public, health, safety,
and welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise
provided under this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to
support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting.
Odd-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
Sec. 13.08.008 Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages
(a) The mayor, or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and
shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of this plan, that is, when the
specified “triggers” are reached.
(b) The triggering criteria described below are based on any of the following conditions:
(1) The known water well production capacities at any given time verses total daily water demand;
(2) The ability to maintain an adequate water level in the ground storage reservoir;
(3) The booster station failing to maintain adequate system pressure.
(c) Stage 1 triggers - mild water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and
adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, defined in section 13.08.007 when the total
daily water demand equals or exceeds 80% of the water system's capacity for a period of 3
consecutive days and/or other conditions listed above exist which limit the ability to maintain or
deliver an adequate water volume.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of this plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days.
(d) Stage 2 triggers - moderate water shortage conditions.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/225
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 13.08.009 of this plan when the
total daily water demand equals or exceeds 85% of the water system's capacity for a period of 3
consecutive days and/or other conditions listed above exist which limit the ability to maintain or
deliver an adequate water volume.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of this plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days. Upon termination
of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(e) Stage 3 triggers - severe water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 3 of this plan when the total daily water
demand equals or exceeds 90% of the water system's capacity for a period of 3 consecutive days
and/or other conditions listed above exist which limit the ability to maintain or deliver an adequate
water volume
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of this plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days. Upon termination
of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative.
(f) Stage 4 triggers - critical water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 4 of this plan when the total daily water
demand equals or exceeds 95% of the water system's capacity for a period of 3 consecutive days
and/or other conditions listed above exist which limit the ability to maintain or deliver an adequate
water volume.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of this plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days. Upon termination
of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative.
(g) Stage 5 triggers - emergency water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions for stage 5 of this plan when the mayor, or his/her designee, determines that a water
supply emergency exists based on:
(B) Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented
loss of capability to provide water service; or
(A) Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source(s).
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of this plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist.
(h) Stage 6 triggers - water allocation.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the water allocation
plan prescribed in section 13.08.009 of this plan and comply with the requirements and restrictions
for stage 5 of this plan when water system ability to provide safe water is compromised or usage
reaches “stage 3 - triggers.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/225
(2) Requirements for termination. Water allocation may be rescinded when all of the conditions
listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days.
Sec. 13.08.009 Drought response stages
The mayor or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in
accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 13.08.008 of this plan, shall determine that a mild,
moderate, severe, critical, emergency or water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following
notification procedures:
(1) Notification.
(A) Notification of the public. The mayor or his/her designee shall notify the public by means
of:
(i) Public service announcements.
(ii) Signs posted in public places.
(iii) Website postings.
(iv) Publication in the city's designated official newspaper.
(B) Additional notification. The mayor or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be
notified directly, the following individuals and entities:
(i) Mayor and members of the city council.
(ii) Water superintendent.
(iii) City manager.
(iv) Fire chief.
(v) County judges and commissioner(s).
(vi) TCEQ (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed).
(vii) Major water users.
(2) Stage 1 response - mild water shortage conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a voluntary 10% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best management practices for supply management. Reduced or discontinued flushing of
water mains.
(C) Voluntary water use restrictions for reducing demand.
(i) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas
to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number
(0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address
ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the
hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/225
(ii) All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for stage 2
of this plan.
(iii) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or
discontinue water use for nonessential purposes.
(3) Stage 2 response - moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a 20% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best management practices for supply management. The city will cease irrigation of
public use areas and all non-potable water use except when required in public emergencies or
needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city will halt all sales of
water through coin-operated dispensers.
(C) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. Under threat of penalty for violation, the
following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation
systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address
ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water
customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and irrigation of
landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and
between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated watering days. However, irrigation
of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a handheld hose, a faucet
filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip irrigation system.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when
allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a handheld hose equipped with a
positive shutoff nozzle for quick rises. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station. Further, such
washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the
public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles
used to transport food and perishables.
(iii) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading
pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(iv) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
(v) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or
other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of
water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under
special permit from the city.
(vi) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is
prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes
a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these
regulations.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/225
(vii) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of
the patron.
(viii) The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited:
a. Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts,
or other hard-surfaced areas;
b. Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
c. Use of water for dust control;
d. Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or
street; and
e. Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having
been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s).
(4) Stage 3 response - severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a 30% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best management practices for supply management. The city will cease irrigation of
public use areas and all non-potable water use except when required in public emergencies or
needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city will halt all sales of
water through coin-operated dispensers.
(C) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in
effect during stage 3 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight
and shall be by means of handheld hoses, handheld buckets, drip irrigation, or
permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is
prohibited at all times.
(ii) The watering of golf course tees is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water
source other than that provided by the city.
(iii) The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under
special permit is to be discontinued.
(iv) The use of water for agricultural purposes from designated overhead dispensers is
to be discontinued.
(5) Stage 4 response - critical water shortage conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a 40% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best management practices for supply management. The city will cease irrigation of
public use areas and all non-potable water use except when required in public emergencies or
needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city will halt all sales of
water through coin-operated dispensers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/225
(C) Water use restrictions for reducing demand. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall
remain in effect during stage 4 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall
be by means of handheld hoses, handheld buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hoseend
sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all
times.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial carwash and commercial service
stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is
prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial carwashes and commercial
service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and
between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(iii) The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and
Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited.
(iv) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
(v) No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service
connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of
any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby
suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall
be in effect.
(6) Stage 5 response - emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Target. Achieve a 50% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Best management practices for supply management. The city will cease irrigation of
public use areas and all non-potable water use except when required in public emergencies or
needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city will halt all sales of
water through coin-operated dispensers.
(C) Water use restrictions for reducing demand. All requirements of stage 2, 3, and 4 shall
remain in effect during stage 5 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle is absolutely prohibited.
(7) Stage 6 response - water allocation. In the event that water shortage conditions threaten public
health, safety, and welfare, the mayor is hereby authorized to allocate water according to the
following water allocation plan:
(A) Single-family residential customers.
(i) The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family dwelling
shall be 7,000 gallons per month.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/225
(ii) Residential water customers shall pay a surcharge of $10.00 for each additional
1,000 gallons over allocation. Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(B) Master-metered multifamily residential customers.
(i) The allocation to a customer billed from a master meter which jointly measures
water to multiple permanent residential dwelling units (example: apartments, mobile
homes) shall be allocated 3,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit.
(ii) Customers billed from a master meter under this provision shall pay a surcharge of
$10.00 for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(C) Commercial and industrial customers.
(i) The allocation to commercial and industrial water customers shall be 3,000 gallons
per month.
(ii) Commercial and industrial water customers shall pay a surcharge of $10.00 for each
additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. Surcharges shall be cumulative.
Sec. 13.08.010 Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant
to action taken by the mayor or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that one or
more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three
or more distinct violations of this plan, the mayor shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to
discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such
circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby established at $25.00, and
any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the
mayor that the same action shall not be repeated while this plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also
be sought through injunctive relief in the district court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the
property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation
occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of
the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not
commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and
proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a
rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she
proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan
and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any employee of the city, police officer, or other municipal employee designated by the mayor, may issue
a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in
duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall
direct him/her to appear in the municipal court on the date shown on the citation for which the date shall not be
less than 3 days nor more than 5 days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served
a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged
violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the
violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/225
municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the alleged violator fails to
appear in municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu
of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all
other cases.
Sec. 13.08.011 Variances
(a) The mayor, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise
prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such
variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which this plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the
city within 5 days after this plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for
variances shall be reviewed by the mayor, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of this plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of this plan adversely affects the petitioner
or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article.
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take
to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the
mayor or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when this plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has
failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the
issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance 533 adopted 5/14/12)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/225
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Sec. 14.02.001 Retained
The zoning regulations governing the use of land within the city as adopted by Ordinance 310 and as
subsequently amended are not included in this code, but are hereby specifically saved from repeal. A copy of
this ordinance and amendments thereto shall be maintained and available on file in the office of the city
secretary. (1996 Code, art. 12.100)
ARTICLE 14.03 AIRFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE**
Sec. 14.03.001 Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Airfield Zoning Ordinance, Abernathy Airfield, Abernathy,
Texas.” (1996 Code, sec. 12.301)
Sec. 14.03.002 Definitions
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
Airfield. Abernathy Airfield, Abernathy, Texas.
Air installations officer. The duly appointed and qualified air installations officer for Reese Air Force Base,
Texas, and his successor in office, or airfield manager as appointed or otherwise elected by the city, or other
operating agency whenever jurisdiction of the Abernathy Airfield is not vested in the Air Force.
Flight hazard. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft
in landing or taking-off at the airfield or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking-off of aircraft.
Landing area. The area of the airfield used for the landing, take-off, or taxiing of aircraft.
Nonconforming use. Any structure, tree or use of land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this
article or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulations.
Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body
politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Structure. Any object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines.
Tree. Any object of natural growth.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.302)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/225
Sec. 14.03.003 Zones
In order to carry out the purposes of this article, all of the land within 50,000 feet radius of the airfield reference
point (Latitude 33° 50' 42" North, Longitude 101° 45' 38" West) that lies within the city limits is hereby divided
into zones A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, the boundaries of which are shown on Drawing Number RA 570, dated 1
April 1953, showing allowable elevations of obstructions in the vicinity of Abernathy Airfield, Abernathy,
Texas, which is attached hereto and hereby made a part hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 12.303)
Sec. 14.03.004 Height limits
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or
maintained in the landing area or in any airfield approach zone, airfield turning zone or airfield transition zone to
a height in excess of the applicable elevations (elevation above mean sea level as established by the United
States Coast & Geodetic Survey) shown on the attached map and herein established for such zone. (1996 Code,
sec. 12.304)
Sec. 14.03.005 Use restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within the landing area, or in
any airfield approach zone, airfield turning zone or airfield transition zone, in such a manner as to create
electrical interference with radio communication between the airfield and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to
distinguish between airfield lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airfield, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airfield, or otherwise endanger the landing, taking-off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.305)
Sec. 14.03.006 Nonconforming uses
(a) The regulations prescribed in sections 14.03.004 and 14.03.005 of this article shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any
structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is
diligently prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.
(b) The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this article, although such use does not
conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued; but if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any future
use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article.
(c) If a building occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or the elements, it may not be
reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform with the provisions of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.306)
Sec. 14.03.007 Variances
Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
tree or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply for a variance
therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest, but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 12.307)
Sec. 14.03.008 Hazard marking and lighting
Any variance granted under section 14.03.007 may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes
of this article and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or
tree in question at his expense, or permit the Abernathy Airfield, Abernathy, Texas, or Reese Air Force Base,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/225
Texas, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary
to indicate to flyers the presence of a flight hazard. (1996 Code, sec. 12.308)
Sec. 14.03.009 Administrative agency
The air installations officer is hereby designated the administrative agency charged with the duty of
administering and enforcing the regulations herein prescribed. The duties of the air installations officer shall
include that of hearing and deciding all applications for variances under section 14.03.007, but the air
installations officer shall not have or exercise any of the powers or duties herein delegated to the board of
adjustment. (1996 Code, sec. 12.309)
Sec. 14.03.010 Appeals
(a) Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by any decision of the air installations officer made in his
administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the air installations officer is an improper
application of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment, for which provision is made in section
14.03.011.
(b) All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the
board, by filing with the air installations officer and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The air installations officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the air installations
officer certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the board on notice to the air installations officer and on due cause
shown.
(d) The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
(e) The board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify, the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the air installations
officer.
(f) The board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted
and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, or affirming, or modifying any order, requirements,
decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article.
(g) The concurring vote of at least four of the members of the board shall be sufficient to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the air installations officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.310)
Sec. 14.03.011 Board of adjustment
(a) Only citizens of the city may be appointed members of the board of adjustment here created under this
article, and said board is hereby delegated and shall exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the air installations officer in the enforcement of this article.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/225
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article which such board may be
required to pass by subsequent ordinance.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed for a term of two years by the
city council and to be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing.
(c) The board shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article.
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may
determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board shall be public. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.311)
State law reference–Airport zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 241.032.
Sec. 14.03.012 Judicial review
Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to a court of
record as provided in section 11 of chapter 391, page 874, Acts of 1947 (H.B. No. 333), 50th Legislature, State
of Texas. (1996 Code, sec. 12.312)
Sec. 14.03.013 Enforcement and remedies
The proper authorities at Reese Air Force Base, Texas, separately, or in conjunction with the city, may institute
in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this article
or any regulations, orders, ordinances, resolutions, or rulings promulgated or made pursuant to this article, and
the court shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction, which may be mandatory, or otherwise,
as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order to effectuate the purposes of this
article and of the regulations adopted and orders, resolutions, and rulings made pursuant thereto. (1996 Code,
sec. 12.313)
Sec. 14.03.014 Conflicting regulations
Where this article imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or
required by any other ordinance or regulations, the provisions of this article shall govern. (1996 Code, sec.
12.314)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
Sec. A1.001 License fees
(a) Dog/cat/ferret: $5.00.
(b) Dangerous dog: $75.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/225
(c) Replacement tag: $3.00.
Sec. A1.002 Adoption fees
(a) Dog or cat: $30.00.
(b) The chief of police shall have the authority to waive any adoption fees.
Sec. A1.003 Impound fees
(a) Impoundment charges where impoundment occurs during regular working hours shall be as follows:
(1) Class A, dogs/cats/ferrets: $50.00.
(2) Class B, small livestock: $60.00.
(3) Class C, large livestock: $75.00.
(b) Impoundment charges where impoundment occurs outside regular working hours shall be doubled.
(c) Daily handling/boarding fees:
(1) Class A: $10.00.
(2) Class B: $20.00.
Sec. A1.004 Animal quarantine
(a) (1) Shelter quarantine, per day: $25.00.
(2) The owner of any animal held in quarantine for ten days for observation purposes shall be
charged ten dollars ($10.00) for handling/boarding every day or fraction of a day an animal remains
in the city's boarding facility. This is in addition to quarantine fees.
(b) Impounded animals cannot be released without proof of current rabies vaccination.
(c) Head shipment: Actual costs.
Sec. A1.005 Miscellaneous fees
(a) Euthanasia/disposal fees:
(1) Cats: $15.00.
(2) Dogs: $30.00.
(b) Surrender fees, per animal: $15.00.
(Ordinance 499, sec. 2, adopted 3/9/09)
ARTICLE A2.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. A2.001 Peddlers and solicitors investigation fee
Each applicant for a permit under article 4.03 who resides in the city and furnishes local references shall be
charged an investigation fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Each such applicant who resides outside of the city shall be
charged an investigation fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). (1996 Code, app. A, sec. 2.100)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/225
Sec. A2.002 Dance hall and pool hall license fees
The following fees shall be charged for such licenses issued under the terms of article 4.04:
(1) For a class A dance hall the license fee shall be $600.00.
(2) For a class B dance hall the license fee shall be $400.00.
(3) For a class C dance hall the license fee shall be $100.00.
(4) For a pool hall the license fee shall be $50.00 for the first table, and an additional fee of $25.00
for each additional table.
(1996 Code, app. A, sec. 2.200)
Sec. A2.003 Coin-operated machines and pool tables
(a) Fee for release of sealed machine. The police department is authorized to seal any recreation or
amusement machine or pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax has not been paid. The police
department is authorized to charge a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the release of any recreation or amusement
machine or pool or billiard table that is sealed for nonpayment of the occupation tax.
(b) License fee.
Number of Machines, Pool or Billiard Tables Fee
50 or fewer $100.00
51 - 200 $200.00
Over 200 $250.00
(1996 Code, app. A, sec. 2.300)
ARTICLE A3.000 MOWING AND LOT CLEANUP FEES
(a) Mowing.
(1) $60.00 for one lot not exceeding 7,000 square feet;
(2) $75.00 per two contiguous lots not exceeding 14,000 square feet total;
(3) $55.00 per hour additional for more than two contiguous lots.
(b) Lot cleanup. $40.00 per hour for one man with truck plus $20.00 per hour for each additional man.
Additionally, any special environmental hazard cleanup work will incur additional charges. Additional charges
will be made in cases where the use of the city's backhoe is required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/225
(c) Lien. Such charge shall be assessed against said lot or lots, tract or parcel of land, and shall constitute a
lien against said lot or lots, tract or parcel of land.
(Ordinance 441 adopted 9/23/02)
ARTICLE A4.000 UTILITY RELATED FEES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. A4.001 Solid waste collection charges
(a) Rate schedule. In order to defray the cost and expense of solid waste disposal services including but not
limited to the collecting garbage, trash and rubbish, maintenance of alley surfaces, brush chipping, equipment
repairs, bulk waste disposal and convenience center operations, a monthly service charge is hereby levied and
assessed as follows:
Classification Monthly Rate
Residential $19.27
Commercial $38.05 per container provided
Schools $757.00
(Ordinance 597 adopted 8/13/18)
(b) Outside the city. All collection services billed for customers outside of the city limits shall be double the
inside city rate.
(c) Sales tax. The city will collect sales taxes as required by state law on trash collections.
(Ordinance 550, sec. 2, adopted 8/12/13)
Sec. A4.002 Water deposits; leakage
(a) Before any consumer may have water service from the city waterworks he must deposit with the city
waterworks one hundred dollars ($100.00). Said deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he shall have
discontinued the use of the city water and shall have all bills and accounts due the city waterworks for any
account whatever connected with the water service, and shall return the receipt. If the receipt is not returned,
then the records on the books of the city waterworks shall be the basis of adjustment. This deposit is required
and made in the nature of a guarantee for payment of water service accounts, and damage to service connections
or meters caused through neglect, abuse or failure to properly care for the same by the consumer or his agent,
and the deposit or any part thereof may be applied by the city waterworks to the payment of any such account
when it becomes past due. This deposit shall not be made nor accepted in the nature of a payment, but only as a
guarantee. Failure to pay the water bill before it becomes delinquent is considered notice from the consumer to
discontinue service and apply so much of the deposit as is necessary for the payment of the then past due
account. In case any deposit or any part thereof shall have been applied in payment of past due accounts, no
service may be re-established until the deposit shall have been brought back up to the full amount required.
(Ordinance 562, sec. 1, adopted 11/10/14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/225
(b) All property owners, their agents and tenants shall be held responsible as consumer for loss of water due to
leakage in pipes or plumbing inside the discharge side of the meter or on said property, and if the water is not
paid for according to the rates then in effect, when it becomes due, the water shall be cut off by the city
waterworks and not turned on again until all claims are paid or adjusted to the satisfaction of the city
waterworks. In the event of any change of tenant, or consumer, in rented property, and there exists, at the time, a
non-paid account for past leakage, the landlord and property owner shall be held to account for payment for this
leakage before service will be extended and water furnished to the second tenant. (1996 Code, app. A, sec.
5.200)
Sec. A4.003 Water rates
The following schedule of monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the city's waterworks system shall
be and such is hereby adopted and established as follows:
(1) Residential rate. $32.00 for the first 2,000 gallons (minimum) plus an additional:
$2.75 per thousand from 2,001–7,000 gallons;
$3.00 per thousand from 7,001–12,000 gallons;
$3.50 per thousand from 12,001–20,000 gallons;
$4.00 per thousand from 20,001–50,000 gallons; and
$5.75 per thousand any over 50,001 gallons.
(2) Commercial/industrial rate. $34.00 for the first 3,000 gallons (minimum) plus an additional:
$2.75 per thousand from 3,001–7,000 gallons;
$3.00 per thousand from 7,001–12,000 gallons;
$3.25 per thousand from 12,001–20,000 gallons;
$3.50 per thousand from 20,001–50,000 gallons; and
$3.75 per thousand any over 50,001 gallons.
(3) Public schools. $3.25 per thousand gallons;
$5.00 per thousand gallons for service outside city limits.
(4) Abernathy volunteer fireman's rate. $22.00 for the first 15,000 gallons (minimum) plus an
additional:
$3.00 per thousand from 15,001–20,000 gallons;
$3.25 per thousand from 20,001–50,000 gallons; and
$3.50 per thousand any over 50,001 gallons.
(5) Bulk water sales (coin operated). $5.00 per thousand gallons.
(6) Bulk water sales. $34.00 for the first 1,000 gallons; and
$5.00 per thousand gallons.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/225
(7) Outside the city. All water service sales outside of the city limits shall be double the inside city
rate.
(Ordinance 588, sec. 1, adopted 8/7/17)
Sec. A4.004 Failure to pay water charges; disconnection of service
(a) It shall be the obligation of each consumer receiving water from the city to pay for all water furnished,
whether same is furnished through one or more water meters to one or more premises. Statements for water
furnished shall be based upon water furnished through each meter. In the event of the failure of a consumer to
pay for water furnished through any one meter, whereby it is necessary for the city to disconnect water service to
such consumer for failure to pay such charges, then all meters through which water is being furnished to such
consumer, whether at one or more locations, shall be disconnected.
(b) If, within seven days from the date the same becomes due, the amount due for water furnished a consumer
through any meter shall not be paid, it will be sufficient notice from the consumer to discontinue service through
any meter whatsoever connected with the water service of the city through which water is being furnished such
consumer.
(1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.700)
(c) Where water service is discontinued as to any consumer, at one or more premises, on account of
nonpayment for water furnished at one or more premises, water shall not again be furnished the consumer at any
premises until the full amount delinquent shall have been paid together with all fees and charges herein
provided. In such event water service shall not be again furnished the consumer until payment in full of all
delinquent amounts plus $25.00 additional for turning water back on at each meter disconnected; provided that,
in the event of the reconnection or turning back water on (where same has been discontinued) by anyone other
than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city, a reconnection and inspection fee of $40.00 as to each such
meter shall be paid prior to the furnishing of water to such consumer again. (Ordinance 506 adopted 7/13/09)
(d) In the event that any meter is tampered with by any person other than a duly authorized employee or agent
of the city, the consumer shall pay to the city an inspection fee of $25.00. (1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.700)
(e) Where the city has discontinued water service to any consumer, if deemed necessary by the city to remove
the meter or meters in order to stop use of water at any one or more locations to which the water is furnished
until past due amounts are paid, then in this event an additional charge of $25.00 for each meter for removing
and resetting the meter shall be charged. (Ordinance 506 adopted 7/13/09)
Sec. A4.005 Sewer rates
(a) The following schedule of monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the city's sanitary sewer
system shall be and such is hereby adopted and established as follows.
(1) Residential rate (based on water consumption). $13.50 (minimum) plus an additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(2) Business office (based on water consumption). $15.00 (minimum) plus an additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(3) Laundry and/or carwash (based on water consumption). $33.00 (minimum) plus an additional:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/225
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(4) Hotel/motel (based on water consumption). $195.00 (minimum) plus an additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(5) Trailer park (based on water consumption). $70.00 (minimum) plus an additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(6) Restaurant: (based on water consumption). $22.00 (minimum) plus an additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(7) Convenience/grocery store (based on water consumption). $22.00 (minimum) plus an
additional:
$0.10 per thousand from 7,001–20,000 gallons; and
$0.25 per thousand any over 20,001.
(8) Public schools. $385.00 (minimum).
(9) Outside the city. All service sales outside of the city limits shall be double the inside city rate.
(Ordinance 589 adopted 8/7/17)
(b) When more than one business or residence is served by one sewer tap, then each business or residence
shall pay a separate sewer user fee in accordance with the rate schedule established by the city.
(c) A monthly user fee will be determined by the city utility department for each account not otherwise
classified by this section.
(d) In addition to all other sewer fees charged by the city, each user who uses less than 750,000 gallons of
water per month will be assessed a fifty cent ($0.50) administrative fee per month.
(1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.800(a)–(c), (e))
Sec. A4.006 Paving cuts for water and sewer taps
A charge for paving cuts on water and sewer taps is hereby set at twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square yard on
all required pavement cuts. (1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.800(d))
Sec. A4.007 Gas rates
(a) Energas Natural Gas Company, its successors and assigns may make charges under its general service rate
for the sale of natural gas and natural gas service to its customers who use natural gas within the city as follows:
Monthly rate, 2,000 cu. ft. or less per month: $2.10.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/225
Next 8,000 cu. ft. per month: 76.2 cents per M. cu. ft.
Next 40,000 cu. ft. per month: 68.8 cents per M. cu. ft.
Next 50,000 cu. ft. per month, 63.2 cents per M. cu. ft.
Next 200,000 cu. ft. per month, 47.5 cents per M. cu. ft.
Next 200,000 cu. ft. per month, 41.7 cents per M. cu. ft.
Next 500,000 cu. ft. per month, 35.0 cents per M. cu. ft.
Minimum bill: $2.10 per month - net.
Delayed payment charge: Ten percent (10%) of bill will be added if not paid within ten (10)
days after date of billing.
(b) The rates set forth in this schedule are based on the average cost to the company of gas purchased for its
West Texas transmission system of 17.2¢ per Mcf at 14.65 psia (15.97¢ at 13.6 psia). By March 1 of each year,
the company shall notify the city of the average cost of gas per Mcf at 13.6 psia for the West Texas transmission
system during the previous calendar year and make its records available on request for verification. Unless the
city notifies the company by April 1 that it does not accept such average as being that experienced for the year,
and the city reserves complete discretion to accept or not accept such average for any reason, the rates per Mcf
set forth above (other than the minimum bill) shall be adjusted up or down to the nearest 0.1¢ above or below
15.97¢ and such adjusted rate shall become effective for all meter reading periods beginning on and after April
15 of that year.
(1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.900)
Secs. A4.008–A4.030 Reserved
Division 2. Nonresident Water Customers
Sec. A4.031 Tapping fee; construction costs
Nonresident users are required to pay to the city a tapping fee of $8,000.00 (eight thousand dollars).
Additionally, nonresident users shall pay all costs of constructing a water distribution system extending from the
water mains of the city to the points of use, with such costs to include, but not be limited to, costs of individual
meters, water taps, all supplies of every kind and character, all labor involved, master meters, installation fees
and all other costs and expenses of similar nature, either required, necessary or convenient in extending service
to such nonresident users. (Ordinance 515 adopted 3/8/10)
Sec. A4.032 Measurement of quantity of water delivered; defective meters
Water supplied hereunder shall be supplied through the master meter set by the city at a point to be mutually
agreed upon and at which point the city shall be furnished with a license or permit to set such master meter, if
such is required. The quantity of water delivered hereunder shall be ascertained by the measurement of such
master meter and the quantity recorded thereby, computed by the city according to its standard operating
practice, and shall be conclusive upon both the city and consumers, except if such master meter is found
defective or ceases to register, in which cases, until repaired or replaced, the quantity of water delivered shall be
ascertained by correcting the error, if the percentage of error is ascertainable by calibration test or mathematical
calculations. If not so ascertainable, then it should be determined by estimating the quantity on a basis of
deliveries during a preceding period under similar conditions when the meter was registering accurately. The
measuring equipment installed by the city shall be accurate at the time of installation and the accuracy thereof
shall be verified by tests by the city at reasonable intervals thereafter or upon the consumer's request; provided
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/225
that, if requested by a consumer, he shall pay a $5.00 service fee. Such provisions as to inspection and
verification by the city on its own initiative or at the request of a consumer as to individual meters shall be upon
the same basis and fees. (1996 Code, app. A, sec. 5.400)
Sec. A4.033 Nonresident deposit
Before any nonresident consumer may have water service from the city waterworks he must deposit with the city
waterworks one hundred dollars ($100.00). Said deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he shall have
discontinued the use of the city water and shall have [paid] all bills and accounts due the city waterworks for any
account whatever connected with the water service, and shall return the receipt. If the receipt is not returned,
then the records on the books of the city waterworks shall be the basis of adjustment. This deposit is required
and made in the nature of a guarantee for payment of water service accounts, and damage to service connections
or meters caused through neglect, abuse or failure to properly care for the same by the consumer or his agent,
and the deposit or any part thereof may be applied by the city waterworks to the payment of any such account
when it becomes past due. This deposit shall not be made nor accepted in the nature of a payment, but only as a
guarantee. Failure to pay the water bill before it becomes delinquent is considered notice from the consumer to
discontinue service and apply so much of the deposit as is necessary for the payment of the then past due
account. In case any deposit or any part thereof shall have been applied in payment of past due accounts, no
service may be re-established until the deposit shall have been brought back up to the full amount required.
(Ordinance 588, sec. 2, adopted 8/7/17)
ARTICLE A5.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. A5.001 Garagekeeper's fee when reporting abandoned vehicle
The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle considered
abandoned under the provisions of article 8.04 shall follow the notification procedures provided by section
8.04.032, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garagekeeper until after compliance with the
notification requirements. A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper to the
police department. The two dollar ($2.00) fee shall be retained by the police department and used to defray the
cost of notification or other cost incurred in the disposition of an abandoned motor vehicle. (1996 Code, app. A,
art. 4.000)
ORDINANCE 310
ZONING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING FOR ZONING REGULATIONS
AND CREATING ZONING DISTRICTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS REGULATING THE USE OF LAND,
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; THE HEIGHT, BULK AND LOCATION OF
BUILDINGS; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET
PARKING, REGULATING THE ERECTION, REPAIR AND ALTERATIONS OF ALL
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
FOR CERTAIN USES; RECOGNIZING NONCONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES AND PROVIDING RULES FOR THE REGULATION THEREOF;
CREATING A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND SETTING FORTH RULES FOR ITS
ORGANIZATION, JURISDICTION AND POWERS; ESTABLISHING THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SITES AND THE MANNER OF THEIR CREATION;
DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS: ADOPTING A ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND MAKING IT
A PART OF SAID ORDINANCE: MAKING ALL FIGURES, LETTERS, MARKINGS,
SYMBOLS AND CHARTS CONTAINED IN SAID ORDINANCE OR SHOWN ON THE
MAP A PART OF SUCH ORDINANCE, PROVIDING A METHOD OF AMENDMENT:
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH ORDINANCE AND FOR
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE VIOLATION OF SAID
ORDINANCE: AND PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE.
WHEREAS, under the laws of the State of Texas, authority is conferred upon the City of
Abernathy, Texas, to establish districts or zones within the city for the purpose of
regulating the use of land and controlling the density of population to the end that
congestion in the public streets may be lessened, the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare promoted; and,
WHEREAS, the city council made a study of the zoning regulations and existing land
use of the city of Abernathy over a period of more than one year; and,
WHEREAS, the city council did call a public hearing after giving written notice in the
local newspaper, and,
WHEREAS, the city council is of the opinion that the passage of the zoning ordinance
and the enforcement of the provision of such ordinance is in the public interest and
deemed necessary for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the city;
NOW THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ABERNATHY HEREBY
ORDAINS:
ENACTING CLAUSE
That Articles inclusive of the Code of the City of Abernathy, Texas, known as the zoning
ordinance, is hereby adopted in its entirety to read as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE #
SECTION I
1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1100 Definitions
1125 General Definitions
1300 USE DEFINITIONS
1310 Residential Uses
1330 Commercial Uses 1390 Industrial Uses
1400 Civic Uses
1450 Agricultural Uses
1500 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION II - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
1600 Agricultural District (A)
1620 Single Family Residential District (R-1)
1700 Multiple Family Residential (MF-I)
(Limited Density)
1750 Multiple Family Residential (MF-2)
(High Density)
1772 Mobil Home Park Development Regulations
1800 Limited Commercial District (C-l)
1850 Heavy Commercial District (C-2)
1900 Industrial District (1-1)
2000 Planned Development District (PD)
SECTION III -SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
3000 General Compliance
3050 Off-Street Parking
3075 Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
SECTION IV - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
4000 Planning & Zoning Commission
4010 Board of Adjustment
4050 Article Changes and Amendments
4060 Procedure for Change of Zoning Request
4070 Conditional Uses
5000 Enforcement

INDEX
TOPIC NOTES
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT REPAIR 1333 AND 1865
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS 1333 AND 1865
AGRICULTURAL SERVICES AND SALES
ANIMAL SALES 1395
APPLIANCE REPAIRS 1315 CHECK 1865 ALSO
ARCADES 1312
ARCHITECTS 1370
ARENAS, SPORTS 1342
AUTO REPAIR MINOR,
AUTO REPAIR SHOP 1865
AUTO REPAIRS MAJOR 1333
AUTO SALES NEW 1333
AUTO SALES USED 1333
AUTO SERVICE STATION
AUTO SERVICES 1333
AUTO WASHING 1333
AUTOMATIC CAR WASHES 1333 C2)
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY 1333 C2)
BAKERIES 1352
BANKS 1351
BARBER SHOPS 1361
BARS ALCOHOUC BEV. 1341
BEAUTY SHOPS 1361
BILL ARD HALLS 1312 NOTE CITY LICENSE
REQUIRED
BOARDING KENNELS 1355
BOATS 1333
BODY FRAME STRAIGHTENING NOT ALLOW. 1333
BODY SHOPS 1333
BODY WORK NOT PERMISSIBLE AT SERV 1333
BODY WORK 1333 AUTO REPAIR
BOOKKEEPERS - SEE ACCOUNTANTS 1370
BOWLING ALLEYS 1312
BRAKE REPAIRS
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 1311
BUILDING MAINTENANCE SERVICES 1331
BUILDING MATERIALS
BUS TERMINALS 1144
BUSINESS MACHINE REPAIRS 1335
BUSINESS OFFICES – PUBLIC UTILITIES
BUSINESS SCHOOLS 1340
CAUCHE PITS 1394
CANDLE SHOPS 1392
CANDY SHOPS 1352
CAR DEALERSHIPS NEW 1333
CAR DEALERSHIPS USED 1333
CAR WASHES 1333
CARBURETOR REPAIRS
CATTLE PENS 1395
CERAMICS 1392
CHEMICALS, FARM 1332
CHIMNEYS 3020
CHURCH BELFRIES 3020
CHURCH SPIRES 3020
CLEANERS 1360
COCKTAIL LOUNGES 1341
COFFEE SHOPS 1372
COMMERCIAL RECREATION 1342
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
CONSTRUCTION SALES 1344
CONSULTANT SERVICES 1370
CUSTODIAL SERVICES 1334
DANCE HALLS 1342
DANCE STUDIOS 1363
DEUCATESSENS 1353
DENTISTS 1362
DEPARTMENT STORES 1354
DESIGN STUDIOS 1370
DIAPER SERVICES 1360
DISTRIBUTION 1396
DOCTORS OFFICES 1362
DOG GROOl1lNG SERVICES 1365
DOG TRAINING 1355
DOGS, BOARDING KENNEL 1355
DRIVING RANGES 1342
DRIVING SCHOOLS 1363
DRY CLEANERS 1360
EGG PRODUCTION 1453
ELEVATORS GRAIN 1396
ELEVATORS SEE 3020
ENGINEERS OFFICES 1370
ENTERTAINMENT 1342
EQUIPMENT RENTALS 1344
EQUIPMENT REPAIRS 1333
EQUIPMENT SALES 1344
EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
EQUIPMENT USED 1865
FARM EQUIPMENT REPAIRS 1333 AND 1865
FARM RELATED 1332
FERTILIZER SALES 1332
FIELD OR ROW CROPS 1552
FINANCE OFFICES 1351
FIRE TOWERS 3020
FITNESS CENTERS 1363
FARM EQUIPMENT SALES 1333 AND 1865
FRAME SHOPS 1333
FREIGHT DEPOTS 1444
FUEL PUMP REPLACEMENT
FUNERAL SERVICES 1353
FURNITURE STORES 1354
CAME ROOMS 1342
GAS EXPLORATION 1394
GOLF COURSES 1342
GOLF DRIVING RANGES 1342
GRAINELEVATORS 1396
GRAIN STORES 1332
GRAVEL PITS 1394
GREASING 1333
GROCERY STORES 1352
HANDICRAFTS 1363
HAY SALES 1332
HEALTII STUDIOS 1363
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
HOBBY INSTRUCTIONS 1363
HORSE STABLES 1375
HOSPITALS SEE 3020
HOTEL EQUIPMENT SUPPLIES 1335
HOTELS 1381
ICE CREAM SHOPS 1372
ICE RINKS 1342
IMPOUND YARDS (VEHICLE STORAGE) 1333
INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 1865
INSURANCE OFFICES 1331
INVESTMENT OFFICES 1331
JANITORIAL SERVICES 1334
JEWELRY REPAIRS 1345
JEWELRY 1392
JUNK YARDS 1374
KENNELS 1355
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES 1334
LAUNDROMATS 1360
LAW OFFICES 1370
LAWN MOWER REPAIR
LENDING INSTITUTIONS
LINEN SUPPLY SERVICES
LIQUOR SALES 1361
LOUNGES COCKTAIL 1341
LUBRICATION 1333
LUMBER YARDS 1314
MACHINE SHOPS 1333 AND 1865
MAINTENANCE OF BOATS, HOMES ETC. 1333
VEHICLES, MOTOR
MAINTENANCE OF E QUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
MANUFACTURING 1392 1393
MEAT MARKETS 1352
MEDICAL OFFICES 1362
MEETING HALLS 1342
MINERALS 1394
MINI STORAGE 1351
MINING 1391
MOBILE HOME SALES 1333
MONUMENTS YARDS 1396
MOTELS 1381
MOTORCYCLE SALES 1333
MOTOR HOME SALES 1333
MOVIES 1342
MOVING AND STORAGE 1396
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT REPAIRS 1345
NURSERIES 1332
OFFICE EQUIPMENT 1335
OFFICE SUPPLIES 1335
OFFICE SUPPLIES 1351
OIL CHANGES 1333
OIL EXPLORATION 1394
OPEN AIR STORAGE 1396
OPTOMETRIST 1362
PACKAGE EXPRESS 1444
PAINT SHOPS 1333
PAINTING OF AUTOS -NOT AT SERVICE 1333
PARKS, AMUSEMENTS 1342
PERSONNEL OFFICES 1331
PESTICIDE SALES 1332
PET CAIW SALONS 1365
PET STORES 1365
PHOTOCOPY SERVICES 1331
PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIOS 1363
POOL HALLS 1342 NOTE CITY LICENSE
REQUIRSED
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 1331
PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICES 1331
RACE FACILITIES 1352
RACQUETBALL COURTS 1342
RADIATOR REPAIR SHOPS
RADIATOR SHOPS 1333
RADIO STATIONS 1343
RADIO TOWERS 3020
REAL ESTATE OFFICES 1331
RECREATION COMMERCIAL 1342
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 1333
REDUCING SALONS 1363
RENTAL OF TRUCKS 1333
RENTAL OF TRUCKS 1333
RENTAL, TOOLS 1344 SEE AlSO 1865
REPAIRS EQUIPMENT SEE AlSO 1865
REPAIRS VEHICLE 1333 ALSO 1865
REPAIRS, APPLIANCE 1345
REPAIRS, AUTO FRAMES
REPRODUCTION SERVICES 1331
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 1371
RESTAURANTS CONVENIENCE) 1372
RESTAURANTS 1373
ROLLER RINKS 1342
RV PARKS 1381
SALVAGE (VEHICLE STORAGE) 1333 & 1865
SALVAGE YARDS 1372 ALSO 1865
SANDWICH SHOPS 1372
SAVINGS AND LOANS 1351
SCHOOLS BUSINESS 1310
SCHOOLS BUSINESS 1310
SCHOOLS SEE 3030
SCHOOLS TRADE 1340
SECRETARIAL SERVICES 1331
SEED SALES, FARM 1332
SEAMSTRESS SHOPS 1364
SERVICING OF EQUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
SHIPPING PENS 1395
SHOE REPAIR SHOPS 1364
SKATING RINKS 1342
SLAUGHTER HOUSES 1395
SODA FOUNTAINS 1372
SPORTS ARENAS 13421
STABLES 1375
STEAM CLEANING 1333
STEAM CLEANING 1333 AUTO REPAIR
STEAM CLEANING OF VEHICLES 1333
STOCKYARDS 1395
STONE YARDS 1396
STORAGE MINI 1350
STORAGE 1396 AND 1350
STORAGE AUTO REPAIR SHOPS SEE 1374 AND 1365
STORAGE OF BOATS 1333
STORAGE OF EQUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
STORAGE OF MOTOR HOMES 1333
STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 1333
STORAGE OF VEHICLES 1333
STORAGE OPEN AIR 1396
STORAGE SCRAP 1865
STORAGE USED MATERIAIS 1865
STORAGE USED VEHICLES 1865
STORAGE, VEHICLES 1333
SUPERMARKETS 1352
SWIMMING POOLS 1342
TAILORS, CLOTHNG 1364
TAVERNS 1341
TAXI CABS
TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICES 1331
TELEVISION STATIONS 1343
TELEVISION TOWERS 3020
TENNIS COURTS 1342
THEATERS 1342
TIRE REPAIR (NOT RECAPPING) 1333
TIRES
TOOL RENTALS 1344
TOOL SALES 1344
TOWERS RATIO AND TV 3020
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 ALSO 1865
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 AND 1665
TRACTOR SALES 1333 AND 1865
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 & 1865
TRADE SCHOOLS 1340
TRAILER RENTALS
TRANSMISSION OVERHAUL
TRAVEL SERVICES 1331
TRUCK RENTALS
TRUCK RENTALS 1333
TRUCK REPAIRS 1333
TRUCK SALES (NON COMMERCIAL) 1333
TRUCK SALES 1333
TV STUDIOS 1343
USED EQUIPMENT 1665
USED VEHICLES 1865
VEHICLE REPAIRS SERVICE STA. 1333 AUTO
VEHICLE STORAGE 1333
VEHICLE STORAGE IMPOUND YARDS
VEHICLE STORAGE 1865
VEHICLES, INOPERATIVE 1865
WAREHOUSING 1396
WASHING AUTOS 1333
WINDOW CLEANING SERVICES 1334
WRECIER SERVICE BODY WORK
WRECKING YARDS 1374 ALSO 1865
SECTION I
BASIC PROVISIONS
SECTION I
BASIC PROVISIONS
1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1010 Title
Sections 1000 through 6020 of this ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Regulations
of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
1015 Purpose of the Zoning Regulations
The purpose of the Zoning Regulations shall be to serve the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the City of Abernathy and the residents thereof; and to attain the
objectives of the planning policies of the City of Abernathy.
1020 Consistency With Planning Policies
It is the intent of the City of Abernathy that the Zoning Regulations shall be consistent
with the planning policies of Abernathy, and with any supplemental land use and
community development policies which may be adopted by the Council.
In the event the Zoning Regulations become inconsistent with the Abernathy planning
policies or with any supplemental land use and community development policies of the
City of Abernathy, by reason of the adoption of new plans or by amendment of the
existing plans or supplemental policies, it is the intent of the. . Council that .the Zoning
Regulations be amended within a reasonable time so as to become or remain consistent
with the revised, or amended land use and community development policies.
Additionally, it is the intent of the Council that all amendments to the Zoning Regulations
shall maintain and enhance the consistency between the Zoning Regulations and the
Abernathy planning policies.
1025 Applicability
The Zoning Regulations shall apply to all of the incorporated areas of the City of
Abernathy. The use of all land and any buildings or structures located upon the land, and
the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or relocation of any building or
structure upon the land shall conform to all regulations applicable to the district in which
the land is located. No land, building, structure or premise shall be used for purpose or in
any manner other than is permitted in the district in which such land, building, structure
or premise is located.
1035 Conflicting Provisions
The Zoning Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion
of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not the intent
of these regulations to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or
other agreement between parties. When these regulations impose a greater restriction'
upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or require larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these regulations shall control.
1040 Relief From Other Provisions
Except as otherwise specifically provided, no provision of the Zoning Regulations shall
be construed as relieving any party to whom a site plan, permit or variance is issued
from any other provision of state or federal law or from any provision, ordinance, rule, or
regulation of the City of Abernathy requiring a license, franchise, or permit to
accomplish, engage in, carryon or maintain a particular business, enterprise, occupation,
transaction or use.
1045 Severability of Provisions
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of these regulations, it
being hereby expressly declared that this ordinance and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, adopted,
approved and ratified irrespective of the fact that anyone or more other sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
1050 Prior Regulations
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as validating or legalizing any land use or
building or .structure conducted, constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of any
city ordinance, and nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or bar the filing of a complaint
or punishment of any act in violation of prior ordinances or bar the bringing of any action
or compel the discontinuance of any use or the removal of any building or structure
conducted, constructed, erected, or maintained. In violation of any prior ordinance.
Insofar as the provisions of this ordinance impose the same regulations as imposed by
previous ordinances, this ordinance shall be construed as a continuation of such
regulations and not as a new enactment.
1055 Completion of Uses and Structures
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of any amendment of these regulations provided that construction
of such building or structure begins within 120 days after the date of issuance
of the building permit and is completed within one year from the effective date of such
amendment, and provided further that such construction and proposed use of such
building or structure is not on said effective date in violation of any other ordinance or
law.
1100 DEFINITIONS
1110 Title and Purpose
Sections 1100 through 1454 shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these
provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretations of the Zoning
Regulations. The meaning and construction of words and .phrases as set forth shall
apply throughout the Zoning Regulations, except where the context of such words or
phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
1115 General Construction of Language
The following general rules of construction shall apply to the textual provisions of the
Zoning Regulations.
a. Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of any provision of the Zoning Regulations.
b. Illustration. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of any provision and any illustration, the text shall control.
c. Shall and May. "Shall is always mandatory and not discretionary "May" is
discretionary.
d. Tenses and Numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future, and
words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
e. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
2. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or
in any combination
3. "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply
singly but not in combination.
f. All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of
the City of Abernathy unless otherwise indicated.
General Definitions
1120
a. "Building Official" means the person responsible for Inspection in the City of
Abernathy.
b. "Comprehensive Plan" means any planning policies or a comprehensive plan of
the City of Abernathy.
c. "Council" or "City Council" shall have the same meaning.
d. "County" shall mean Hale or Lubbock County..
e. "District or Zone" shall have the same meaning and shall refer to districts
established by the Zoning Regulations unless otherwise indicated.
f. "Federal" shall mean the Government of the United State of America.
g. "Section" means a section of the Zoning Regulations unless otherwise
indicated.
h. "State" shall mean the State of Texas.
i. "Used" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "occupied," or "intended to be
occupied for."
j: "Zoning Administrator" means the person designated by the City Manager to
administer the provisions of this ordinance.
1125 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
1130 Abutting
Having lot lines or district boundaries in common.
1131 Accessory Building
A building which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific
principal use or principal building on the same site.
1132 Accessory Dwelling
A dwelling unit accessory to a principal use on the same site and intended for
occupancy by a family having at least one member employed on the site for
purposes of security, maintenance. Management, supervision, or personal
service.
1133 Addition
Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of
site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.
1134 Agent of Owner
Any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for, and with the
knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
1135 Alteration
Any construction of physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the
supporting members of a building or structure, or change in relative position of
buildings or structures on a site. or substantial change in appearance of any
building or structure.
1140 Attached
Having one or more walls common with a principal building, or joined to a
principal building by a covered porch, Loggia, or passageway, the roof of which is
a part of extension of a principal building.
1141 Beginning of Construction
The incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of a building or
structure.
1142 Building
A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support
or enclosure of persons or property. The word “building" includes the word
"structure",
1143 Building Pad
A portion of a sloping site graded relatively flat, or to a minimum slope, for the
purpose of accommodating a building and related outdoor space.
1144 Change of Use
The replacement of an existing use by a new use, or a change in the nature of an
existing use. Change in use does not include a change of ownership, tenancy,
name or management, or change in product or service within the same use
classification.
1145 Common Area
An area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the
owners or occupants of a town house project, PD, mobilehome park, or
subdivision.
1150 Detached
Fully separated from any other building, or joined to another building by structural
members not constituting an enclosed or covered space.
1151 Discontinuance of Use
To cease or discontinue a use or activity. This does, not include temporary or
short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
maintaining, or otherwise improving a facility.
1152 Drive-In Service
A feature or characteristic of a use involving sale of products or provision of
services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and
drive-through services such as mechanical automobile washing.
1153 Driveway
A permanently surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an
off-street parking or loading area.
1154 Dwelling Unit
A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit containing not less than 600 square feet
or floor area, and not having a separate bedroom or sleeping area independent
of the principal living area.
1155 Enclosed
A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors,
and similar openings or architectural features, or an open space-of less than 100
square feet fully surrounded by a building or walls exceeding 8 feet in height.
1160 Family
An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not more than (3) unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
1161 Floor Area (Gross)
The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the surfaces of
exterior walls, including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, service and mechanical
equipment rooms, light wells, courts, 'and basement, cellar or attic areas deemed
usable by the Building Official or habitable by the Uniform Building Code, but
excluding area within a building used for off-street parking or loading facilities.
1162 Grade
The lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or
sidewalk at a point where height is to be measured.
1163 Guest House
An accessory building containing a lodging unit without kitchen facilities, and
used to house occasional visitors or non-paying guests of the occupants of a
dwelling unit on the same site.
1164 Height
The vertical distance from "grade" to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof
or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable
on a pitched 9r hipped roof, or to the highest point of a structure. As applied to a
building, the height shall be measured from an elevation derived from the
average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building, but not greater
than five feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced
building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.
1165 Home Occupation
A use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, employing only the
inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential
occupancy and does not change the character thereof, which shall include no
separate outside entrance or other structural changes and does not cause the
generation of additional traffic on the street.
1170 Landscaped
An area devoted to or developed predominately with plant material or natural
landscape features, including lawn, ground .cover, gardens, trees, shrubs and
other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape
elements such a~ pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces
or rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking,
loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements, provided that the use of
brick, stone, aggregate, or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over
the use of plant material.
1171 Lodging Unit
A room or group of rooms in a dwelling unit or a group residential use, for
overnight occupancy on a transient or residential occupancy basis. Where
designed or used for occupancy by more than two persons, each two person
capacity shall be deemed a separate lodging unit. For the purpose of determining
residential density, each two lodging unit shall be considered the equivalent of
one dwelling unit.
1172 Lot of Record
A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation
shown on a plat record of survey, parcel map, or subdivision map recorded in tie"
office of the County Clerk, or a parcel legally approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission according to applicable development regulations.
Corner Lot A lot located at the intersection or interception of two streets, or of
two segments of a curved street, forming an angle of not more than one hundred
thirty five degrees.
Interior Lot A lot other than a corner lot.
Reverse Corner Lot A corner lot, having a side lot line which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of a lot to its rear.
Through Lot A lot other than a corner lot abutting more than one street.
1173 Lot Area
The net horizontal area within bounding lot lines, but excluding any public or
private easement or right of way providing access to another lot.
1174 Lot Coverage or Building Coverage
The area of a lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, but excluding incidental
projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features and excluding ground level
paving landscaping and open recreational facilities.
1175 Lot Depth
The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint
of the rear lot line.
1180 Lot Line
A line or series of connected line segments bounding a lot as herein defined.
Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street. On a
corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or the line designated as
the front lot line by a subdivision or parcel map. On a through lot, the lot
line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot.
Interior Lot Line. A lot line not abutting a street.
Rear Lot Line. A lot line not defined as a front or side lot line. In the case
of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, a line
within the lot having length of 10 feet, parallel to and most distant from the
front lot shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of
determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this
ordinance.
Street or Exterior Lot Line. A lot line abutting a street.
1181 Lot Width
The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the front setback line
and at a distance of 50 feet to the rear thereof.
1182 Mobilehome (Amended by City Ordinance 393 on 6-9-1997)
A moveable or portable dwelling which is constructed on a chassis, and which is
designed to be towed over Texas roads and highways under special permit,
designed for year-round occupancy, designed primarily to be used without a
permanent foundation, but which may sit on a permanent foundation, and
designed to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or more units that can
be telescoped when transported and expanded later for additional capacity, or of
two or more units, separately transportable, but designed to be joined together
into one integral unit. Mobilehome as used in this ordinance specifically includes
manufactured housing and HUD-code manufactured homes meeting said
description.
The following shall not be included in this definition:
a. Travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motor homes, camping trailers, or other
recreational vehicles.
b. Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a permanent
foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding, and electrical,
plumbing, and heating systems.
1183 Mobilehome Park
A unified development of two or more mobilehome spaces for rent or lease, and
including common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry and
utility services, storage, and similar services for the convenience of residents of
the mobilehome park.
1184 Mobilehome Space
An area within a mobilehome park which is designed for and designated as the
location for a single mobilehome and the exclusive use of its occupants.
1185 Mobilehome Stand
That portion of a mobilehome space upon which the mobilehome is placed.
1190 Nonconforming Use
A lawful use of any land, building, or structure, other than a sign, that does not
conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complied with use
regulations in effect at the time the use was established.
1191 Non-complying Structure
A building or structure, including off-street parking or loading areas that does not
comply with currently applicable site development regulations for the district in
which it is located, or with applicable General Regulations but which complied
with applicable provisions at the time of construction.
1192 Parking Space
A paved area of at least one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet, enclosed or
unenclosed, approximately nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in depth,
having a paved driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and
permitting ingress and egress of an automobile. A "parking space" including
maneuvering area shall not occupy any public land. In a cluster housing development a
parking space may immediately abut a private drive which serves as a primary means
of access.
1193 Street
A public or private thoroughfare more than 20' in width which affords a primary
means of access to abutting property, including all land within the right-of-way
thereof.
1194 Screened
Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from view by a person standing at
ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a
fence, wall, hedge, beam, or similar architectural or landscape feature.
1195 Structure
That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece
of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting or structural members of a
building, including but not limited to bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in exterior walls.
1200 Townhouse
A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjoining
dwelling units in a townhouse group.
1201 Townhouse Group
Two or more contiguous townhouses having common or abutting walls.
1202 Townhouse Lot
That portion of the total development site of a townhouse residential use
intended for separate ownership as the location of a single townhouse and
associated private yard area.
1203 Useable Open Space
Outdoor or unenclosed area, located on the ground or on a roof, balcony, deck,
porch, or terrace, designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation,
pedestrian access, or landscaping, but excluding parking facilities, driveways,
utility and service areas.
1204 Use
The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a
site or in a building or facility.
Accessory Use. A use or activity which is incidental to and customarily
associated with a specific principal use on the same site.
Principal Use. A use which fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution, or other entity.
Permitted Use. A use defined by the following section and listed by the
regulations for any particular district as a permitted use within that zone,
and permitted therein as a matter of right when conducted in accord with
the relations established by this ordinance.
Conditional Use. A use defined by the following section and listed by the
regulations for any particular district as a conditional use within that
district and allowable therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional
basis subject to a Conditional Use Permit, and to all other regulations
established by this ordinance.
1205 Value or Valuation
The value of a structure shall be the estimated cost to replace the structure in
kind, based on current replacement costs.
1206 Yard
A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only landscaping
and such uses and facilities as may be permitted by this ordinance.
Front Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot
line and the front setback line.
Interior Yard. Any required yard, not adjacent to a street, which is determined on
the basis of an interior lot line.
Rear Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot
line and the rear setback line, but excluding any area located within the street
side yard of a corner lot.
Side Yard. A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the front yard to the
rear yard between the side lot line and the side setback line. In the case of a
corner lot, the street side yard shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.
Street Yard. Any required yard adjacent to a street and which is determined on
the basis of a street lot line.
1300 DEFINITIONS OF USE CLASSIFICATIONS
1301Title and Purpose
Section 1300 through 1454 shall be 'known as the Use Classifications. The
purpose of the Use Classifications shall be to provide a consistent set of terms
encompassing and defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the
various districts, and to provide a procedure for determination of the applicable
use classification of any activity not clearly within any defined use classification.
1302 Determination of Use Classification
In event of any question as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or
proposed use or activity, the Building Official shall have the authority to
determine the appropriate classification subject to the right of appeal to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. In making such determinations, the Building
Official shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in question, and
match the unlisted use where similar uses are permitted. The function and
locational requirements of the unlisted use must be consistent with the purpose
and description of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the
district, and be similar in traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibration, dust, odor,
glare and heat producing characteristics.
1303 Approval of Supplemental Listing
The Building Official" shall maintain a list of all such determinations, and shall
quarterly recommend to the Planning Commission additions, deletions, or
revisions to the use classifications to reflect contemporary usage and
terminology, and to minimize ambiguity. If the Planning and Zoning Commission
differs with a Building Official determination, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall prevail except any building permits issued under the Building
Official's determination that permit shall be considered a valid legal nonconforming
use.
1310 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES
Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on a
wholly or primarily non-transient basis but exclude institutional living
arrangements involving those providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care
and those providing forced residence, such as asylums and prisons.
1311 Single Family Residential
The use of a site for only one dwelling unit.
1312 Duplex Residential
The use of a site for two dwelling units within a single building.
1313 Two Family Residential
The use of a site for two dwelling units, each in a separate building.
1314 Townhouse Residential
The use of a site for four or more townhouse dwelling units, constructed with
common or adjacent walls and each located on a separate ground parcel within
the total development site, together with common area serving all dwelling units.
1315 Condominium Residential
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units intended for separate
ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units. The units may
or may not be situated on a ground parcel.
1316 Multiple Family Residential
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within one or more buildings.
1317 Group Residential
The residential occupancy of living accommodations by groups of more than 5
persons not defined as a family on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include
occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls, or
boarding houses.
1318 Mobilehome Residential
The residential occupancy of mobilehomes by families on a weekly or longer
basis. Typical uses include mobilehome parks or mobilehome subdivisions.
1330 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES
Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods;
and the provision of services other than those classified as Industrial or Civic
uses.
1331 Administrative and Business Offices
Offices of private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision
of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses, include
administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone
answering, photocopy and reproduction, and business offices of public utilities,
organizations and associations, or other use classifications when the serv1ce
rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services.
1332 Agricultural Sales and Services
Establishments or ~laces of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed,
grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally
related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, feed and grain stores, and tree
service firms.
1333 Automotive and Equipment Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in automotive-related or
heavy equipment sales or services. The following are automotive and equipment
use types:
Automobile Repair, Major: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning engines,
motor vehicles, trailers: collision services including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning.
Automobile Repair. Minor: Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes,
batteries and minor motor services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter
changing of passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2)
ton capacity, but not including any operation named under "Automobile Repair,
Major" or any other similar use thereto. .
Automobile Service Station: An automobile service station shall mean buildings
and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, including the servicing of
vehicles designed or calculated to be performed by the customer. In addition, the
following services may be rendered and sales made and no other:
? Sale and service of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor
parts;
? Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or re-grooving;
? Replacement or adjustment of automobile accessories;
? Radiator cleaning and flushing; provision of water, antifreeze and other
additives;
? Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing
materials
? Greasing and lubrication;
? Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;.
? Servicing and repair of carburetors~~
? Adjusting and repairing brakes;
? Emergency wiring repairs;
? Motor adjustments not involving removal of head or crankcase;
? Truck and trailer rental;
? Provision of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for customers, but only as accessory and incidental to
the principal operation;
? Provision of road maps and other information material;
? Provision of restroom facilities;
? Parking lot as an accessory use;
? Wrecker service;
? Uses permissible at a service station do not include body work;
transmission or brake overhauling; straightening of frames or body parts;
steam cleaning, painting, welding, storage of automobile not in operating
condition nor the operation of a commercial garage as an accessory use.
Automobile Self-Service Station: Self-service gasoline sales only, excluding all
other automobile sales or service.
1. Self-service gasoline sales shall mean gasoline and oil sales in which the
customer dispenses same into his automobile and shall not include oil sales in
which oil is drained from the automobile (oil changes) but only addition. Water or
radiator additives may be sold but no flushing or draining of radiator shall be
permitted. Compressed air for tires shall be limited to injection of air into tires
actually mounted on the automobile. No tire repair or changing shall be
permitted. Facilities for windshield cleaning may be provided for use by customer
with adequate receptacles for cleaning water material, but no car washing other
than windows shall be permitted.
2. All automotive service not herein expressed is declared to be in excess of
self-service gasoline sales.
Automobile Wash, Automatic Car Wash. or Automobile Laundry:
A building or structure where chain conveyors, blowers, steam cleaners, and
other mechanical devices, including, coin-operated self-service facilities, are
employed for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
Commercial Off-Street Parking: Parking 'of motor vehicles on a temporary basis
within a privately, owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a
principal use.
Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking garages.
Automotive Rentals: Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, trailers, and
recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles
available for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies trailer rental
agencies, and taxicab parking and dispatching.
Automotive Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motorhomes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental
storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car
dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle
dealerships.
Equipment Sales: Sale or rental of truck5, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, mobilehomes, and similar heavy equipment, including
incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck
dealerships, construction equipment dealerships and mobilehome sales
establishments.
Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck
repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services and machine shops,
but exclude dismantling or salvage.
Vehicle Storage: Long term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles.
Typical uses include storage of private parking towaways or impound yards, but
exclude dismantling or salvage.
1334 Building Maintenance Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial
services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial,
landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.
1335 Business Support Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or
repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and service
establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes
automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office
equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel
equipment and supply firms.
1340 Business or Trade School
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other
similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home
occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility.
1341 Cocktail Lounge
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges,
restaurants, and similar uses.
1342 Commercial Recreation
Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports
entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The following are
commercial recreation use types:
Indoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted within an enclosed building.
Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks,
and penny arcades.
Outdoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or
screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses,
golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts. racquetball courts.
Indoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an
enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture, theaters, meeting halls,
and dance halls.
Outdoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted in open
facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, amusement parks.
1343 Communications Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other
information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and
telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Major Utility Facilities.
Typical uses include television studios, telecommunications service centers or
telegraph service offices.
1344 Construction Sales and Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities
and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or
wholesale sale, from the premises of materials used in the construction of
buildings or other structures other than retail sales of paint, fixtures and
hardware; but excludes those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment
Services use types. Typical uses include building materials ~~pres. tool and
equipment rental or sales, or building contractors.
1345 Consumer Repair Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals
and households rather than firms, but excluding Automotive and Equipment use
types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair, or
musical instrument repair firms.
1350 Convenience Storage
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within
enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding use as
workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing or commercial activity. Typical uses
include mini-warehousing.
1351 Financial Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and banking
services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, land and
lending activities, and similar services.
1352 Food Sales
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries,
delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
1353 Funeral Services
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human
dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include
funeral homes or mortuaries.
1354 General Retail Sales
Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for personal or
household use, but excludes those classified more specifically in this use
definition section. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores,
furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or services:
household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, and stationery,
notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants,
hobby materials,' toys, and handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like
items; cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment, records,
sporting equipment, Kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art
supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor
covering, interior decorating services, office supplies; bicycles; and automotive
parts and accessories (excluding service and installation) .
1355 Kennels
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical uses
include boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog training centers.
1360 Laundry Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning or
dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses
include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply
services.
1361 Liquor Sales
Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption off
the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle
shops, or any licensed sales for off-site consumption.
1362 Medical Offices
A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or corrective
personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories,
and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such
practice by the State of Texas.
1363 Personal Improvement Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of information, instructional,
personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical
uses include photography studios, driving schools, health or physical fitness
studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
1364 Personal Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses
include beauty and barber shops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and selfservice
laundry or apparel cleaning services.
1365 Pet Services
Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals
customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing
and clipping salons, or pet grooming shops.
1370 Professional Office
A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of law,
architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and similar professions.
1371 Research Services
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature
but excludes product testing. Typical uses include electronics research
laboratories, space research and development firms, or pharmaceutical research
labs.
1372 Restaurant (Convenience)
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages,
excluding alcoholic beverages, for on-premise consumption. Typical uses include
soda fountains, ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, cafes, and coffee shops.
1373 Restaurant (General)
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages,
including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or
secondary feature and producing less than 50 percent of the gross income. A
general restaurant may include live entertainment. Typical uses include
restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses, and similar establishments with
incidental alcoholic beverage service.
1374 Scrap and Salvage Services
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other
processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their
original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards or
paper salvage yards.
1375 Stables
Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the
premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises or their
nonpaying guests. Typical uses include boarding stables or public stables.
1380 Veterinary Services
Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat
hospitals, and veterinary hospitals.
1381 Visitor Habitation
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on a lessthan-
weekly basis with incidental food, drink and other sales and services
intended for the convenience of guests. The following are visitor habitation use
types:
Campground: Campground facilities providing camping or parking areas and
incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses
include recreational vehicle parks.
Hotel-Motel: Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board.
Typical uses include hotels, motels or transient boarding houses.
1390 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by
methods not agricultural, and storage and distribution of produces.
1391 Basic Industry
A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in
storage of, or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions.
1392 Custom Manufacturing
Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand
manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical
equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding 8
kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods
produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops or
custom jewelry manufacturers.
1393 Light Manufacturing
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared
materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and packaging of -Such products, and incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
1394 Resource Extraction
A use involving the on-site extraction of surface or sub-surface mineral products
or natural resources. Typical are quarries borrow pits, sand and gravel and gas
extraction, and mining operations.
1395 Stockyards
Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter,
market or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards or animal sales or auction
yards.
1396 Warehousing and Distribution
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage,
distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and
plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution use types:
Limited Warehousing and Distribution: Wholesaling, storage and warehousing
services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors,
storage -warehouses or moving and storage firms.
General Warehousing and Distribution: Open-air storage, distribution and
handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone
yards, grain elevators or open storage yards.
1400 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CIVIC USE TYPES
Civic Use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational,
cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly
vested with public or social importance.
1401 Administrative Services
Offices, administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with
the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary
vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices.
1402 Aviation Facilities
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for
operation, services fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft,
and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of
airport facilities and the provision of safety and security.
1403 Cemetery
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
1404 Club or Lodge
A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private or non-profit
association; primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include
private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
1405 College and University Facilities
An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of study
designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree as defined by the State of
Texas.
1410 Community Recreation
A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a particular residential
development, planned unit development, or limited residential neighborhood
including both indoor and outdoor facilities.
1411 Convalescent Services
A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular
medical attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency
medical services, and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug
addiction, mental disease or communicable disease.
1412 Cultural Services
A library, museum, art gallery, or similar non-profit use affording display,
preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in one or more of the
arts and sciences.
1413 Day Care Services (Limited
A facility, or use of a building or portion thereof, for daytime care of 6 or fewer
individuals. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers for
children or adults, and similar uses.
1414 Day Care Services (General)
A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or portion thereof, or daytime care of 7 or more
children or adults, and similar uses.
1415 Detention Facilities
A publicly operated use providing housing and care for individuals confined by
law.
1420 Guidance Services
A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, vocational, or similar
services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental
illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition, either on a
residential or daytime care basis.
1421 Hospital Services
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured
persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for
outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research,
administration, and services to patients, employees or visitors.
1422 Local Utility Services
Services which are necessary to support principal development and involve only
minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal
development.
1423 Maintenance and Service Facilities
A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing,
materials storage, and similar activities, including corporation yards, equipment
service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services
or contracting or industrial activities.
1424 Major Utility Facilities
Generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse
collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants, and
similar facilities of public agencies or public utility firms having potentially
significant impact upon surrounding uses.
1425 Military Installations
Military facilities of the federal or state governments.
1430 Park and Recreation Services
Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open
spaces.
1431 Postal Facilities
Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers,
operated by the United States Postal Service.
1432 Primary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school
level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public
schools of the State of Texas.
1433 Public Assembly
Publicly owned or operated facilities for major public assembly, recreation,
sports, amusement, or entertainment, including civic or community auditoriums,
sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and exhibition facilities.
1435 Railroad Facilities
Railroad yards, equipment 'servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
1440 Religious Assembly
A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious
worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding primary or
secondary educational facilities. A property tax exemption obtained from the
State of Texas shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.
1441 Residential Care Services
A use, other than a hospital or convalescent facility, providing care for
ambulatory persons in a residential environment, including overnight occupancy
or care for extended periods.
1442 Safety Services
Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police
and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
1443 Secondary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the junior and senior
high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in
the public schools of the State of Texas.
1444 Transportation Terminal
A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and
incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including
bus terminals, railroad stations, airport terminals, and public transit facilities.
1450 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES
Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal products
by agricultural methods.
1451 Horticulture
The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs,
or trees intended for ornamental, or landscaping purposes, but excluding retail
sales. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
1452 Crop Production
The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an
agricultural or commercial basis, including incidental packing and processing.
1453 Animal Production
The raising of animals or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy
products on an agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses include grazing,
ranching, dairy farming and poultry farming.
1454 Support Housing
The occupancy of any living accommodations by agricultural employees and their
families, without regard to duration, which occurs exclusively in association with
the performance of agricultural labor.
1500 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
1505 Zoning Districts
For the purposes of this section, the City is hereby divided into eight (8) districts
as follows:
? Agricultural A
? District R-l
? District MF-l District MF-2
? District C-l
? District C-2
? District I-I
? Planned Development PD
1510 Official Zoning Map
The location and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon
the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made part of this
section as though fully set forth herein. It shall be the duty of the zoning
administrator to maintain the official zoning map together with all notations,
references, and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto.
1515 District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as
shown on the district map accompanying and made a part of this section, the
following rules apply:
(a) The district boundaries are either street or alley centerlines unless otherwise shown,
and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this
section are bound approximately by street or alley centerlines, the street or alley
centerlines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
(b) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property
has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall
be construed to be the lot lines; and where the districts designated on the district map
accompanying and. made a part of this section, are bound approximately by lot lines, the
lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are
otherwise indicated on the map.
(c) In un-subdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and
made a part of this section shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the
map.
(d) In subdivided property, where a district boundary line divides property into two (2)
parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the
district boundary lines as shown.
(e) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City
Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall
be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the
vacation shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
(f) Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on
the official zoning map, the streets or alleyways on the ground shall control.
(g) If one of the above applies, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of
the district boundary.
1520 Zoning of Annexed Areas
Zoning Annexed Areas
All territory hereafter annexed to the City shall also be required to have a zoning hearing
as prescribed by state law and these regulations to determine the proper zoning classification.
SECTION II
Specific District Regulations
SECTION II
Specific District Regulations
1600 Agricultural District (A)
1605 General Purpose and Description
The Agricultural (A) District is the most restrictive zoning district. The principal
use of land in this district is for crop, horticultural production, animal
production and support housing. The Agricultural (A) District can be a
temporary zoning classification until permanent zoning is established by the
City Council in accordance with the procedures established by state law and
these regulations.
1610 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the Agricultural (A) District are as follows:
1. Residential Uses: Primary dwelling and support housing.
2. Civic Uses:
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services Religious Assembly
3. Agricultural Uses: Crop, horticultural production and Animal Production
4. Conditional Uses: None
1615 Site Development Regulations
Feature Regulation
Lot Area One Acre
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet
Residential Density Not more than one primary dwelling
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Minimum Height: 35 feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 35% of the lot area
Feature Regulation
Parking No maximum; See Section 3050
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1620 Single Family Residential Districts (R-l)
1625 General Purpose and Description
The R-l Residential Single Family Dwelling District is the most restrictive
residential district. The principal use of land in this district is for low density
single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced, orderly,
convenient, and attractive residential area. Low density residential areas shall be
protected from higher density residential development and from the
encroachment of incompatible uses. Internal stability, harmony, attractiveness,
order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open
space for dwellings and related facilities and by consideration of the proper
functional relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
district.
1630 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in an R-l Residential Single Family Dwelling District, are as
follows:
1. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
2. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
3. Agricultural Uses
Crop and Horticultural Production
4. Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to
approval as provided by Section 4070.
a. Residential (Subject to Site Plan Approval)
1. Duplex
2. Cluster
3. Mobile .or modular home on a single lot
b. Civic Uses
1. Club or Lodge
2. Cultural Services .
3. Day Care Services
4. Primary Education Facilities
5. Religious Assembly
6. Residential Care Services
7. Safety Services
8. Secondary Education Facilities
c. Agricultural Uses
1. Animal Production
2. Support Housing
1635 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the R-1 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Area None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density Not more than one primary dwelling unit
per lot
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 35 feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 35% of the lot area
Parking No maximum; See Section 3050
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1700 MF-l Multiple Family Residence District (Limited Density) MF-l
1705 Purposes
The MF-l Multiple Family Residence District (Limited Density) is intended to
accommodate multiple family use with a maximum density of 12 to 17 units per
acre, depending on unit size. The MF-l District is appropriate for residential
neighborhoods having a mixture of single family and multiple family uses, as a
buffer between single family neighborhoods and higher intensity uses, and in
selected areas where limited density multiple family use is desirable.
1710 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential
b. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Primary and Secondary Education Facilities Religious Assembly
1715 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070:
a. Civic Uses
Club or Lodge
Cultural Services
Day Care Services
Residential Care Services
b. Residential Uses
Mobile or Modular Home on a single Lot
1720 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the MF-l District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Area None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density Minimum site area per dwelling unit:
Dwelling Unit Minimum Required
Size Site Area Per Unit
Efficiency 2,500 Square Feet
1 Bedroom 3,000 Square Feet
2 or more
bedrooms 3,500 Square Feet
Feature Regulation
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 35 feet
Parking Must meet off-street development
standards, Section 3050.
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 45% of the lot area
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 60% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space Minimum usable open space per
dwelling unit: 300 Square Feet.
1750 MF-2 Multiple Family Residence District
1755 Purposes
The MF-2 Multiple Family Residence District is intended to accommodate
multiple family use with a maximum density of 18 to 27 units per acre, depending
on unit size. The MF-2 District is usually located adjacent to a major street and
serves as a buffer or transition between higher intensity uses and low density
residential.
1760 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential
b. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
Primary and Secondary Education
1765 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070.
a. Civic Uses
Club or Lodge
Cultural Services
Guidance Services
Residential Care Services
b. Residential Uses
1. Residential uses of higher density than permitted by this ordinance.
Such density also is subject to site plan approval.
2. Mobile home parks subject to site plan approval and the following
mobile home park development regulations which shall be used
for site plan approval guidelines.
1770 Site Development Regulations
1771 General Residential Uses
Each site in the MF-2 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size None
Lot Width None
Residential Density Dwelling Unit Minimum Required
Size Site Area Per Unit
Efficiency 1,600 Square Feet
1 Bedroom 2,000 Square Feet
2 or more
bedrooms 2,400 Square Feet
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 50 feet, but limited to
35 feet on any portion of a site within
100 feet of property classified as R-I or
MF-l
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 50% of the lot area
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 70% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space Minimum usable open space per
dwelling unit: 200 Square Feet.
Parking Must meet off-street development
standards, Section 3050.
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1772 Development Regulations for Mobilehome Parks
Mobilehome parks shall be subject to the following site development regulations
unless unique and unusual design restraints are shown. Unique shall be defined
as not common to other typical properties in the community.
a. The minimum number of mobilehome spaces contained in any
mobilehome park shall be 10 spaces, and the minimum site area shall
be 45,000 square feet.
b. The minimum mobilehome park site area per dwelling unit shall be
4,500 square feet.
c. Each mobilehome park shall have 3 minimum street yard of 25 feet, and a
minimum interior yard of 15 feet. No mobilehome space shall be
permitted in any street yard.
d. The mobilehome park shall have direct access to a street having a
dedicated and accepted right of way of not less than 60 feet.
e. Interior vehicular circulation shall be provided by private internal streets
paved to a width of not less than 30 feet. Internal streets shall be
continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets,
or shall be provided with a paved cul-de-sac not to exceed 400 feet in
length.
f. Each mobilehome space shall contain a minimum area of 4,500 square
feet, adjacent to an internal street designed to permit movement of
mobilehomes to .and from each space.
g. Each mobilehome space shall contain a minimum of 2.1 off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit, at least one of which shall be provided on each
mobilehome space. The balance of the required parking may be, located
in common parking area distributed throughout the mobilehome park in a
manner that: provides reasonable and convenient access to all
mobilehome spaces.
h. Each mobilehome and any attached accessory structures shall be
separated from every other mobilehome, building, or structure by at least
10 feet.
i. The minimum distance between a mobilehome stand and the pavement
of an internal street, common parking area, or other common area shall
be 10 feet.
j. A solid wall or fence at least six feet high shall be erected and thereafter
properly maintained along all boundaries of the Mobilehome Park; except,
(1) Where the solid wall or fence would impede drainage;
(2) Where the boundary of the Mobilehome Park abuts another
mobilehome development.
k. The height of the mobilehome chassis above the ground elevation,
measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet at the
low end.
l. Required street yards shall he landscaped, excluding necessary
driveways and walkways providing access to the Mobilehome Park.
m. Each mobilehome park shall provide for reasonable and safe pedestrian
access to and among each mobilehome space and all common facilities.
Walks not designed in common with internal streets or parking areas shall
have a minimum paved width of two feet.
n. Each mobilehome park shall have a minimum of 300 square feet of
usable open space per dwelling unit, with at least 150 square feet being
located on each mobilehome space. The balance of the required usable
open space may be located in common open space areas distributed
throughout the Mobilehome Park in a manner that provides reasonable
and convenient access to all mobilehome spaces.
o. Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
p. Each mobilehome park shall be subject to site plan review.
1800 LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-l)
1805 General Purpose and Description
The Limited Commercial District is intended for uses completely enclosed in a building,
of a nature of primarily retail sale of convenience goods or personal services primarily for
persons residing in adjacent residential areas. It also includes selected retail, office and
services uses that are similar in land use intensity and physical impact to the
neighborhood retail sales and service uses permitted in this district. Because the retail
and personal service uses permitted may be an integral part of the neighborhood,
closely associated with the residential, religious, recreational and educational uses in the
neighborhood, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, landscaping, and
off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. The Limited
Commercial District (C-l) is usually located on the periphery of the residential
neighborhood on a major street and in close proximity to the intersection of two major
streets.
1810 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Commercial Uses
Administrative and Business Offices
Consumer Repair Services
Restaurant (Convenience)
Food Sales
General Retail Sales
Personal Services
Pet Services
b. Civic Uses
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Administrative Services
Religious Assembly
Educational Services
All Governmental Cultural and other similar Civic Services
c. Residential
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
1815 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by Section
4070.
a. Residential Uses
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential (standards are per MF-2 District)
Group Residential
b. Commercial Uses
Automotive Washing
Service Station
Liquor Sales
c. Civic Uses
Clubs; Lodges Other
d. Other
Any activity proposed to be conducted outside of main buildings.
1820 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the C-l District shall be subject to the following site development regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Size None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 30 feet
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Ratio: .50 to 1
Height Maximum Height: 35 Feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Front yard to remain clear. No parking
space or sign erected. Front yard limited
to vehicle maneuvering space,
landscaping that does not obstruct view
and other similar uses.
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement
Rear Yard No requirement, unless backing to a
residential district which shall then be 20
feet.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 50% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 30% of the lot
area.
Parking Must meet minimum design standards.
Section 3050
Screening A six foot solid masonry fence of equal
characteristics of main building shall be
constructed along property line common
to a residential district.
Enclosed Building All activities permitted in this district
must be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, unless specifically
permitted otherwise by Condition Use
Permit
Signs All signs must be permanently attached
to building face no larger than 10% of
Building Face.
1850 HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - C-2
1855 General Purpose and Description
The Heavy Commercial District is designed for intensive commercial uses and
those selected industrial uses which are compatible with commercial
development. The permitted industrial uses are either free of objectionable
influences in their operation's and appearance or can eliminate or control
objectionable characteristics by landscaping, screening, and other abatement
devices. Because most of the uses in the
C-2 District often requires direct access to major streets, rail or air facilities, this
district should be located near major transportation routes. The C-2 Commercial
District should be used as a buffer or transition between industrial development
and Limited Commercial or Multi-Family Residential development.
1860 Permitted Uses (Amended by City Ordinance 417 on 9-13-1999)
The following use types are permitted:
a. Commercial Uses
Administrative and Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Sales
Automotive Repair Services (major and minor)
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Campground
Commercial Off-Street Parking
Communications Services
Construction Sales and Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Hotel - Motel
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Kennels
Laundry Services
Liquor Sales
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Pet Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant
Service Station
Vehicle Storage
b. Industrial Uses
Limited warehousing and distribution (not including garden storage and similar
activities that emit dust).
c. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Ambulance Services
Club or Lodge
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Governmental
Religious and other public assembly
Educational Service
d. Agricultural Uses
Horticulture
Crop Production
e. Single Family Residential Dwelling Units
1865 Conditional Uses (Amended by City Ordinance 417 on 9-13-1999)
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070.
a. Commercial Uses
Cocktail Lounge
Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment
Scrap and Salvage Services
This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Any type use requiring outdoor vehicle storage of more than 7
days, such as for auto repair services, etc. This does not include outdoor
sales of new vehicles or used vehicles as long as the used vehicles are in
operative condition with current license and inspection certificates.
2. Any type of outdoor sales or storage (except used cars as defined
above) of any used equipment, inoperative vehicles, used goods, scrap
parts or any other similar merchandise, material or used goods.
3. Any type of scrap or salvage services.
4. Veterinary Services
b. Industrial Uses
Light Manufacturing
c. Civic Uses
Detention Facilities
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
d. Residential
Mobile Homes (including HUD-Code Manufactured Homes).
1870 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the C-2 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size No Minimum lot area
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density As approved by Conditional Use Permit
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 2.0 to 1.
Height Maximum Height: 60 feet, but limited to
35 feet on any portion of a site within
100 feet of property classified as
residential
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet.
Front yard to remain clear. No vehicle
parking space or sign erected. Front
yard limited to vehicle maneuver space,
landscaping that does not obstruct view
and other similar activities.
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement.
Rear Yard No requirement, except 20 feet on
any portion of a site within 100 feet of
a property classified residential.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 75% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 90% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space No Requirement
Screening No requirement, except for property
abutting residential district and there is
existing residential, construction within
500 feet then a solid 6 foot masonry
fence of equal characteristics of main
'building shall be constructed down the
common property line (except in
required front yard.)
Parking Must meet minimum standards, Section 3050.
Signs No restriction except it cannot obstruct
traffic views on any street or from any
curb cut.
1900 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS - I-1
1905 General Purpose and Description
The Industrial District is intended to provide-for industrial uses and other uses not
otherwise provided for in the other districts. The intensity of uses permitted in this district
makes it necessary to separate it from all residential districts and most commercial
districts wherever possible.
1910 Permitted Uses
1. Commercial Uses
Administrative and' Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Repair Services (major and minor)
Automotive Sales
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Communications Services
Commercial Off-Street Parking
Construction Sales and Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
General Retail Sales
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Kennels
Laundry Services
Liquor Sales
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant (Convenience or General)
Vehicle Storage
Veterinary Services
2. Industrial Uses
Basic Industry
Manufacturing
Warehousing and Distribution
3. Civic Uses
All civic type uses.
4. Agricultural Uses
Crop Product ion
Horticulture
1915 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by Section
4070.
A. Commercial Uses
Cocktail Lounges
Stockyards
Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment
Scrap and Salvage Services
In particular the following but not limited to the following:
1. Any type use requiring outdoor vehicle storage of more than 7 days,
such as for auto repair services, etc. This does not include outdoor
sales of new vehicles or used vehicles as long as the used vehicles are
in operative condition with current license and inspection certificates.
2. Any type of outdoor sales or storage (except used cars as defined
above) of any used equipment, inoperative vehicles, used goods, scrap
parts or any other similar merchandise, material or used goods.
3. Any type of scrap or salvage services
B. Industrial Uses
Resource Extraction
C. Residential
All Residential uses.
1920 Site Development
Regulations
Each site in the 1-1 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size No Minimum lot area
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 30 feet
Residential Density As per conditional use permit
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 1.0 to 1
Height Maximum Height: 75 feet, but limited to 35 feet on
any portion of a site within 100 feet of
property classified as R-l, MF-l, or MF-2.
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement
Rear Yard No requirement, except 20 feet if
backing to a residential district.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 75% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 90% of the lot
area.
Screening No requirement. except for property
abutting residential district and there
existing residential construction within
500 feet then a solid 6 foot masonry
fence of equal characteristics of main
building shall be constructed down the
common property line (except in
required front yard).
Parking Must meet minimum development
standards, Section 3050
Signs No requirement except it cannot
obstruct traffic view on any street or
from any curb cut.
2000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT - PD
2005 General Purpose and Description
The Planned Development District (PD) is designed to provide flexibility in
development planning and the opportunity for the application of planning
concepts not available in "Euclidian" zoning districts. It shall, where applicable,
supplement other classifications and is an optional zoning district.
2010 Authority and Limitations to Development Standards
The Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, after public hearing and proper
notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the planning and
zoning commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned
development districts:
l. Shopping center on tracts of three (3) acres or more.
2. Housing development on tracts of three (3) acres or more.
3. Industrial parks or districts on tracts of ten (10) acres or more.
4. Medical center and hospital.
5. Civic center and community center.
6. Office center.
7. Recreation center.
8. A combination of any of the developments listed in1 through 7.
9. Industrial uses which do not clearly comply with the standards prescribed
for the Industrial District.
10. Transition districts as an extension of an existing district whereby the
provision of off-street parking, screening walls, open space and planting
would create a protective transition between a lesser and more restrictive
district.
2015
In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this section,
the City Council shall require a comprehensive site plan of the development.
Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the ordinance prior to the
issuance of any building permit in a planned development district. Such required
plan and ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the
property, public or private streets or drives, with adequate right-of-way,
sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking spaces, height of building, maximum lot
coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls, or fences and other
development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a
reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property.
2020 Every planned development district approved under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be considered as an amendment to the ordinance as applicable
to the property involved. In approving the planned development district, the
Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development and such
conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the use of .the land or any structure which is part of the planned development
district~ and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to
the approval of zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions
precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy.
2025 All planned development districts approved in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance or by subsequent amendment thereto shall be referenced on the
zoning district map.
SECTION III
Supplemental Provisions and Regulations
SECTION III
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
3000 GENERAL COMPLIANCE
3005 Conformity to Zoning District Required
No building shall be erected and no existing buildings shall be moved, structurally
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall. any land, building or premises be used,
or designated for use for any purpose or in any manner other than provided for
hereinafter in the district in which the building, land or premises is located;
provided, however, that necessary structural repairs may be made where health
and safety are endangered.
3010 Accessory Buildings and Uses
(a) Customary accessory uses and buildings are authorized where a lot is
utilized for a permitted principal use except where prohibited specifically
or by necessary implication.
(b) Customary home occupations, together with such other activities
commonly conducted in living quarters shall be authorized as an
accessory use where the principal use is residential.
(c) Temporary buildings are authorized as an accessory use where the
permitted principal use is under construction.
(d) Real estate offices are authorized accessory uses where a residential
area is under development, provided that the said office is directly and
exclusively related to initial sales of dwelling units within the respective
residential subdivision or cluster housing development or an
immediately adjacent subdivision. Under those conditions the Building
Official shall ensure that each such accessory use real estate office is
issued a provisional certificate of occupancy only. The said provisional
certificate of occupancy shall expire in one (1) year unless it is
renewed by the respective real estate agency upon which the burden
shall lie to demonstrate that the conditions of approval still exist.
(e) Day nurseries are authorized accessory uses where the principal use is a
church or other place of worship.
3015 Conformity to Land Use Regulations
No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be structurally
altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, unless the same shall conform to
the setback, building site area, building location and land use regulations
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is
located.
3020 Conformity to Height Limits
(a) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which such building is located except as set forth below.
(b) The height limits prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio
towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers,
stage towers, scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and
spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, necessary public or
private utilities, conveyors, flag poles, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances.
(c) Public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools,
where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet (60')
and churches and other places of worship may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five (75') when each of the required yards is increased
by one foot (1') for each two feet (2') of additional building height above
the height limits for the district in which the building is located.
3025 Conformity to Parking and Loading Regulations
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered unless it shall conform to the area and off street parking and loading
regulations of the district in which such building is located.
3030 Conformity to Yard and Setback Requirements
(a) No yard or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with provisions of this section shall be considered
as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
(b) Where fifty-one percent (511.) or more of the frontage within a block is
occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of
less depth than required by this section, the remainder of that block may
be developed by observing the established front yard line, if approval
thereof is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
(c) On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision between a height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of the intersection streets in the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street
lines thirty-five feet (35') from the point of the intersection.
(d) Open or unenclosed terraces; porches, or roof eaves or extensions may
project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet
(4'); provided, however, no supporting structure for such projections may
be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a
gasoline filling station may extend into the required front yard, provided
such extension shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line.
(e) A roof overhang, open fire escape, or outside stairway may project not
more than three feet (3') into a required side yard.
3050 OFF-STREET PARKING AND CURB CUT STANDARDS
3051 Off-Street Parking
Except as hereinafter provided, no buildings or structure or part thereof shall
be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district in which it
is located, unless there shall be provided on the lot or tract off-street parking
in the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the designated
districts. An established use lawfully existing at the effective date of the
ordinance need not provide vehicle parking as hereinafter set forth, and no
existing vehicle parking in connection with said use at the effective date of this
ordinance may be reduced below the minimum number of spaces as
hereinafter required.
Maneuvering Area - Adequate on site maneuver area required; as .a minimum,
the car must be totally upon private property before any turning motion is
required to enter into the parking space stall.
(a) The minimum off-street parking spaces for residential use shall be as
follows:
1. One and two-family dwellings: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling
unit.
2. Multi-family dwellings:
(a) One space for each bedroom unit in dormitories, rooming
houses, or other group housing structure.
(b) One and one-fourth (1.25) spaces for each efficiency unit.
(c) One and one-half (1.50) spaces for each one-bedroom unit.
(d) One and three-fourths (1.75) spaces for each two-bedroom
unit.
(e) Two (2) spaces for each three-Bedroom or larger units.
3. PD, Planned Development District: Parking for dwelling units shall
be established on plan.
(b) Parking space schedule non-residential uses applicable to all districts
except original downtown. (See Section (c) following.)
1. Bank, savings and loan or similar financial establishment: One (1)
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of area.
2. Bowling Alley: Six (6) spaces for each lane.
3. Clinics or Doctors' Offices: One space for each two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces).
4. Commercial Outdoor Amusement: Twenty (20) spaces, plus one
space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area over
one thousand (1,000) square fee t.
5. Convalescent Home or Home for Aged: One space for each six
(6) rooms or beds.
6. Gasoline Service Station: Minimum if six (6) spaces.
7. Golf Course: Minimum of thirty (30) spaces.
8. High School, College or University: One space for each
classroom, laboratory or instruction area, plus one space for each
four (4) students accommodated at the institution during the
periods of heaviest attendance.
9. Hospitals. Acute Care: One space for every two (2) beds.
10. Hospital Chronic Care: One space for each six (6) beds, plus one
space for each employee.
11. Hotel or Motel: One space for each room, unit or guest
accommodation.
12. Institutions of a Philanthropic Nature; Ten (10) spaces, plus one
space for each employee.
13. Library or Museum: Ten (10) spaces, plus one space for each
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
14. Manufacturing, Processing or Repairing: One (1) space for each
two (2) employees, or one space for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
15. Offices, General: One Space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area (minimum five (5) spaces).
16. Places of public assembly not listed: One space for each three (3)
seats provided.
17. Recreational, private or commercial area or building (other than
listed): One space for every three (3) persons to be normally
accommodated in the establishment.
18. Restaurant, Cafeteria or Clubs with License to sell alcoholic
beverages: One space for every (3) three seats under maximum
seating arrangements or one space for everyone hundred (100)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
19. Retail or Personal Service: One (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces).
20. Schools, Elementary or Junior High: One space for each
classroom, plus one space for each four (4) seats in any
auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly.
21. Storage or Warehousing: One (1) space for each two (2)
employees, or one space for each one thousand (1,000) square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
22. Theaters, Meeting Rooms and Place of Public Assembly: One (1)
space for every three (3) seats in the facility.
23. Day Nursery or Kindergarten: One space for each employee, and
one space for each ten (10) children. A circular drive that will
adequately serve the same traffic load, approved by the Traffic
Safety Director may be substituted for the required public parking.
(c) Original Downtown - Off-street parking is not required in the original
downtown area. The "original downtown area" is defined as an area
bordered by 7th Street on the South; 10th Street on the North; Avenue E
on the West, and the West Service Road of 1-27 on the East.
3052 Curb Cuts
Number - One curb cut per lot but no more than two curb cuts per 200 feet of lot
frontage.
Spacing - Curb cut no closer than 50 feet apart to the next adjacent curb cut or
street corner measured from the inside curb return.
Width - 12 feet minimum one way; 30 feet maximum two way.
Radius - 10 feet minimum radius.
3075 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
3076 Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing on the effective date of
this section may be continued, although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, the right to continue such
nonconforming use shall be subject to the following regulations:
(a) Normal repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure; provided that no structural alterations to enlarge the
nonconforming use shall be made except those required by law or
ordinance or those necessary for installing or enclosing required sanitary
facilities, such as toilets and bathrooms.
(b) If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed to an
extent of less than sixty percent (60%) of its fair market value by fire,
explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, then restoration or new
construction shall be permitted. If destruction is greater than sixty percent
(60%) of its fair market value, such building or structure and its use, if
repaired or replaced, shall conform to all regulations of the district in
which it is located, and it shall be treated as a new building.
(c) A vacant, nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before
the date of enactment of this section may be occupied by a use for which
the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a
period of ninety (90) days after the effective date of this section. The use
of a nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before the
date of enactment of this section which becomes vacant after the
effective date of this section, may be reoccupied by the use for which the
building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a
period of ninety (90) days after the building or structure becomes vacant.
All such buildings, after ninety (90) days of vacancy, shall be converted to
a conforming use.
3078 Other Conditions for Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be continued as
hereinafter provided:
(a) The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed to
a use which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which
it is situated.
(b) If a nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is voluntarily
discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, any future use of such land
or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district
in which such land or portion thereof is located.
.
3079 Abandonment
The nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land which has been
abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when:
(a) The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
(b) The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use
have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by
similar equipment within ninety (90) days; or
(c) A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use.
3080 Change in District Boundaries
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one (1) district to another district, or when the boundaries of
districts are changed as the result of annexation of new territory, or changed in
the regulations or restrictions of this section, the foregoing provisions relating to
nonconforming uses shall also apply to any uses existing therein which may
become nonconforming.
3081 Mobile Home Use (Amended by City Ordinance 333 on 5-8-1989)
A mobilehome, travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor home or camping trailer shall
not be used as an office or business building in any zoning district, except as an
office on the site in connection with construction with construction activities or in
connection with a bona fide retail mobilehome, travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor
home or camping trailer sales lot or park.
SECTION IV
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION IV
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
4000 RESERVED
4001 RESERVED
4002 RESERVED
4003 RESERVED
4004 RESERVED
4005 RESERVED
4006 RESERVED
4010 Board of Adjustment (Amended by City Ordinance 397 on 9-8-1997)
The City Council shall also serve as the Zoning Board of Adjustment (The
Board). The Board is hereby vested with power and authority in appropriate
cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make such
exceptions to the terms of this ordinance, in harmony with the general purpose
and intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein contained for
the purpose of rendering full justice and equity to the general public.
The Board of Adjustment may adopt rules to govern the proceedings, provided,
however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this ordinance. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman who may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of the
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon such question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed and shall be public record.
4011 Appeals
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by the person affected by any
decision of any administrative office with respect to this ordinance. Appeals shall
be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by the
administrative office by filing notice of appeal specifying the grounds.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken, certified to the Board after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record or application on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of an
appeal, give the public notice as well as due notice to the parties, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by attorney or by agent.
4012 Jurisdiction and General Powers
The Board of Adjustment is hereby authorized to act in the following and limited to the
following areas:
(a) Require the discontinuance of non-conforming uses under any plan
whereby the full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite
period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the
neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the
regulations of this ordinance. It is the declared purpose of this ordinance
that non-conforming uses be eliminated and be required to conform to the
regulations prescribed in the preceding articles of this ordinance, having
due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered
in the light of the public welfare and the conservation and preservation of
property.
The Board of Adjustment shall from time to time on it’s' motion or upon
cause presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence,
continuation, or maintenance of any non-conforming use within the City. It
is the declared purpose of this ordinance that nonconforming uses be
eliminated and be required to conform to the regulations prescribed in the
preceding articles of this ordinance.
(b) To hear and decide is an error in any determination made the enforcement
of find the following appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or by an administrative official in this Chapter. The
Board must find the following in order to grant an appeal:
1. That there is a reasonable difference of interpretation as to the
specific intent of the zoning regulations or zoning map.
2. That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to
one property inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly
situated.
3. The decision of the Board must be such as will be in the best
interest of the community and consistent with the spirit and interest
of the City's zoning laws.
(c) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Chapter. The
term "special exception" shall mean a deviation from the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance, specifically enumerated herein, which shall be
granted only in the following instances, and then only when the Board finds
that such special exception will not adversely affect the value and use of
adjacent or neighboring property or be contrary to the best public interest:
1. To reconstruct, extend or enlarge a building occupied by a
nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building,
provided that the reconstruction, extension, or enlargement does not
prevent the return of the property to a conforming use.
2. To deviate yard requirements in the following circumstances:
a. An exception from the front yard requirements where the
actual front yard setback of an abutting lot does not meet the
front yard exception where the actual rear yard setback of any
four (4) or more lots in the same block do not meet the rear
yard requirements of these regulations.
b. A yard exception on corner lots.
c. An exception where the existing front yard setbacks of the
various lots in the same block are not uniform, so that anyone
of the existing front yard setbacks shall, for a building hereafter
constructed pr extended, be the required minimum front yard
depth.
3. To waive or reduce off-street parking and loading requirements
when the Board finds the same are unnecessary for the proposed
use of the building or structure for which the special exception
request applies.
(d) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of
this Chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of said laws will
result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall
be observed and substantial justice done. The term "variance" shall mean a
deviation from the literal provisions of .the Zoning Ordinance which is
granted by the Board when strict conformity to the Zoning Ordinance would
cause an unnecessary hardship because of circumstances unique to the
property on which the variance is granted. Except as otherwise prohibited in
this Section, the Board is empowered to authorize a variance from a
requirement of the Zoning Ordinance when the Board finds that all of the
following conditions have been met:
1. That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest; and
2. That literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topography or other extraordinary or exceptional physical situation
or physical condition unique' to the specific piece of property in
question which means that it cannot be common to other properties
in the area.
4050 Article Changes and Amendments
4051 Official Zoning Map
The official zoning map of the City of Abernathy shall be kept in the office of the City
Secretary.
4052 Changes and Amendments
The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by
ordinance the boundaries of the district, or the regulations herein established.
4053 RESERVED
4054 Public Hearing
A public hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting any
proposed amendment, supplement, or change. Notice of such hearing shall be
given by publication one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City, stating the
time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15)
days from date of publication.
4055 Protest
If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been
filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending
two hundred (200) feet or if those directly opposite thereto extending two
hundred (200) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment
shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the
governing body, as per Article 1011e, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes.
4060 Procedure for Change of Zoning Request Application
4061 Application
A zoning change request shall be completed in duplicate, which includes a
description of the subject property. The applicant shall state the specific zoning
classification desired and shall not list alternatives. Three (3) copies of a
planimetric map showing the subject property drawn to scale shall accompany
the application showing: boundary dimensions, adjacent property within two
hundred (200) feet including owners of record and addresses as shown on the
tax rolls, and all existing buildings on the subject property.
4062 Council Public Hearing
The zoning change request is scheduled for a public hearing before the Council
at their next regular meeting following an eighteen (18) day administrative period.
Fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, a notice of public hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the City and all property owners within two
hundred (200) feet of the subject property shall be notified.
4063 RESERVED
4064 Council Action
Action by the City Council is final and the same request may not be brought
before the Council again for one (1) year unless the Council shall determine that
extenuating circumstances exist. A notation by the Council on its minutes on the
prior denial of an application shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of
extenuating circumstances.
4065 Preparation of Ordinance
Contingent upon approval of the request by the Council, the applicant shall
provide a description of subject property suitable for the preparation of an
ordinance within ninety (90) days of Council approval. Field notes of a survey of
the property are considered suitable descriptions.
When correct field notes are not provided to the City within ninety (90) days,
previous action by the Council is null and void.
4070 CONDITIONAL USES
4071 Title and Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to provide for review and discretionary approval
of uses typically having unusual site development features or unique operating
characteristics requiring special consideration so that they may be located,
designed, and operated compatibly with uses on surrounding properties and
within the City at large. The Conditional Use Procedure process is intended to
encourage broad public review and evaluation of site development features and
operating characteristics, and to ensure adequate mitigation of potentially
unfavorable impacts.
4072. Concurrent Applications
Application for a Conditional Use Permit and for Rezoning for the same property
may be made concurrently, subject to the fees applicable to both a Conditional
Use Permit and a Rezoning.
4073 Application and Fee
Application for a conditional Use Permit shall be filed with the Building Official.
The application shall include the following:
a. Name and address of the owner and applicant.
b. Address and legal description of the property.
c. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the
applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property.
d. The property address and the name and mailing address of the owner of
each lot within 200 feet of the subject property and a map with parcels
keyed to the ownership and address data.
e. A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use including any data pertinent to the findings required for
approval of the application. For uses involving public assembly or
industrial processing or uses potentially generating high volumes of
vehicular traffic, the zoning administrator may require specific information
relative to the anticipated peak loads and peak use periods relative to
industrial processes and the ability of the use to meet performance
standards, or substantiating the adequacy of proposed parking, loading
and circulation facilities.
f. Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement plans
and such additional maps and drawings all sufficiently dimensioned as
required to illustrate the following:
1. The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
2. The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks.
3. The location, height, bulk, general appearance and intended use
of existing and proposed buildings on the site, and the
approximate location of existing buildings on abutting sites within
50 feet.
4. The location of existing and proposed site improvements including
parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access,
landscaped areas, utility or service areas, fencing and screening,
signs and lighting.
5. The location of watercourses and drainage features.
6. The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and
loading spaces, and a calculation of applicable minimum
requirements.
7. The relationship of the site and the proposed use to surrounding
uses, including pedestrian and vehicular circulation, current use of
nearby parcels, and any proposed off-site improvements to be
made
g. Any applicable fee established by the City Council.
4074 Public Hearing, Notice and Procedure
The Public Hearing and Notice and Procedure shall be the same as for a change
in zoning.
4075 Conditions of Approval (Amended by City Ordinance 397 on 6-14-1999)
a. The City Council may establish conditions of approval. Conditions may
include, but shall not be limited to requirements for special yards, open
spaces: buffers, fences, walls, and screening; requirements for installation
and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures;
requirements for street improvements and dedications, regulation of
vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; regulation of signs;
regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; requirements for
maintenance of landscaping and other improvements; establishment of
development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; and
such other conditions as the Commission may deem necessary to insure
compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety,
and welfare.
b. The applicant for a Conditional Use Permit for the placement of a mobile
home or I-IUD-Code manufactured home must provide, upon application
for the permit, a minimum of four (4) photographs of the home to be
placed in the City. Such photographs must include a picture of each side
of the home. In addition, within thirty (30) days after the home has been
placed on the property, the applicant must meet the following conditions
to specifications acceptable to the City: (1) build a front porch of not less
than 4' x 6', with stable railing attached; (2) build a rear porch at least 4' x
4', with stable railing attached; (3) provide either a gravel, asphalt or
concrete off street drive-way or parking area; and (4) provide a skirt for
the mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured unit.
4076 Lapse of a Conditional Use Permit. (Amended by City Ordinance 333 on
5/8/1989 and City Ordinance 425 on 8/10/2000)
Unless a longer or shorter time shall be specifically established as a condition of
approval, a Conditional Use Permit shall lapse and shall become void 120 days
following the date on which such permit became effective, unless prior to
expiration a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and
diligently pursued toward completion, or a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the use, or the site is occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is
required.
4077 Suspension and Revocation
a. Upon violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance, or, if granted
subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, a Conditional
Use Permit shall be suspended upon notification to the owner of a use or
property subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
b. The City Council shall hold a Public Hearing within forty (40) days of such
notification and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, or
condition is .being complied with, may revoke the Conditional Use Permit
or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
regulation, general provision, or condition.
c. The decision of the Council to revoke a Conditional Use Permit shall be
effective immediately
5000 ENFORCEMENT
5005 General Requirements
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Building Official. All
applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat submitted in
duplicate (2 copies) drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or
tract of land to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the
property, all means of ingress and egress, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of such
application and plat shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector. Prior to
the issuance of any building permit, the Building Inspector shall determine-that
the application and improvements to be constructed comply with the
requirements and provisions of this ordinance.
5010 Certificate of Occupancy
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied, or
changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the
Building Inspector stating that the building or proposed use of a building or
premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these regulations.
5015 Application
Certificates of Occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for
building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the completion or
alterations of such building in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the Building Inspection Office
and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having an interest in the
building.
5020 Penalty of Violation
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance or fail to comply with any of the requirements, or who shall build or
alter any building or use in violation of any detail or plan submitted and approved
hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not
more than two hundred (200) dollars and each day shall constitute a separate
offense. The owner of any building or premises where any thing in violation of
this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, persons or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may
have assisted in the commission of such violations, shall be guilty of a separate
offense and upon conviction, shall be fined as herein provided.
6000 84 VALIDITY, REPEAL, ENACTMENT
6005 Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any part or provision thereof
other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
6010 Repeal
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed
6015 (Reserved)
6020 (Reserved)
DULY PASSED by the City Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, on November 18,
1985
Ordinance 557 Page 1
CITY ORDINANCE NO. 557
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ABERNATHY AMENDING
ORDINANCE 310 (ZONING CODE) OF THE CITY OF
ABERNATHY AND REPEALING ALL LAWS OR ORDINANCES
OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH;
ESTABLISHING STANDARD RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR
THE INSTALLATION, USE, PLACEMENT, AND LOCATION OF
MOBILE HOMES, HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES,
MODULAR HOMES, AND PROVIDING FOR MANUFACTURED
HOME PARKS, PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS;
PROVIDING FOR A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND
PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, the City of Abernathy, Texas, has authority to regulate, limit, prohibit, and direct
the installation, placement, and planning of housing within the municipality through zoning,
land use, and its powers to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
WHEREAS, the City of Abernathy, Texas, has adopted various ordinances causing confusion
and conflicts regulating mobile homes, HUD-Code manufactured homes and modular homes;
and
WHEREAS, portions of the City’s current zoning ordinances: Ordinance No. 310, Ordinance
No. 333, Ordinance 393, Ordinance 412, Ordinance 417, and Ordinance 425; and are found to be
disorganized and confusing and the City desires to amend certain provisions and re-codify and
establish a more uniform Code in order to update its Ordinances with the State of Texas
Manufactured Housing Standards Act (MHSA) as codified in the Texas Occupations Code; and
WHEREAS, the City Council for the City of Abernathy desires to amend and clarify its rules,
procedures, and guidelines related to Mobile Homes, HUD-Code Manufactured Homes, and
Modular Homes as they are defined under the MHSA; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, finds that it is in the best interest
of the public safety, health and general welfare, as well as to proper planning and management of
zoning and land use, to amend its ordinances regulating Mobile Homes, HUD-Code
Manufactured Homes, and Modular Homes as they are defined under the MHSA;
WHEREAS, a public hearing on this matter was held by the City Council as required by law;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF ABERNATHY,
TEXAS:
Ordinance 557 Page 2
SECTION 1 - OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS.
THAT Ordinance 310 (Zoning Code) is amended as stated herein and only those parts of said
Ordinance or other ordinances that conflict herein are hereby replaced and repealed and declared
no further in force or effect.
SECTION 2 - CONTROLLING ORDINANCE
This ordinance shall control over any conflicting terms of Zoning Ordinance 310 and any other
ordinances amending ordinances thereunder, except as may be otherwise stated herein.
SECTION 3 - DEFINITIONS
a. “BUILDING OFFICIAL” – The City Manager or the person or department to whom
the city manager may delegate the BUILDING OFFICIAL duties including the physical
inspection of property to ensure each major component meets zoning and building codes;
foundation, plumbing, electrical wiring, roofing, and fire egress.
b. “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY” – a document issued by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL that authorizes a building or structure to be used or occupied by the proposed
use upon being inspected and found to be in compliance with the requirements of all City
ordinances.
c. “MOBILE HOME” - a structure constructed before June 15, 1976, according to the
rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, built on a
permanent chassis, designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities, transportable in one
or more sections, and in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40
body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet. Tex. Occ. Code §
1201.003 (20).
d. “HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME” - a structure constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities,
transportable in one or more sections, and in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet
in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square
feet. Tex. Occ. Code § 1201.003 (12). (A HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME
displays a red certification label on the exterior of each section. This label serves as the
manufacturer’s certification that the section is built in accordance with Federal Housing
and Urban Development standards.)
e. “MANUFACTURED HOME” or “MANUFACTURED HOUSING” – is a HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME or a MOBILE HOME. Tex. Occ. Code § 1201.003
(18).
Ordinance 557 Page 3
f. “MODULAR HOME” – a structure designed for the occupancy of one or more families,
that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular
components built at a location other than the permanent site; and designed to be used as a
permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is
transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation
system. Tex. Occ. Code § 1202.002. (A MODULAR HOME will have a blue decal issued
by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation signifying that the home has been
built to comply with the International Residential Code.)
g. “HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK” - A unified development of ten or
more MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES for rent or lease, and including common
areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry and utility services, storage, and
similar services for the convenience of residents of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK.
h. “MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE” - An area within a HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK which is designed for and designated as the location
for a single MANUFACTURED HOME and the exclusive use of its occupants.
i. “MANUFACTURED HOME STAND” - That portion of a MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACE upon which the MANUFACTURED HOME is placed.
j. “PIT SET FOUNDATION” A foundation system designed to give a low profile
appearance resembling a "site" built home on slab foundation which incorporates a full
perimeter support wall constructed of poured concrete or concrete block resting on an
excavated footing which has been installed so that it forms a barrier to the entry of water
underneath the home and acts as a short retaining wall.
k. “STREET LINE” - the line of the tract or lot which adjoins a street or roadway upon
which there is situated either street numbered houses or businesses or a combination of
both. Where curbing is present, the farthest edge of the curbing from the center of the
street shall be considered the STREET LINE. Where a curb is not present, the STREET
LINE shall be considered to be 9½ feet from the actual property line nearest the street or
roadway.
l. “PERSON, FIRM OR CORPORATION” - includes a natural person, entity, firm,
partnership, association, limited liability company, joint venturer, or corporation.
Other terms herein shall have the meanings defined in other ordinances of the City, except where
the context clearly requires otherwise.
SECTION 4 - MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED
No MOBILE HOME shall be permitted within the City limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
Any MOBILE HOME located in the City legally, prior to the enactment of this ordinance and
Ordinance 557 Page 4
used and occupied as a residential dwelling shall be allowed to remain, but shall not be replaced
with another MOBILE HOME under any circumstance.
SECTION 5 - UNLAWFUL PARKING, USE OR LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED
HOMES
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, locate or permit the parking or
location of any HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME upon any lot, street or tract of land
unless the lot or tract of land is entirely within an approved HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK.
SECTION 6 - EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOMES
This ordinance does not make unlawful any MANUFACTURED HOME already in place and
complying with all laws when this ordinance becomes effective. However, after the effective
date of this ordinance, if any nonconforming MANUFACTURED HOME is removed from its
location, the following shall apply:
a. If it is a MOBILE HOME, it shall not be allowed to relocate within the city limits of the
City of Abernathy, Texas; and
b. If it is a HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME all provisions of this ordinance shall
apply.
SECTION 7 – MANUFACTURED HOME USE
A MANUFACTURED HOME shall not be used as an office or business building in any zoning
district, except as an office on the site in connection with:
a. a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, or
b. a bona fide retail MANUFACTURED HOME sales lot or park.
SECTION 8 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who commits any of the following shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than FIVE HUNDRED
DOLLARS ($500.00) for:
a. Any violation of this ordinance; or
b. Providing false information to a City official concerning licensing or permitting under
this ordinance this ordinance or compliance with this ordinance.
Each day or portion of a day during which any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate
offense.
SECTION 9 - PERMISSIBLE PARKING OR LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED
HOUSING.
A HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME may be parked or located or permitted to be parked
or located upon any lot or tract of land not prohibited above as long as long as such HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME complies with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and the
Ordinance 557 Page 5
provisions of state law. Any person, firm or corporation who desires to park or locate a HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME as permitted in this ordinance, shall make application for a
housing installation permit with the BUILDING OFFICIAL of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
The fee for the housing installation permit shall be $0.05 PER SQUARE FEET of enclosure.
Before granting a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall insure
that the following requirements are met:
a. Setbacks. No HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME may be placed on any lot or
tract within the City of Abernathy, Texas, in such manner that any part of the HUD
MANUFACTURED HOME or any extension thereto is situated within 5 feet of any side
lot or tract line whenever the lot or tract is bordered by a lot or tract of land on either side
of such lot or tract land so occupied, and is set back less than 25 feet from the front
STREET LINE. Whenever the lot or tract of land is situated at an intersection of two
different streets, or roadways, the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME or any extension
thereof shall not be parked nearer than 5 feet from the inside lot or tract line and not
nearer than 15 feet from the side STREET LINE adjacent to the street intersecting the
street upon which are situated homes or businesses which have street addresses and not
nearer than 25 feet to the front STREET LINE.
b. Anchoring. A HUD MANUFACTURED HOME must be anchored in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions and anchored, as well as supported and
blocked, in accordance with the standards for HUD MANUFACTURED HOUSING
established or maintained by the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs.
c. Porches. A porch is required at each point of entry to the home. Each porch must be of
sturdy construction. The minimum size requirement for any front porch shall be four foot
by six foot (4’ X 6’) and all other porches shall have a minimum size requirement of four
foot by four foot (4’X4’). Any porch with a finished tread surface higher than twelve
(12) inches above the existing ground level must have handrails attached.
d. Driveway. Any HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME is required to have a concrete,
gravel, or asphalt driveway and parking area for off-street parking of vehicles. Where the
driveway and parking area adjoin a curb along any paved street, a concrete apron
extending five feet (5’) from the curb shall be required. Driveways shall not be located
within twenty feet (20’) of any street intersection.
e. Skirting. In addition to the requirements specified above, any HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME shall be properly skirted. Skirting shall be required around
the complete perimeter of said HUD MANUFACTURED HOME in accordance with the
following minimum specifications:
1. Skirting shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that prevents animals
from entering into the crawl space.
2. The following material (or its equivalent as approved by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL) is approved to be used for skirting:
a. manufactured vinyl skirting with vent panels;
b. factory painted steel sheets, with appropriate “J-Trim” installed where the
skirting meets the home;
c. reinforced and painted Masonite, HardiPlank or other similar
commercially produced hard board siding products;
Ordinance 557 Page 6
d. reinforced and painted grooved plywood sheets commonly used as home
siding, with a 3/8 inch minimum thickness, rated for exterior use by the
manufacturer;
e. reinforced vinyl siding, rated for exterior use by the manufacturer;
f. mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
3. Screened vents are required to be used with all skirting to allow for air circulation
under the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME.
4. Used materials for skirting are strictly prohibited.
SECTION 10 - MODULAR HOME
A MODULAR HOME may be parked or located or permitted to be parked or located upon any
lot or tract of land which has 6,000 square feet of land or more, whenever such lot or tract is
unoccupied other dwelling within the City limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, as long as such
MODULAR HOME complies with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and the provisions
of state law. Any person, firm or corporation who desires to park or locate a MODULAR
HOME as permitted in this ordinance, shall make application for a housing installation permit
with the BUILDING OFFICIAL of the City of Abernathy, Texas. The fee for the housing
installation permit shall be $0.05 PER SQUARE FEET of enclosure.
A MODULAR HOME may be placed in a single-family zoned area consistent with this
Ordinance and, must:
1. have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each singlefamily
dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized
housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax
appraisal roll in the county in which the properties are located;
2. have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on
which the modular housing is proposed to be located;
3. have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on
which the modular housing is proposed to be located, as well as required herein;
4. comply with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard
offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site
requirements applicable to single-family dwellings;
5. be securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
For purposes of Section, "value" means the taxable value of the modular housing and the lot
after installation of the housing. TEXA OCC. CODE 1202.253.
Ordinance 557 Page 7
Before granting a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall insure
that the following requirements are met:
a. Setbacks. No MODULAR HOME may be placed on any lot or tract within the City of
Abernathy, Texas, in such manner that any part of the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME
or any extension thereto is situated within 5 feet of any side lot or tract line whenever the
lot or tract is bordered by a lot or tract of land on either side of such lot or tract land so
occupied, and is set back less than 25 feet from the front STREET LINE. Whenever the
lot or tract of land is situated at an intersection of two different streets, or roadways, the
MODULAR HOME or any extension thereof shall not be parked nearer than 5 feet from
the inside lot or tract line and not nearer than 15 feet from the side STREET LINE
adjacent to the street intersecting the street upon which are situated homes or businesses
which have street addresses and not nearer than 25 feet to the front STREET LINE.
b. Foundation. In accordance with the Building Code of the City, each MODULAR
HOME shall be anchored to a permanent foundation. A PIT SET FOUNDATION is
required if the MODULAR HOME is placed on any lot or tract of land within the city
limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, which is not located entirely within an approved
HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
c. Anchoring. A MODULAR HOME shall be anchored in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and anchored, as well as supported and blocked,
in accordance with the standards for MODULAR HOUSING established and/or
maintained by the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs.
d. Floor Level. Any MODULAR HOME placed on any lot or tract of land within the city
limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, not located entirely within an approved HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK must be installed so that finished floor at any
entrance does not extend to a height greater than twelve (12) inches above the existing
ground level.
e. Porches. A porch is required at each point of entry to the home. Each porch must be of
sturdy construction. The minimum size requirement for any front porch shall be four foot
by six foot (4’ X 6’) and all other porches shall have a minimum size requirement of four
foot by four foot (4’X4’). Any porch with a finished tread surface higher than twelve
(12) inches above the existing ground level must have handrails attached.
f. Driveway. Any MODULAR HOME is required to have installed, a concrete, gravel, or
asphalt driveway and parking area for off-street parking of vehicles. Where the driveway
and parking area adjoin a curb along any paved street, a concrete apron extending five
feet (5’) from the curb shall be required. Driveways shall not be located within twenty
feet (20’) of any street intersection.
g. Skirting. In addition to the requirements specified above, any MODULAR HOME shall
be properly skirted. Skirting shall be required around the complete perimeter of said
MODULAR HOME in accordance with the following minimum specifications:
1. Skirting shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that prevents animals
from entering into the crawl space.
2. For any MODULAR HOME the following material (or its equivalent as approved
by the appropriate city officials) is approved to be used for skirting:
a. manufactured vinyl skirting with vent panels;
b. reinforced and painted Masonite, HardiPlank or other similar
commercially produced hard board siding products;
Ordinance 557 Page 8
c. Poured Concrete
d. Mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
3. For any MODULAR HOME required to utilize a PIT SET FOUNDATION, the
only material approved to be used for skirting is:
a. Poured Concrete;
b. Mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
4. Screened vents are required to be used with all skirting to allow for air circulation
under the MODULAR HOME.
5. Used materials for skirting is strictly prohibited
SECTION 11 - INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Before a newly installed HUD MANUFACTURED HOME or MODULAR HOME may be
occupied, it must first be inspected by the City BUILDING OFFICIAL. Once the premises has
been inspected and found to be in compliance with all City ordinances, the BUILDING
OFFICIAL shall issue a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
SECTION 12 – CONNECTION TO CITY UTILITY SERVICES
A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY is required prior to connecting any newly installed HUD
MANUFACTURED HOME or MODULAR HOME to the water and/or sewer service of the
City of Abernathy, Texas, in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the City.
SECTION 13 - HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS shall be subject to the following site
development regulations unless unique and unusual design restraints are shown. HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOMES and/or HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS are
only allowed in designated zones established by the City Zoning areas MF-2, C-1, I-1, and PD.
Unique shall be defined as not common to other typical properties in the community.
a. The minimum number of HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES contained
in any HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall be 10 spaces, and the
minimum site area shall be 45,000 square feet.
b. The minimum HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK site area per dwelling
unit shall be 4,500 square feet.
c. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have a minimum street yard
of 25 feet, and a minimum interior yard of 15 feet. No HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACE shall be permitted in any street yard.
d. The HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have direct access to a street
having a dedicated and accepted right of way of not less than 60 feet.
e. Interior vehicular circulation shall be provided by private internal streets paved to a width
of not less than 30 feet. Internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other
internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a paved cul-de-sac not to
exceed 400 feet in length.
Ordinance 557 Page 9
f. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE shall contain a minimum area of
4,500 square feet, adjacent to an internal street designed to permit movement of HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES to and from each space.
g. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE shall contain a minimum of 2.1
off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one of which shall be provided on
each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. The balance of the required
parking may be located in common parking area distributed throughout the HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK in a manner that provides reasonable and convenient
access to all MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES.
h. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME and any attached accessory structures
shall be separated from every other HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME, building,
or structure by at least 10 feet.
i. The minimum distance between a HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME STAND and
the pavement of an internal street, common parking area, or other common area shall be
10 feet.
j. A solid wall or fence at least six feet high shall be erected and thereafter properly
maintained along all boundaries of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK;
except,
1. Where the solid wall or fence would impede drainage;
2. Where the boundary of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
abuts another HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME development.
k. The height of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME chassis above the ground
elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet at the low end.
l. Required street yards shall he landscaped, excluding necessary driveways and walkways
providing access to the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
m. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall provide for reasonable and
safe pedestrian access to and among each MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE and all
common facilities. Walks not designed in common with internal streets or parking areas
shall have a minimum paved width of two feet.
n. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have a minimum of 300
square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit, with at least 150 square feet being
located on each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. The balance of the
required usable open space may be located in common open space areas distributed
throughout the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK in a manner that
provides reasonable and convenient access to all HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACES.
o. Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
p. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall be subject to site plan
review by the BUILDING OFFICIAL and subject to Zoning approval by the City.
SECTION 14- EXISTING HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
This ordinance does not make an existing or prior approved HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK or any MOBILE HOME park which is already in place and conforming to all
laws at the date this ordinance becomes effective. It is further provided that in the situation
where the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MOBILE HOME park in
Ordinance 557 Page 10
existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance does not conform to the minimum spacing
requirements of this ordinance, such space may not again be occupied unless and until such
vacant space conforms to the minimum spacing requirements of this ordinance. It is the intent of
this ordinance to cause existing HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKs and/or
MOBILE HOME parks to be brought up to the minimum spacing standards of this Ordinance as
an existing space becomes vacant.
SECTION 15 - NONLIABILITY
The City and its officers, agents and employees shall have no liability of any nature for any
actions, omissions, or other matters in any way concerning the subject matter of this ordinance.
SECTION 16 - CONSTITUTIONALITY
If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance shall held to be
held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such section, sub-section,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion shall be a deemed separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 17 – PUBLICAITON
The City Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to cause publication of this ordinance in
accordance with law.
SECTION 18 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the date of its passage and adoption by the
City Council of the City of Abernathy.
Public Hearing was held on the 9th day of June, 2014.
PASSED AND ADOPTED THIS THE 9TH DAY OF JUNE, 2014.

ORDINANCE 310
ZONING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING AND PROVIDING FOR ZONING REGULATIONS
AND CREATING ZONING DISTRICTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS REGULATING THE USE OF LAND,
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; THE HEIGHT, BULK AND LOCATION OF
BUILDINGS; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET
PARKING, REGULATING THE ERECTION, REPAIR AND ALTERATIONS OF ALL
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
FOR CERTAIN USES; RECOGNIZING NONCONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES AND PROVIDING RULES FOR THE REGULATION THEREOF;
CREATING A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND SETTING FORTH RULES FOR ITS
ORGANIZATION, JURISDICTION AND POWERS; ESTABLISHING THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SITES AND THE MANNER OF THEIR CREATION;
DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS: ADOPTING A ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND MAKING IT
A PART OF SAID ORDINANCE: MAKING ALL FIGURES, LETTERS, MARKINGS,
SYMBOLS AND CHARTS CONTAINED IN SAID ORDINANCE OR SHOWN ON THE
MAP A PART OF SUCH ORDINANCE, PROVIDING A METHOD OF AMENDMENT:
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH ORDINANCE AND FOR
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE VIOLATION OF SAID
ORDINANCE: AND PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE.
WHEREAS, under the laws of the State of Texas, authority is conferred upon the City of
Abernathy, Texas, to establish districts or zones within the city for the purpose of
regulating the use of land and controlling the density of population to the end that
congestion in the public streets may be lessened, the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare promoted; and,
WHEREAS, the city council made a study of the zoning regulations and existing land
use of the city of Abernathy over a period of more than one year; and,
WHEREAS, the city council did call a public hearing after giving written notice in the
local newspaper, and,
WHEREAS, the city council is of the opinion that the passage of the zoning ordinance
and the enforcement of the provision of such ordinance is in the public interest and
deemed necessary for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the city;
NOW THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ABERNATHY HEREBY
ORDAINS:
ENACTING CLAUSE
That Articles inclusive of the Code of the City of Abernathy, Texas, known as the zoning
ordinance, is hereby adopted in its entirety to read as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE #
SECTION I
1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1100 Definitions
1125 General Definitions
1300 USE DEFINITIONS
1310 Residential Uses
1330 Commercial Uses 1390 Industrial Uses
1400 Civic Uses
1450 Agricultural Uses
1500 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION II - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
1600 Agricultural District (A)
1620 Single Family Residential District (R-1)
1700 Multiple Family Residential (MF-I)
(Limited Density)
1750 Multiple Family Residential (MF-2)
(High Density)
1772 Mobil Home Park Development Regulations
1800 Limited Commercial District (C-l)
1850 Heavy Commercial District (C-2)
1900 Industrial District (1-1)
2000 Planned Development District (PD)
SECTION III -SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
3000 General Compliance
3050 Off-Street Parking
3075 Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
SECTION IV - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
4000 Planning & Zoning Commission
4010 Board of Adjustment
4050 Article Changes and Amendments
4060 Procedure for Change of Zoning Request
4070 Conditional Uses
5000 Enforcement

INDEX
TOPIC NOTES
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT REPAIR 1333 AND 1865
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS 1333 AND 1865
AGRICULTURAL SERVICES AND SALES
ANIMAL SALES 1395
APPLIANCE REPAIRS 1315 CHECK 1865 ALSO
ARCADES 1312
ARCHITECTS 1370
ARENAS, SPORTS 1342
AUTO REPAIR MINOR,
AUTO REPAIR SHOP 1865
AUTO REPAIRS MAJOR 1333
AUTO SALES NEW 1333
AUTO SALES USED 1333
AUTO SERVICE STATION
AUTO SERVICES 1333
AUTO WASHING 1333
AUTOMATIC CAR WASHES 1333 C2)
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY 1333 C2)
BAKERIES 1352
BANKS 1351
BARBER SHOPS 1361
BARS ALCOHOUC BEV. 1341
BEAUTY SHOPS 1361
BILL ARD HALLS 1312 NOTE CITY LICENSE
REQUIRED
BOARDING KENNELS 1355
BOATS 1333
BODY FRAME STRAIGHTENING NOT ALLOW. 1333
BODY SHOPS 1333
BODY WORK NOT PERMISSIBLE AT SERV 1333
BODY WORK 1333 AUTO REPAIR
BOOKKEEPERS - SEE ACCOUNTANTS 1370
BOWLING ALLEYS 1312
BRAKE REPAIRS
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 1311
BUILDING MAINTENANCE SERVICES 1331
BUILDING MATERIALS
BUS TERMINALS 1144
BUSINESS MACHINE REPAIRS 1335
BUSINESS OFFICES – PUBLIC UTILITIES
BUSINESS SCHOOLS 1340
CAUCHE PITS 1394
CANDLE SHOPS 1392
CANDY SHOPS 1352
CAR DEALERSHIPS NEW 1333
CAR DEALERSHIPS USED 1333
CAR WASHES 1333
CARBURETOR REPAIRS
CATTLE PENS 1395
CERAMICS 1392
CHEMICALS, FARM 1332
CHIMNEYS 3020
CHURCH BELFRIES 3020
CHURCH SPIRES 3020
CLEANERS 1360
COCKTAIL LOUNGES 1341
COFFEE SHOPS 1372
COMMERCIAL RECREATION 1342
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
CONSTRUCTION SALES 1344
CONSULTANT SERVICES 1370
CUSTODIAL SERVICES 1334
DANCE HALLS 1342
DANCE STUDIOS 1363
DEUCATESSENS 1353
DENTISTS 1362
DEPARTMENT STORES 1354
DESIGN STUDIOS 1370
DIAPER SERVICES 1360
DISTRIBUTION 1396
DOCTORS OFFICES 1362
DOG GROOl1lNG SERVICES 1365
DOG TRAINING 1355
DOGS, BOARDING KENNEL 1355
DRIVING RANGES 1342
DRIVING SCHOOLS 1363
DRY CLEANERS 1360
EGG PRODUCTION 1453
ELEVATORS GRAIN 1396
ELEVATORS SEE 3020
ENGINEERS OFFICES 1370
ENTERTAINMENT 1342
EQUIPMENT RENTALS 1344
EQUIPMENT REPAIRS 1333
EQUIPMENT SALES 1344
EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
EQUIPMENT USED 1865
FARM EQUIPMENT REPAIRS 1333 AND 1865
FARM RELATED 1332
FERTILIZER SALES 1332
FIELD OR ROW CROPS 1552
FINANCE OFFICES 1351
FIRE TOWERS 3020
FITNESS CENTERS 1363
FARM EQUIPMENT SALES 1333 AND 1865
FRAME SHOPS 1333
FREIGHT DEPOTS 1444
FUEL PUMP REPLACEMENT
FUNERAL SERVICES 1353
FURNITURE STORES 1354
CAME ROOMS 1342
GAS EXPLORATION 1394
GOLF COURSES 1342
GOLF DRIVING RANGES 1342
GRAINELEVATORS 1396
GRAIN STORES 1332
GRAVEL PITS 1394
GREASING 1333
GROCERY STORES 1352
HANDICRAFTS 1363
HAY SALES 1332
HEALTII STUDIOS 1363
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES 1333
HOBBY INSTRUCTIONS 1363
HORSE STABLES 1375
HOSPITALS SEE 3020
HOTEL EQUIPMENT SUPPLIES 1335
HOTELS 1381
ICE CREAM SHOPS 1372
ICE RINKS 1342
IMPOUND YARDS (VEHICLE STORAGE) 1333
INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 1865
INSURANCE OFFICES 1331
INVESTMENT OFFICES 1331
JANITORIAL SERVICES 1334
JEWELRY REPAIRS 1345
JEWELRY 1392
JUNK YARDS 1374
KENNELS 1355
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES 1334
LAUNDROMATS 1360
LAW OFFICES 1370
LAWN MOWER REPAIR
LENDING INSTITUTIONS
LINEN SUPPLY SERVICES
LIQUOR SALES 1361
LOUNGES COCKTAIL 1341
LUBRICATION 1333
LUMBER YARDS 1314
MACHINE SHOPS 1333 AND 1865
MAINTENANCE OF BOATS, HOMES ETC. 1333
VEHICLES, MOTOR
MAINTENANCE OF E QUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
MANUFACTURING 1392 1393
MEAT MARKETS 1352
MEDICAL OFFICES 1362
MEETING HALLS 1342
MINERALS 1394
MINI STORAGE 1351
MINING 1391
MOBILE HOME SALES 1333
MONUMENTS YARDS 1396
MOTELS 1381
MOTORCYCLE SALES 1333
MOTOR HOME SALES 1333
MOVIES 1342
MOVING AND STORAGE 1396
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT REPAIRS 1345
NURSERIES 1332
OFFICE EQUIPMENT 1335
OFFICE SUPPLIES 1335
OFFICE SUPPLIES 1351
OIL CHANGES 1333
OIL EXPLORATION 1394
OPEN AIR STORAGE 1396
OPTOMETRIST 1362
PACKAGE EXPRESS 1444
PAINT SHOPS 1333
PAINTING OF AUTOS -NOT AT SERVICE 1333
PARKS, AMUSEMENTS 1342
PERSONNEL OFFICES 1331
PESTICIDE SALES 1332
PET CAIW SALONS 1365
PET STORES 1365
PHOTOCOPY SERVICES 1331
PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIOS 1363
POOL HALLS 1342 NOTE CITY LICENSE
REQUIRSED
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 1331
PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICES 1331
RACE FACILITIES 1352
RACQUETBALL COURTS 1342
RADIATOR REPAIR SHOPS
RADIATOR SHOPS 1333
RADIO STATIONS 1343
RADIO TOWERS 3020
REAL ESTATE OFFICES 1331
RECREATION COMMERCIAL 1342
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 1333
REDUCING SALONS 1363
RENTAL OF TRUCKS 1333
RENTAL OF TRUCKS 1333
RENTAL, TOOLS 1344 SEE AlSO 1865
REPAIRS EQUIPMENT SEE AlSO 1865
REPAIRS VEHICLE 1333 ALSO 1865
REPAIRS, APPLIANCE 1345
REPAIRS, AUTO FRAMES
REPRODUCTION SERVICES 1331
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 1371
RESTAURANTS CONVENIENCE) 1372
RESTAURANTS 1373
ROLLER RINKS 1342
RV PARKS 1381
SALVAGE (VEHICLE STORAGE) 1333 & 1865
SALVAGE YARDS 1372 ALSO 1865
SANDWICH SHOPS 1372
SAVINGS AND LOANS 1351
SCHOOLS BUSINESS 1310
SCHOOLS BUSINESS 1310
SCHOOLS SEE 3030
SCHOOLS TRADE 1340
SECRETARIAL SERVICES 1331
SEED SALES, FARM 1332
SEAMSTRESS SHOPS 1364
SERVICING OF EQUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
SHIPPING PENS 1395
SHOE REPAIR SHOPS 1364
SKATING RINKS 1342
SLAUGHTER HOUSES 1395
SODA FOUNTAINS 1372
SPORTS ARENAS 13421
STABLES 1375
STEAM CLEANING 1333
STEAM CLEANING 1333 AUTO REPAIR
STEAM CLEANING OF VEHICLES 1333
STOCKYARDS 1395
STONE YARDS 1396
STORAGE MINI 1350
STORAGE 1396 AND 1350
STORAGE AUTO REPAIR SHOPS SEE 1374 AND 1365
STORAGE OF BOATS 1333
STORAGE OF EQUIPMENT 1333 AND 1865
STORAGE OF MOTOR HOMES 1333
STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 1333
STORAGE OF VEHICLES 1333
STORAGE OPEN AIR 1396
STORAGE SCRAP 1865
STORAGE USED MATERIAIS 1865
STORAGE USED VEHICLES 1865
STORAGE, VEHICLES 1333
SUPERMARKETS 1352
SWIMMING POOLS 1342
TAILORS, CLOTHNG 1364
TAVERNS 1341
TAXI CABS
TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICES 1331
TELEVISION STATIONS 1343
TELEVISION TOWERS 3020
TENNIS COURTS 1342
THEATERS 1342
TIRE REPAIR (NOT RECAPPING) 1333
TIRES
TOOL RENTALS 1344
TOOL SALES 1344
TOWERS RATIO AND TV 3020
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 ALSO 1865
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 AND 1665
TRACTOR SALES 1333 AND 1865
TRACTOR REPAIRS 1333 & 1865
TRADE SCHOOLS 1340
TRAILER RENTALS
TRANSMISSION OVERHAUL
TRAVEL SERVICES 1331
TRUCK RENTALS
TRUCK RENTALS 1333
TRUCK REPAIRS 1333
TRUCK SALES (NON COMMERCIAL) 1333
TRUCK SALES 1333
TV STUDIOS 1343
USED EQUIPMENT 1665
USED VEHICLES 1865
VEHICLE REPAIRS SERVICE STA. 1333 AUTO
VEHICLE STORAGE 1333
VEHICLE STORAGE IMPOUND YARDS
VEHICLE STORAGE 1865
VEHICLES, INOPERATIVE 1865
WAREHOUSING 1396
WASHING AUTOS 1333
WINDOW CLEANING SERVICES 1334
WRECIER SERVICE BODY WORK
WRECKING YARDS 1374 ALSO 1865
SECTION I
BASIC PROVISIONS
SECTION I
BASIC PROVISIONS
1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1010 Title
Sections 1000 through 6020 of this ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Regulations
of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
1015 Purpose of the Zoning Regulations
The purpose of the Zoning Regulations shall be to serve the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the City of Abernathy and the residents thereof; and to attain the
objectives of the planning policies of the City of Abernathy.
1020 Consistency With Planning Policies
It is the intent of the City of Abernathy that the Zoning Regulations shall be consistent
with the planning policies of Abernathy, and with any supplemental land use and
community development policies which may be adopted by the Council.
In the event the Zoning Regulations become inconsistent with the Abernathy planning
policies or with any supplemental land use and community development policies of the
City of Abernathy, by reason of the adoption of new plans or by amendment of the
existing plans or supplemental policies, it is the intent of the. . Council that .the Zoning
Regulations be amended within a reasonable time so as to become or remain consistent
with the revised, or amended land use and community development policies.
Additionally, it is the intent of the Council that all amendments to the Zoning Regulations
shall maintain and enhance the consistency between the Zoning Regulations and the
Abernathy planning policies.
1025 Applicability
The Zoning Regulations shall apply to all of the incorporated areas of the City of
Abernathy. The use of all land and any buildings or structures located upon the land, and
the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or relocation of any building or
structure upon the land shall conform to all regulations applicable to the district in which
the land is located. No land, building, structure or premise shall be used for purpose or in
any manner other than is permitted in the district in which such land, building, structure
or premise is located.
1035 Conflicting Provisions
The Zoning Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion
of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not the intent
of these regulations to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or
other agreement between parties. When these regulations impose a greater restriction'
upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or require larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these regulations shall control.
1040 Relief From Other Provisions
Except as otherwise specifically provided, no provision of the Zoning Regulations shall
be construed as relieving any party to whom a site plan, permit or variance is issued
from any other provision of state or federal law or from any provision, ordinance, rule, or
regulation of the City of Abernathy requiring a license, franchise, or permit to
accomplish, engage in, carryon or maintain a particular business, enterprise, occupation,
transaction or use.
1045 Severability of Provisions
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of these regulations, it
being hereby expressly declared that this ordinance and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, adopted,
approved and ratified irrespective of the fact that anyone or more other sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
1050 Prior Regulations
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as validating or legalizing any land use or
building or .structure conducted, constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of any
city ordinance, and nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or bar the filing of a complaint
or punishment of any act in violation of prior ordinances or bar the bringing of any action
or compel the discontinuance of any use or the removal of any building or structure
conducted, constructed, erected, or maintained. In violation of any prior ordinance.
Insofar as the provisions of this ordinance impose the same regulations as imposed by
previous ordinances, this ordinance shall be construed as a continuation of such
regulations and not as a new enactment.
1055 Completion of Uses and Structures
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of any amendment of these regulations provided that construction
of such building or structure begins within 120 days after the date of issuance
of the building permit and is completed within one year from the effective date of such
amendment, and provided further that such construction and proposed use of such
building or structure is not on said effective date in violation of any other ordinance or
law.
1100 DEFINITIONS
1110 Title and Purpose
Sections 1100 through 1454 shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these
provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretations of the Zoning
Regulations. The meaning and construction of words and .phrases as set forth shall
apply throughout the Zoning Regulations, except where the context of such words or
phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
1115 General Construction of Language
The following general rules of construction shall apply to the textual provisions of the
Zoning Regulations.
a. Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of any provision of the Zoning Regulations.
b. Illustration. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of any provision and any illustration, the text shall control.
c. Shall and May. "Shall is always mandatory and not discretionary "May" is
discretionary.
d. Tenses and Numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future, and
words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
e. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
2. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or
in any combination
3. "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply
singly but not in combination.
f. All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of
the City of Abernathy unless otherwise indicated.
General Definitions
1120
a. "Building Official" means the person responsible for Inspection in the City of
Abernathy.
b. "Comprehensive Plan" means any planning policies or a comprehensive plan of
the City of Abernathy.
c. "Council" or "City Council" shall have the same meaning.
d. "County" shall mean Hale or Lubbock County..
e. "District or Zone" shall have the same meaning and shall refer to districts
established by the Zoning Regulations unless otherwise indicated.
f. "Federal" shall mean the Government of the United State of America.
g. "Section" means a section of the Zoning Regulations unless otherwise
indicated.
h. "State" shall mean the State of Texas.
i. "Used" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "occupied," or "intended to be
occupied for."
j: "Zoning Administrator" means the person designated by the City Manager to
administer the provisions of this ordinance.
1125 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
1130 Abutting
Having lot lines or district boundaries in common.
1131 Accessory Building
A building which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific
principal use or principal building on the same site.
1132 Accessory Dwelling
A dwelling unit accessory to a principal use on the same site and intended for
occupancy by a family having at least one member employed on the site for
purposes of security, maintenance. Management, supervision, or personal
service.
1133 Addition
Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of
site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.
1134 Agent of Owner
Any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for, and with the
knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
1135 Alteration
Any construction of physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the
supporting members of a building or structure, or change in relative position of
buildings or structures on a site. or substantial change in appearance of any
building or structure.
1140 Attached
Having one or more walls common with a principal building, or joined to a
principal building by a covered porch, Loggia, or passageway, the roof of which is
a part of extension of a principal building.
1141 Beginning of Construction
The incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of a building or
structure.
1142 Building
A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support
or enclosure of persons or property. The word “building" includes the word
"structure",
1143 Building Pad
A portion of a sloping site graded relatively flat, or to a minimum slope, for the
purpose of accommodating a building and related outdoor space.
1144 Change of Use
The replacement of an existing use by a new use, or a change in the nature of an
existing use. Change in use does not include a change of ownership, tenancy,
name or management, or change in product or service within the same use
classification.
1145 Common Area
An area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the
owners or occupants of a town house project, PD, mobilehome park, or
subdivision.
1150 Detached
Fully separated from any other building, or joined to another building by structural
members not constituting an enclosed or covered space.
1151 Discontinuance of Use
To cease or discontinue a use or activity. This does, not include temporary or
short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
maintaining, or otherwise improving a facility.
1152 Drive-In Service
A feature or characteristic of a use involving sale of products or provision of
services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and
drive-through services such as mechanical automobile washing.
1153 Driveway
A permanently surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an
off-street parking or loading area.
1154 Dwelling Unit
A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking.
Efficiency Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit containing not less than 600 square feet
or floor area, and not having a separate bedroom or sleeping area independent
of the principal living area.
1155 Enclosed
A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors,
and similar openings or architectural features, or an open space-of less than 100
square feet fully surrounded by a building or walls exceeding 8 feet in height.
1160 Family
An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not more than (3) unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
1161 Floor Area (Gross)
The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the surfaces of
exterior walls, including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, service and mechanical
equipment rooms, light wells, courts, 'and basement, cellar or attic areas deemed
usable by the Building Official or habitable by the Uniform Building Code, but
excluding area within a building used for off-street parking or loading facilities.
1162 Grade
The lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or
sidewalk at a point where height is to be measured.
1163 Guest House
An accessory building containing a lodging unit without kitchen facilities, and
used to house occasional visitors or non-paying guests of the occupants of a
dwelling unit on the same site.
1164 Height
The vertical distance from "grade" to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof
or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable
on a pitched 9r hipped roof, or to the highest point of a structure. As applied to a
building, the height shall be measured from an elevation derived from the
average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building, but not greater
than five feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced
building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.
1165 Home Occupation
A use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, employing only the
inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential
occupancy and does not change the character thereof, which shall include no
separate outside entrance or other structural changes and does not cause the
generation of additional traffic on the street.
1170 Landscaped
An area devoted to or developed predominately with plant material or natural
landscape features, including lawn, ground .cover, gardens, trees, shrubs and
other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape
elements such a~ pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces
or rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking,
loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements, provided that the use of
brick, stone, aggregate, or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over
the use of plant material.
1171 Lodging Unit
A room or group of rooms in a dwelling unit or a group residential use, for
overnight occupancy on a transient or residential occupancy basis. Where
designed or used for occupancy by more than two persons, each two person
capacity shall be deemed a separate lodging unit. For the purpose of determining
residential density, each two lodging unit shall be considered the equivalent of
one dwelling unit.
1172 Lot of Record
A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation
shown on a plat record of survey, parcel map, or subdivision map recorded in tie"
office of the County Clerk, or a parcel legally approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission according to applicable development regulations.
Corner Lot A lot located at the intersection or interception of two streets, or of
two segments of a curved street, forming an angle of not more than one hundred
thirty five degrees.
Interior Lot A lot other than a corner lot.
Reverse Corner Lot A corner lot, having a side lot line which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of a lot to its rear.
Through Lot A lot other than a corner lot abutting more than one street.
1173 Lot Area
The net horizontal area within bounding lot lines, but excluding any public or
private easement or right of way providing access to another lot.
1174 Lot Coverage or Building Coverage
The area of a lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, but excluding incidental
projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features and excluding ground level
paving landscaping and open recreational facilities.
1175 Lot Depth
The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint
of the rear lot line.
1180 Lot Line
A line or series of connected line segments bounding a lot as herein defined.
Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street. On a
corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or the line designated as
the front lot line by a subdivision or parcel map. On a through lot, the lot
line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot.
Interior Lot Line. A lot line not abutting a street.
Rear Lot Line. A lot line not defined as a front or side lot line. In the case
of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, a line
within the lot having length of 10 feet, parallel to and most distant from the
front lot shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of
determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this
ordinance.
Street or Exterior Lot Line. A lot line abutting a street.
1181 Lot Width
The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the front setback line
and at a distance of 50 feet to the rear thereof.
1182 Mobilehome (Amended by City Ordinance 393 on 6-9-1997)
A moveable or portable dwelling which is constructed on a chassis, and which is
designed to be towed over Texas roads and highways under special permit,
designed for year-round occupancy, designed primarily to be used without a
permanent foundation, but which may sit on a permanent foundation, and
designed to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or more units that can
be telescoped when transported and expanded later for additional capacity, or of
two or more units, separately transportable, but designed to be joined together
into one integral unit. Mobilehome as used in this ordinance specifically includes
manufactured housing and HUD-code manufactured homes meeting said
description.
The following shall not be included in this definition:
a. Travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motor homes, camping trailers, or other
recreational vehicles.
b. Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a permanent
foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding, and electrical,
plumbing, and heating systems.
1183 Mobilehome Park
A unified development of two or more mobilehome spaces for rent or lease, and
including common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry and
utility services, storage, and similar services for the convenience of residents of
the mobilehome park.
1184 Mobilehome Space
An area within a mobilehome park which is designed for and designated as the
location for a single mobilehome and the exclusive use of its occupants.
1185 Mobilehome Stand
That portion of a mobilehome space upon which the mobilehome is placed.
1190 Nonconforming Use
A lawful use of any land, building, or structure, other than a sign, that does not
conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complied with use
regulations in effect at the time the use was established.
1191 Non-complying Structure
A building or structure, including off-street parking or loading areas that does not
comply with currently applicable site development regulations for the district in
which it is located, or with applicable General Regulations but which complied
with applicable provisions at the time of construction.
1192 Parking Space
A paved area of at least one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet, enclosed or
unenclosed, approximately nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in depth,
having a paved driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and
permitting ingress and egress of an automobile. A "parking space" including
maneuvering area shall not occupy any public land. In a cluster housing development a
parking space may immediately abut a private drive which serves as a primary means
of access.
1193 Street
A public or private thoroughfare more than 20' in width which affords a primary
means of access to abutting property, including all land within the right-of-way
thereof.
1194 Screened
Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from view by a person standing at
ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a
fence, wall, hedge, beam, or similar architectural or landscape feature.
1195 Structure
That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece
of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting or structural members of a
building, including but not limited to bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in exterior walls.
1200 Townhouse
A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjoining
dwelling units in a townhouse group.
1201 Townhouse Group
Two or more contiguous townhouses having common or abutting walls.
1202 Townhouse Lot
That portion of the total development site of a townhouse residential use
intended for separate ownership as the location of a single townhouse and
associated private yard area.
1203 Useable Open Space
Outdoor or unenclosed area, located on the ground or on a roof, balcony, deck,
porch, or terrace, designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation,
pedestrian access, or landscaping, but excluding parking facilities, driveways,
utility and service areas.
1204 Use
The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a
site or in a building or facility.
Accessory Use. A use or activity which is incidental to and customarily
associated with a specific principal use on the same site.
Principal Use. A use which fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution, or other entity.
Permitted Use. A use defined by the following section and listed by the
regulations for any particular district as a permitted use within that zone,
and permitted therein as a matter of right when conducted in accord with
the relations established by this ordinance.
Conditional Use. A use defined by the following section and listed by the
regulations for any particular district as a conditional use within that
district and allowable therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional
basis subject to a Conditional Use Permit, and to all other regulations
established by this ordinance.
1205 Value or Valuation
The value of a structure shall be the estimated cost to replace the structure in
kind, based on current replacement costs.
1206 Yard
A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only landscaping
and such uses and facilities as may be permitted by this ordinance.
Front Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot
line and the front setback line.
Interior Yard. Any required yard, not adjacent to a street, which is determined on
the basis of an interior lot line.
Rear Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot
line and the rear setback line, but excluding any area located within the street
side yard of a corner lot.
Side Yard. A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the front yard to the
rear yard between the side lot line and the side setback line. In the case of a
corner lot, the street side yard shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.
Street Yard. Any required yard adjacent to a street and which is determined on
the basis of a street lot line.
1300 DEFINITIONS OF USE CLASSIFICATIONS
1301Title and Purpose
Section 1300 through 1454 shall be 'known as the Use Classifications. The
purpose of the Use Classifications shall be to provide a consistent set of terms
encompassing and defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the
various districts, and to provide a procedure for determination of the applicable
use classification of any activity not clearly within any defined use classification.
1302 Determination of Use Classification
In event of any question as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or
proposed use or activity, the Building Official shall have the authority to
determine the appropriate classification subject to the right of appeal to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. In making such determinations, the Building
Official shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in question, and
match the unlisted use where similar uses are permitted. The function and
locational requirements of the unlisted use must be consistent with the purpose
and description of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the
district, and be similar in traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibration, dust, odor,
glare and heat producing characteristics.
1303 Approval of Supplemental Listing
The Building Official" shall maintain a list of all such determinations, and shall
quarterly recommend to the Planning Commission additions, deletions, or
revisions to the use classifications to reflect contemporary usage and
terminology, and to minimize ambiguity. If the Planning and Zoning Commission
differs with a Building Official determination, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall prevail except any building permits issued under the Building
Official's determination that permit shall be considered a valid legal nonconforming
use.
1310 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES
Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on a
wholly or primarily non-transient basis but exclude institutional living
arrangements involving those providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care
and those providing forced residence, such as asylums and prisons.
1311 Single Family Residential
The use of a site for only one dwelling unit.
1312 Duplex Residential
The use of a site for two dwelling units within a single building.
1313 Two Family Residential
The use of a site for two dwelling units, each in a separate building.
1314 Townhouse Residential
The use of a site for four or more townhouse dwelling units, constructed with
common or adjacent walls and each located on a separate ground parcel within
the total development site, together with common area serving all dwelling units.
1315 Condominium Residential
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units intended for separate
ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units. The units may
or may not be situated on a ground parcel.
1316 Multiple Family Residential
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within one or more buildings.
1317 Group Residential
The residential occupancy of living accommodations by groups of more than 5
persons not defined as a family on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include
occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls, or
boarding houses.
1318 Mobilehome Residential
The residential occupancy of mobilehomes by families on a weekly or longer
basis. Typical uses include mobilehome parks or mobilehome subdivisions.
1330 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES
Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods;
and the provision of services other than those classified as Industrial or Civic
uses.
1331 Administrative and Business Offices
Offices of private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision
of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses, include
administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone
answering, photocopy and reproduction, and business offices of public utilities,
organizations and associations, or other use classifications when the serv1ce
rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services.
1332 Agricultural Sales and Services
Establishments or ~laces of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed,
grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally
related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, feed and grain stores, and tree
service firms.
1333 Automotive and Equipment Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in automotive-related or
heavy equipment sales or services. The following are automotive and equipment
use types:
Automobile Repair, Major: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning engines,
motor vehicles, trailers: collision services including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning.
Automobile Repair. Minor: Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes,
batteries and minor motor services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter
changing of passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2)
ton capacity, but not including any operation named under "Automobile Repair,
Major" or any other similar use thereto. .
Automobile Service Station: An automobile service station shall mean buildings
and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, including the servicing of
vehicles designed or calculated to be performed by the customer. In addition, the
following services may be rendered and sales made and no other:
? Sale and service of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor
parts;
? Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or re-grooving;
? Replacement or adjustment of automobile accessories;
? Radiator cleaning and flushing; provision of water, antifreeze and other
additives;
? Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing
materials
? Greasing and lubrication;
? Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;.
? Servicing and repair of carburetors~~
? Adjusting and repairing brakes;
? Emergency wiring repairs;
? Motor adjustments not involving removal of head or crankcase;
? Truck and trailer rental;
? Provision of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for customers, but only as accessory and incidental to
the principal operation;
? Provision of road maps and other information material;
? Provision of restroom facilities;
? Parking lot as an accessory use;
? Wrecker service;
? Uses permissible at a service station do not include body work;
transmission or brake overhauling; straightening of frames or body parts;
steam cleaning, painting, welding, storage of automobile not in operating
condition nor the operation of a commercial garage as an accessory use.
Automobile Self-Service Station: Self-service gasoline sales only, excluding all
other automobile sales or service.
1. Self-service gasoline sales shall mean gasoline and oil sales in which the
customer dispenses same into his automobile and shall not include oil sales in
which oil is drained from the automobile (oil changes) but only addition. Water or
radiator additives may be sold but no flushing or draining of radiator shall be
permitted. Compressed air for tires shall be limited to injection of air into tires
actually mounted on the automobile. No tire repair or changing shall be
permitted. Facilities for windshield cleaning may be provided for use by customer
with adequate receptacles for cleaning water material, but no car washing other
than windows shall be permitted.
2. All automotive service not herein expressed is declared to be in excess of
self-service gasoline sales.
Automobile Wash, Automatic Car Wash. or Automobile Laundry:
A building or structure where chain conveyors, blowers, steam cleaners, and
other mechanical devices, including, coin-operated self-service facilities, are
employed for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
Commercial Off-Street Parking: Parking 'of motor vehicles on a temporary basis
within a privately, owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a
principal use.
Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking garages.
Automotive Rentals: Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, trailers, and
recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles
available for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies trailer rental
agencies, and taxicab parking and dispatching.
Automotive Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motorhomes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental
storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car
dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle
dealerships.
Equipment Sales: Sale or rental of truck5, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, mobilehomes, and similar heavy equipment, including
incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck
dealerships, construction equipment dealerships and mobilehome sales
establishments.
Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck
repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services and machine shops,
but exclude dismantling or salvage.
Vehicle Storage: Long term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles.
Typical uses include storage of private parking towaways or impound yards, but
exclude dismantling or salvage.
1334 Building Maintenance Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial
services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial,
landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.
1335 Business Support Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or
repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and service
establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes
automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office
equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel
equipment and supply firms.
1340 Business or Trade School
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other
similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home
occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility.
1341 Cocktail Lounge
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges,
restaurants, and similar uses.
1342 Commercial Recreation
Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports
entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The following are
commercial recreation use types:
Indoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted within an enclosed building.
Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks,
and penny arcades.
Outdoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or
screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses,
golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts. racquetball courts.
Indoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an
enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture, theaters, meeting halls,
and dance halls.
Outdoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted in open
facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, amusement parks.
1343 Communications Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other
information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and
telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Major Utility Facilities.
Typical uses include television studios, telecommunications service centers or
telegraph service offices.
1344 Construction Sales and Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities
and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or
wholesale sale, from the premises of materials used in the construction of
buildings or other structures other than retail sales of paint, fixtures and
hardware; but excludes those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment
Services use types. Typical uses include building materials ~~pres. tool and
equipment rental or sales, or building contractors.
1345 Consumer Repair Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals
and households rather than firms, but excluding Automotive and Equipment use
types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair, or
musical instrument repair firms.
1350 Convenience Storage
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within
enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding use as
workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing or commercial activity. Typical uses
include mini-warehousing.
1351 Financial Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and banking
services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, land and
lending activities, and similar services.
1352 Food Sales
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries,
delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
1353 Funeral Services
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human
dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include
funeral homes or mortuaries.
1354 General Retail Sales
Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for personal or
household use, but excludes those classified more specifically in this use
definition section. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores,
furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or services:
household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, and stationery,
notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants,
hobby materials,' toys, and handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like
items; cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment, records,
sporting equipment, Kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art
supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor
covering, interior decorating services, office supplies; bicycles; and automotive
parts and accessories (excluding service and installation) .
1355 Kennels
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical uses
include boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog training centers.
1360 Laundry Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning or
dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses
include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply
services.
1361 Liquor Sales
Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption off
the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle
shops, or any licensed sales for off-site consumption.
1362 Medical Offices
A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or corrective
personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories,
and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such
practice by the State of Texas.
1363 Personal Improvement Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of information, instructional,
personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical
uses include photography studios, driving schools, health or physical fitness
studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
1364 Personal Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses
include beauty and barber shops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and selfservice
laundry or apparel cleaning services.
1365 Pet Services
Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals
customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing
and clipping salons, or pet grooming shops.
1370 Professional Office
A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of law,
architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and similar professions.
1371 Research Services
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature
but excludes product testing. Typical uses include electronics research
laboratories, space research and development firms, or pharmaceutical research
labs.
1372 Restaurant (Convenience)
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages,
excluding alcoholic beverages, for on-premise consumption. Typical uses include
soda fountains, ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, cafes, and coffee shops.
1373 Restaurant (General)
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages,
including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or
secondary feature and producing less than 50 percent of the gross income. A
general restaurant may include live entertainment. Typical uses include
restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses, and similar establishments with
incidental alcoholic beverage service.
1374 Scrap and Salvage Services
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other
processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their
original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards or
paper salvage yards.
1375 Stables
Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the
premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises or their
nonpaying guests. Typical uses include boarding stables or public stables.
1380 Veterinary Services
Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat
hospitals, and veterinary hospitals.
1381 Visitor Habitation
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on a lessthan-
weekly basis with incidental food, drink and other sales and services
intended for the convenience of guests. The following are visitor habitation use
types:
Campground: Campground facilities providing camping or parking areas and
incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses
include recreational vehicle parks.
Hotel-Motel: Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board.
Typical uses include hotels, motels or transient boarding houses.
1390 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by
methods not agricultural, and storage and distribution of produces.
1391 Basic Industry
A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in
storage of, or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions.
1392 Custom Manufacturing
Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand
manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical
equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding 8
kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods
produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops or
custom jewelry manufacturers.
1393 Light Manufacturing
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared
materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and packaging of -Such products, and incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
1394 Resource Extraction
A use involving the on-site extraction of surface or sub-surface mineral products
or natural resources. Typical are quarries borrow pits, sand and gravel and gas
extraction, and mining operations.
1395 Stockyards
Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter,
market or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards or animal sales or auction
yards.
1396 Warehousing and Distribution
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage,
distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and
plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution use types:
Limited Warehousing and Distribution: Wholesaling, storage and warehousing
services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors,
storage -warehouses or moving and storage firms.
General Warehousing and Distribution: Open-air storage, distribution and
handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone
yards, grain elevators or open storage yards.
1400 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CIVIC USE TYPES
Civic Use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational,
cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly
vested with public or social importance.
1401 Administrative Services
Offices, administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with
the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary
vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices.
1402 Aviation Facilities
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for
operation, services fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft,
and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of
airport facilities and the provision of safety and security.
1403 Cemetery
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
1404 Club or Lodge
A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private or non-profit
association; primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include
private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
1405 College and University Facilities
An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of study
designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree as defined by the State of
Texas.
1410 Community Recreation
A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a particular residential
development, planned unit development, or limited residential neighborhood
including both indoor and outdoor facilities.
1411 Convalescent Services
A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular
medical attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency
medical services, and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug
addiction, mental disease or communicable disease.
1412 Cultural Services
A library, museum, art gallery, or similar non-profit use affording display,
preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in one or more of the
arts and sciences.
1413 Day Care Services (Limited
A facility, or use of a building or portion thereof, for daytime care of 6 or fewer
individuals. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers for
children or adults, and similar uses.
1414 Day Care Services (General)
A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or portion thereof, or daytime care of 7 or more
children or adults, and similar uses.
1415 Detention Facilities
A publicly operated use providing housing and care for individuals confined by
law.
1420 Guidance Services
A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, vocational, or similar
services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental
illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition, either on a
residential or daytime care basis.
1421 Hospital Services
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured
persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for
outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research,
administration, and services to patients, employees or visitors.
1422 Local Utility Services
Services which are necessary to support principal development and involve only
minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal
development.
1423 Maintenance and Service Facilities
A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing,
materials storage, and similar activities, including corporation yards, equipment
service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services
or contracting or industrial activities.
1424 Major Utility Facilities
Generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse
collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants, and
similar facilities of public agencies or public utility firms having potentially
significant impact upon surrounding uses.
1425 Military Installations
Military facilities of the federal or state governments.
1430 Park and Recreation Services
Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open
spaces.
1431 Postal Facilities
Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers,
operated by the United States Postal Service.
1432 Primary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school
level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public
schools of the State of Texas.
1433 Public Assembly
Publicly owned or operated facilities for major public assembly, recreation,
sports, amusement, or entertainment, including civic or community auditoriums,
sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and exhibition facilities.
1435 Railroad Facilities
Railroad yards, equipment 'servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
1440 Religious Assembly
A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious
worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding primary or
secondary educational facilities. A property tax exemption obtained from the
State of Texas shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.
1441 Residential Care Services
A use, other than a hospital or convalescent facility, providing care for
ambulatory persons in a residential environment, including overnight occupancy
or care for extended periods.
1442 Safety Services
Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police
and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
1443 Secondary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the junior and senior
high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in
the public schools of the State of Texas.
1444 Transportation Terminal
A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and
incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including
bus terminals, railroad stations, airport terminals, and public transit facilities.
1450 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES
Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal products
by agricultural methods.
1451 Horticulture
The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs,
or trees intended for ornamental, or landscaping purposes, but excluding retail
sales. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
1452 Crop Production
The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an
agricultural or commercial basis, including incidental packing and processing.
1453 Animal Production
The raising of animals or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy
products on an agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses include grazing,
ranching, dairy farming and poultry farming.
1454 Support Housing
The occupancy of any living accommodations by agricultural employees and their
families, without regard to duration, which occurs exclusively in association with
the performance of agricultural labor.
1500 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
1505 Zoning Districts
For the purposes of this section, the City is hereby divided into eight (8) districts
as follows:
? Agricultural A
? District R-l
? District MF-l District MF-2
? District C-l
? District C-2
? District I-I
? Planned Development PD
1510 Official Zoning Map
The location and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon
the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made part of this
section as though fully set forth herein. It shall be the duty of the zoning
administrator to maintain the official zoning map together with all notations,
references, and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto.
1515 District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as
shown on the district map accompanying and made a part of this section, the
following rules apply:
(a) The district boundaries are either street or alley centerlines unless otherwise shown,
and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this
section are bound approximately by street or alley centerlines, the street or alley
centerlines shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
(b) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property
has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall
be construed to be the lot lines; and where the districts designated on the district map
accompanying and. made a part of this section, are bound approximately by lot lines, the
lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are
otherwise indicated on the map.
(c) In un-subdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and
made a part of this section shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the
map.
(d) In subdivided property, where a district boundary line divides property into two (2)
parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the
district boundary lines as shown.
(e) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City
Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall
be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the
vacation shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
(f) Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on
the official zoning map, the streets or alleyways on the ground shall control.
(g) If one of the above applies, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of
the district boundary.
1520 Zoning of Annexed Areas
Zoning Annexed Areas
All territory hereafter annexed to the City shall also be required to have a zoning hearing
as prescribed by state law and these regulations to determine the proper zoning classification.
SECTION II
Specific District Regulations
SECTION II
Specific District Regulations
1600 Agricultural District (A)
1605 General Purpose and Description
The Agricultural (A) District is the most restrictive zoning district. The principal
use of land in this district is for crop, horticultural production, animal
production and support housing. The Agricultural (A) District can be a
temporary zoning classification until permanent zoning is established by the
City Council in accordance with the procedures established by state law and
these regulations.
1610 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the Agricultural (A) District are as follows:
1. Residential Uses: Primary dwelling and support housing.
2. Civic Uses:
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services Religious Assembly
3. Agricultural Uses: Crop, horticultural production and Animal Production
4. Conditional Uses: None
1615 Site Development Regulations
Feature Regulation
Lot Area One Acre
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet
Residential Density Not more than one primary dwelling
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Minimum Height: 35 feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 35% of the lot area
Feature Regulation
Parking No maximum; See Section 3050
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1620 Single Family Residential Districts (R-l)
1625 General Purpose and Description
The R-l Residential Single Family Dwelling District is the most restrictive
residential district. The principal use of land in this district is for low density
single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced, orderly,
convenient, and attractive residential area. Low density residential areas shall be
protected from higher density residential development and from the
encroachment of incompatible uses. Internal stability, harmony, attractiveness,
order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open
space for dwellings and related facilities and by consideration of the proper
functional relationship and arrangement of the different uses permitted in this
district.
1630 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in an R-l Residential Single Family Dwelling District, are as
follows:
1. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
2. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
3. Agricultural Uses
Crop and Horticultural Production
4. Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to
approval as provided by Section 4070.
a. Residential (Subject to Site Plan Approval)
1. Duplex
2. Cluster
3. Mobile .or modular home on a single lot
b. Civic Uses
1. Club or Lodge
2. Cultural Services .
3. Day Care Services
4. Primary Education Facilities
5. Religious Assembly
6. Residential Care Services
7. Safety Services
8. Secondary Education Facilities
c. Agricultural Uses
1. Animal Production
2. Support Housing
1635 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the R-1 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Area None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density Not more than one primary dwelling unit
per lot
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 35 feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 35% of the lot area
Parking No maximum; See Section 3050
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1700 MF-l Multiple Family Residence District (Limited Density) MF-l
1705 Purposes
The MF-l Multiple Family Residence District (Limited Density) is intended to
accommodate multiple family use with a maximum density of 12 to 17 units per
acre, depending on unit size. The MF-l District is appropriate for residential
neighborhoods having a mixture of single family and multiple family uses, as a
buffer between single family neighborhoods and higher intensity uses, and in
selected areas where limited density multiple family use is desirable.
1710 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential
b. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Primary and Secondary Education Facilities Religious Assembly
1715 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070:
a. Civic Uses
Club or Lodge
Cultural Services
Day Care Services
Residential Care Services
b. Residential Uses
Mobile or Modular Home on a single Lot
1720 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the MF-l District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Area None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density Minimum site area per dwelling unit:
Dwelling Unit Minimum Required
Size Site Area Per Unit
Efficiency 2,500 Square Feet
1 Bedroom 3,000 Square Feet
2 or more
bedrooms 3,500 Square Feet
Feature Regulation
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 35 feet
Parking Must meet off-street development
standards, Section 3050.
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 45% of the lot area
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 60% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space Minimum usable open space per
dwelling unit: 300 Square Feet.
1750 MF-2 Multiple Family Residence District
1755 Purposes
The MF-2 Multiple Family Residence District is intended to accommodate
multiple family use with a maximum density of 18 to 27 units per acre, depending
on unit size. The MF-2 District is usually located adjacent to a major street and
serves as a buffer or transition between higher intensity uses and low density
residential.
1760 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Residential Uses
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential
b. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Community Recreation
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
Primary and Secondary Education
1765 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070.
a. Civic Uses
Club or Lodge
Cultural Services
Guidance Services
Residential Care Services
b. Residential Uses
1. Residential uses of higher density than permitted by this ordinance.
Such density also is subject to site plan approval.
2. Mobile home parks subject to site plan approval and the following
mobile home park development regulations which shall be used
for site plan approval guidelines.
1770 Site Development Regulations
1771 General Residential Uses
Each site in the MF-2 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size None
Lot Width None
Residential Density Dwelling Unit Minimum Required
Size Site Area Per Unit
Efficiency 1,600 Square Feet
1 Bedroom 2,000 Square Feet
2 or more
bedrooms 2,400 Square Feet
Floor Area Ratio None
Height Maximum Height: 50 feet, but limited to
35 feet on any portion of a site within
100 feet of property classified as R-I or
MF-l
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Rear Yard Minimum Minimum Required Setback: 5 Feet
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 50% of the lot area
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 70% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space Minimum usable open space per
dwelling unit: 200 Square Feet.
Parking Must meet off-street development
standards, Section 3050.
Signs No signs allowed except for real estate,
temporary development sign, political
signs, nameplate signs, garage sale
signs, 45 square feet or less.
1772 Development Regulations for Mobilehome Parks
Mobilehome parks shall be subject to the following site development regulations
unless unique and unusual design restraints are shown. Unique shall be defined
as not common to other typical properties in the community.
a. The minimum number of mobilehome spaces contained in any
mobilehome park shall be 10 spaces, and the minimum site area shall
be 45,000 square feet.
b. The minimum mobilehome park site area per dwelling unit shall be
4,500 square feet.
c. Each mobilehome park shall have 3 minimum street yard of 25 feet, and a
minimum interior yard of 15 feet. No mobilehome space shall be
permitted in any street yard.
d. The mobilehome park shall have direct access to a street having a
dedicated and accepted right of way of not less than 60 feet.
e. Interior vehicular circulation shall be provided by private internal streets
paved to a width of not less than 30 feet. Internal streets shall be
continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets,
or shall be provided with a paved cul-de-sac not to exceed 400 feet in
length.
f. Each mobilehome space shall contain a minimum area of 4,500 square
feet, adjacent to an internal street designed to permit movement of
mobilehomes to .and from each space.
g. Each mobilehome space shall contain a minimum of 2.1 off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit, at least one of which shall be provided on each
mobilehome space. The balance of the required parking may be, located
in common parking area distributed throughout the mobilehome park in a
manner that: provides reasonable and convenient access to all
mobilehome spaces.
h. Each mobilehome and any attached accessory structures shall be
separated from every other mobilehome, building, or structure by at least
10 feet.
i. The minimum distance between a mobilehome stand and the pavement
of an internal street, common parking area, or other common area shall
be 10 feet.
j. A solid wall or fence at least six feet high shall be erected and thereafter
properly maintained along all boundaries of the Mobilehome Park; except,
(1) Where the solid wall or fence would impede drainage;
(2) Where the boundary of the Mobilehome Park abuts another
mobilehome development.
k. The height of the mobilehome chassis above the ground elevation,
measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet at the
low end.
l. Required street yards shall he landscaped, excluding necessary
driveways and walkways providing access to the Mobilehome Park.
m. Each mobilehome park shall provide for reasonable and safe pedestrian
access to and among each mobilehome space and all common facilities.
Walks not designed in common with internal streets or parking areas shall
have a minimum paved width of two feet.
n. Each mobilehome park shall have a minimum of 300 square feet of
usable open space per dwelling unit, with at least 150 square feet being
located on each mobilehome space. The balance of the required usable
open space may be located in common open space areas distributed
throughout the Mobilehome Park in a manner that provides reasonable
and convenient access to all mobilehome spaces.
o. Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
p. Each mobilehome park shall be subject to site plan review.
1800 LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-l)
1805 General Purpose and Description
The Limited Commercial District is intended for uses completely enclosed in a building,
of a nature of primarily retail sale of convenience goods or personal services primarily for
persons residing in adjacent residential areas. It also includes selected retail, office and
services uses that are similar in land use intensity and physical impact to the
neighborhood retail sales and service uses permitted in this district. Because the retail
and personal service uses permitted may be an integral part of the neighborhood,
closely associated with the residential, religious, recreational and educational uses in the
neighborhood, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, landscaping, and
off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. The Limited
Commercial District (C-l) is usually located on the periphery of the residential
neighborhood on a major street and in close proximity to the intersection of two major
streets.
1810 Permitted Uses
The following use types are permitted:
a. Commercial Uses
Administrative and Business Offices
Consumer Repair Services
Restaurant (Convenience)
Food Sales
General Retail Sales
Personal Services
Pet Services
b. Civic Uses
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Administrative Services
Religious Assembly
Educational Services
All Governmental Cultural and other similar Civic Services
c. Residential
Single Family Residential
Duplex Residential
1815 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by Section
4070.
a. Residential Uses
Townhouse Residential
Condominium Residential
Multiple Family Residential (standards are per MF-2 District)
Group Residential
b. Commercial Uses
Automotive Washing
Service Station
Liquor Sales
c. Civic Uses
Clubs; Lodges Other
d. Other
Any activity proposed to be conducted outside of main buildings.
1820 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the C-l District shall be subject to the following site development regulations.
Feature Regulation
Lot Size None
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 30 feet
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Ratio: .50 to 1
Height Maximum Height: 35 Feet
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Front yard to remain clear. No parking
space or sign erected. Front yard limited
to vehicle maneuvering space,
landscaping that does not obstruct view
and other similar uses.
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 15 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement
Rear Yard No requirement, unless backing to a
residential district which shall then be 20
feet.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 50% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 30% of the lot
area.
Parking Must meet minimum design standards.
Section 3050
Screening A six foot solid masonry fence of equal
characteristics of main building shall be
constructed along property line common
to a residential district.
Enclosed Building All activities permitted in this district
must be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, unless specifically
permitted otherwise by Condition Use
Permit
Signs All signs must be permanently attached
to building face no larger than 10% of
Building Face.
1850 HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - C-2
1855 General Purpose and Description
The Heavy Commercial District is designed for intensive commercial uses and
those selected industrial uses which are compatible with commercial
development. The permitted industrial uses are either free of objectionable
influences in their operation's and appearance or can eliminate or control
objectionable characteristics by landscaping, screening, and other abatement
devices. Because most of the uses in the
C-2 District often requires direct access to major streets, rail or air facilities, this
district should be located near major transportation routes. The C-2 Commercial
District should be used as a buffer or transition between industrial development
and Limited Commercial or Multi-Family Residential development.
1860 Permitted Uses (Amended by City Ordinance 417 on 9-13-1999)
The following use types are permitted:
a. Commercial Uses
Administrative and Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Sales
Automotive Repair Services (major and minor)
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Campground
Commercial Off-Street Parking
Communications Services
Construction Sales and Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Hotel - Motel
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Kennels
Laundry Services
Liquor Sales
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Pet Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant
Service Station
Vehicle Storage
b. Industrial Uses
Limited warehousing and distribution (not including garden storage and similar
activities that emit dust).
c. Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Ambulance Services
Club or Lodge
Day Care Services
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Governmental
Religious and other public assembly
Educational Service
d. Agricultural Uses
Horticulture
Crop Production
e. Single Family Residential Dwelling Units
1865 Conditional Uses (Amended by City Ordinance 417 on 9-13-1999)
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by
Section 4070.
a. Commercial Uses
Cocktail Lounge
Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment
Scrap and Salvage Services
This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Any type use requiring outdoor vehicle storage of more than 7
days, such as for auto repair services, etc. This does not include outdoor
sales of new vehicles or used vehicles as long as the used vehicles are in
operative condition with current license and inspection certificates.
2. Any type of outdoor sales or storage (except used cars as defined
above) of any used equipment, inoperative vehicles, used goods, scrap
parts or any other similar merchandise, material or used goods.
3. Any type of scrap or salvage services.
4. Veterinary Services
b. Industrial Uses
Light Manufacturing
c. Civic Uses
Detention Facilities
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
d. Residential
Mobile Homes (including HUD-Code Manufactured Homes).
1870 Site Development Regulations
Each site in the C-2 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size No Minimum lot area
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
Residential Density As approved by Conditional Use Permit
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 2.0 to 1.
Height Maximum Height: 60 feet, but limited to
35 feet on any portion of a site within
100 feet of property classified as
residential
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet.
Front yard to remain clear. No vehicle
parking space or sign erected. Front
yard limited to vehicle maneuver space,
landscaping that does not obstruct view
and other similar activities.
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement.
Rear Yard No requirement, except 20 feet on
any portion of a site within 100 feet of
a property classified residential.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 75% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 90% of the lot area.
Usable Open Space No Requirement
Screening No requirement, except for property
abutting residential district and there is
existing residential, construction within
500 feet then a solid 6 foot masonry
fence of equal characteristics of main
'building shall be constructed down the
common property line (except in
required front yard.)
Parking Must meet minimum standards, Section 3050.
Signs No restriction except it cannot obstruct
traffic views on any street or from any
curb cut.
1900 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS - I-1
1905 General Purpose and Description
The Industrial District is intended to provide-for industrial uses and other uses not
otherwise provided for in the other districts. The intensity of uses permitted in this district
makes it necessary to separate it from all residential districts and most commercial
districts wherever possible.
1910 Permitted Uses
1. Commercial Uses
Administrative and' Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Repair Services (major and minor)
Automotive Sales
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Communications Services
Commercial Off-Street Parking
Construction Sales and Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
General Retail Sales
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Kennels
Laundry Services
Liquor Sales
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant (Convenience or General)
Vehicle Storage
Veterinary Services
2. Industrial Uses
Basic Industry
Manufacturing
Warehousing and Distribution
3. Civic Uses
All civic type uses.
4. Agricultural Uses
Crop Product ion
Horticulture
1915 Conditional Uses
The following use types may be allowed, subject to approval as provided by Section
4070.
A. Commercial Uses
Cocktail Lounges
Stockyards
Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment
Scrap and Salvage Services
In particular the following but not limited to the following:
1. Any type use requiring outdoor vehicle storage of more than 7 days,
such as for auto repair services, etc. This does not include outdoor
sales of new vehicles or used vehicles as long as the used vehicles are
in operative condition with current license and inspection certificates.
2. Any type of outdoor sales or storage (except used cars as defined
above) of any used equipment, inoperative vehicles, used goods, scrap
parts or any other similar merchandise, material or used goods.
3. Any type of scrap or salvage services
B. Industrial Uses
Resource Extraction
C. Residential
All Residential uses.
1920 Site Development
Regulations
Each site in the 1-1 District shall be subject to the following site development
regulations:
Feature Regulation
Lot Size No Minimum lot area
Lot Width Minimum Lot Width: 30 feet
Residential Density As per conditional use permit
Floor Area Ratio Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 1.0 to 1
Height Maximum Height: 75 feet, but limited to 35 feet on
any portion of a site within 100 feet of
property classified as R-l, MF-l, or MF-2.
Front Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Street Side Yard Minimum Required Setback: 25 Feet
Interior Side Yard No requirement
Rear Yard No requirement, except 20 feet if
backing to a residential district.
Building Coverage Maximum Coverage: 75% of the lot
area.
Impervious Coverage Maximum Coverage: 90% of the lot
area.
Screening No requirement. except for property
abutting residential district and there
existing residential construction within
500 feet then a solid 6 foot masonry
fence of equal characteristics of main
building shall be constructed down the
common property line (except in
required front yard).
Parking Must meet minimum development
standards, Section 3050
Signs No requirement except it cannot
obstruct traffic view on any street or
from any curb cut.
2000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT - PD
2005 General Purpose and Description
The Planned Development District (PD) is designed to provide flexibility in
development planning and the opportunity for the application of planning
concepts not available in "Euclidian" zoning districts. It shall, where applicable,
supplement other classifications and is an optional zoning district.
2010 Authority and Limitations to Development Standards
The Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, after public hearing and proper
notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the planning and
zoning commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned
development districts:
l. Shopping center on tracts of three (3) acres or more.
2. Housing development on tracts of three (3) acres or more.
3. Industrial parks or districts on tracts of ten (10) acres or more.
4. Medical center and hospital.
5. Civic center and community center.
6. Office center.
7. Recreation center.
8. A combination of any of the developments listed in1 through 7.
9. Industrial uses which do not clearly comply with the standards prescribed
for the Industrial District.
10. Transition districts as an extension of an existing district whereby the
provision of off-street parking, screening walls, open space and planting
would create a protective transition between a lesser and more restrictive
district.
2015
In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this section,
the City Council shall require a comprehensive site plan of the development.
Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the ordinance prior to the
issuance of any building permit in a planned development district. Such required
plan and ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the
property, public or private streets or drives, with adequate right-of-way,
sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking spaces, height of building, maximum lot
coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls, or fences and other
development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a
reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property.
2020 Every planned development district approved under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be considered as an amendment to the ordinance as applicable
to the property involved. In approving the planned development district, the
Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development and such
conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the use of .the land or any structure which is part of the planned development
district~ and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to
the approval of zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions
precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy.
2025 All planned development districts approved in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance or by subsequent amendment thereto shall be referenced on the
zoning district map.
SECTION III
Supplemental Provisions and Regulations
SECTION III
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
3000 GENERAL COMPLIANCE
3005 Conformity to Zoning District Required
No building shall be erected and no existing buildings shall be moved, structurally
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall. any land, building or premises be used,
or designated for use for any purpose or in any manner other than provided for
hereinafter in the district in which the building, land or premises is located;
provided, however, that necessary structural repairs may be made where health
and safety are endangered.
3010 Accessory Buildings and Uses
(a) Customary accessory uses and buildings are authorized where a lot is
utilized for a permitted principal use except where prohibited specifically
or by necessary implication.
(b) Customary home occupations, together with such other activities
commonly conducted in living quarters shall be authorized as an
accessory use where the principal use is residential.
(c) Temporary buildings are authorized as an accessory use where the
permitted principal use is under construction.
(d) Real estate offices are authorized accessory uses where a residential
area is under development, provided that the said office is directly and
exclusively related to initial sales of dwelling units within the respective
residential subdivision or cluster housing development or an
immediately adjacent subdivision. Under those conditions the Building
Official shall ensure that each such accessory use real estate office is
issued a provisional certificate of occupancy only. The said provisional
certificate of occupancy shall expire in one (1) year unless it is
renewed by the respective real estate agency upon which the burden
shall lie to demonstrate that the conditions of approval still exist.
(e) Day nurseries are authorized accessory uses where the principal use is a
church or other place of worship.
3015 Conformity to Land Use Regulations
No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be structurally
altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, unless the same shall conform to
the setback, building site area, building location and land use regulations
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is
located.
3020 Conformity to Height Limits
(a) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which such building is located except as set forth below.
(b) The height limits prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio
towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers,
stage towers, scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and
spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, necessary public or
private utilities, conveyors, flag poles, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances.
(c) Public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools,
where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet (60')
and churches and other places of worship may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five (75') when each of the required yards is increased
by one foot (1') for each two feet (2') of additional building height above
the height limits for the district in which the building is located.
3025 Conformity to Parking and Loading Regulations
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered unless it shall conform to the area and off street parking and loading
regulations of the district in which such building is located.
3030 Conformity to Yard and Setback Requirements
(a) No yard or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with provisions of this section shall be considered
as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
(b) Where fifty-one percent (511.) or more of the frontage within a block is
occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of
less depth than required by this section, the remainder of that block may
be developed by observing the established front yard line, if approval
thereof is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
(c) On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision between a height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of the intersection streets in the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street
lines thirty-five feet (35') from the point of the intersection.
(d) Open or unenclosed terraces; porches, or roof eaves or extensions may
project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet
(4'); provided, however, no supporting structure for such projections may
be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a
gasoline filling station may extend into the required front yard, provided
such extension shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line.
(e) A roof overhang, open fire escape, or outside stairway may project not
more than three feet (3') into a required side yard.
3050 OFF-STREET PARKING AND CURB CUT STANDARDS
3051 Off-Street Parking
Except as hereinafter provided, no buildings or structure or part thereof shall
be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district in which it
is located, unless there shall be provided on the lot or tract off-street parking
in the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the designated
districts. An established use lawfully existing at the effective date of the
ordinance need not provide vehicle parking as hereinafter set forth, and no
existing vehicle parking in connection with said use at the effective date of this
ordinance may be reduced below the minimum number of spaces as
hereinafter required.
Maneuvering Area - Adequate on site maneuver area required; as .a minimum,
the car must be totally upon private property before any turning motion is
required to enter into the parking space stall.
(a) The minimum off-street parking spaces for residential use shall be as
follows:
1. One and two-family dwellings: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling
unit.
2. Multi-family dwellings:
(a) One space for each bedroom unit in dormitories, rooming
houses, or other group housing structure.
(b) One and one-fourth (1.25) spaces for each efficiency unit.
(c) One and one-half (1.50) spaces for each one-bedroom unit.
(d) One and three-fourths (1.75) spaces for each two-bedroom
unit.
(e) Two (2) spaces for each three-Bedroom or larger units.
3. PD, Planned Development District: Parking for dwelling units shall
be established on plan.
(b) Parking space schedule non-residential uses applicable to all districts
except original downtown. (See Section (c) following.)
1. Bank, savings and loan or similar financial establishment: One (1)
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of area.
2. Bowling Alley: Six (6) spaces for each lane.
3. Clinics or Doctors' Offices: One space for each two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces).
4. Commercial Outdoor Amusement: Twenty (20) spaces, plus one
space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area over
one thousand (1,000) square fee t.
5. Convalescent Home or Home for Aged: One space for each six
(6) rooms or beds.
6. Gasoline Service Station: Minimum if six (6) spaces.
7. Golf Course: Minimum of thirty (30) spaces.
8. High School, College or University: One space for each
classroom, laboratory or instruction area, plus one space for each
four (4) students accommodated at the institution during the
periods of heaviest attendance.
9. Hospitals. Acute Care: One space for every two (2) beds.
10. Hospital Chronic Care: One space for each six (6) beds, plus one
space for each employee.
11. Hotel or Motel: One space for each room, unit or guest
accommodation.
12. Institutions of a Philanthropic Nature; Ten (10) spaces, plus one
space for each employee.
13. Library or Museum: Ten (10) spaces, plus one space for each
three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
14. Manufacturing, Processing or Repairing: One (1) space for each
two (2) employees, or one space for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
15. Offices, General: One Space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area (minimum five (5) spaces).
16. Places of public assembly not listed: One space for each three (3)
seats provided.
17. Recreational, private or commercial area or building (other than
listed): One space for every three (3) persons to be normally
accommodated in the establishment.
18. Restaurant, Cafeteria or Clubs with License to sell alcoholic
beverages: One space for every (3) three seats under maximum
seating arrangements or one space for everyone hundred (100)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
19. Retail or Personal Service: One (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area (minimum of five (5) spaces).
20. Schools, Elementary or Junior High: One space for each
classroom, plus one space for each four (4) seats in any
auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly.
21. Storage or Warehousing: One (1) space for each two (2)
employees, or one space for each one thousand (1,000) square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
22. Theaters, Meeting Rooms and Place of Public Assembly: One (1)
space for every three (3) seats in the facility.
23. Day Nursery or Kindergarten: One space for each employee, and
one space for each ten (10) children. A circular drive that will
adequately serve the same traffic load, approved by the Traffic
Safety Director may be substituted for the required public parking.
(c) Original Downtown - Off-street parking is not required in the original
downtown area. The "original downtown area" is defined as an area
bordered by 7th Street on the South; 10th Street on the North; Avenue E
on the West, and the West Service Road of 1-27 on the East.
3052 Curb Cuts
Number - One curb cut per lot but no more than two curb cuts per 200 feet of lot
frontage.
Spacing - Curb cut no closer than 50 feet apart to the next adjacent curb cut or
street corner measured from the inside curb return.
Width - 12 feet minimum one way; 30 feet maximum two way.
Radius - 10 feet minimum radius.
3075 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
3076 Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing on the effective date of
this section may be continued, although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, the right to continue such
nonconforming use shall be subject to the following regulations:
(a) Normal repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure; provided that no structural alterations to enlarge the
nonconforming use shall be made except those required by law or
ordinance or those necessary for installing or enclosing required sanitary
facilities, such as toilets and bathrooms.
(b) If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed to an
extent of less than sixty percent (60%) of its fair market value by fire,
explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, then restoration or new
construction shall be permitted. If destruction is greater than sixty percent
(60%) of its fair market value, such building or structure and its use, if
repaired or replaced, shall conform to all regulations of the district in
which it is located, and it shall be treated as a new building.
(c) A vacant, nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before
the date of enactment of this section may be occupied by a use for which
the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a
period of ninety (90) days after the effective date of this section. The use
of a nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before the
date of enactment of this section which becomes vacant after the
effective date of this section, may be reoccupied by the use for which the
building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a
period of ninety (90) days after the building or structure becomes vacant.
All such buildings, after ninety (90) days of vacancy, shall be converted to
a conforming use.
3078 Other Conditions for Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be continued as
hereinafter provided:
(a) The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed to
a use which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which
it is situated.
(b) If a nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is voluntarily
discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, any future use of such land
or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district
in which such land or portion thereof is located.
.
3079 Abandonment
The nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land which has been
abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when:
(a) The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
(b) The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use
have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by
similar equipment within ninety (90) days; or
(c) A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use.
3080 Change in District Boundaries
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one (1) district to another district, or when the boundaries of
districts are changed as the result of annexation of new territory, or changed in
the regulations or restrictions of this section, the foregoing provisions relating to
nonconforming uses shall also apply to any uses existing therein which may
become nonconforming.
3081 Mobile Home Use (Amended by City Ordinance 333 on 5-8-1989)
A mobilehome, travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor home or camping trailer shall
not be used as an office or business building in any zoning district, except as an
office on the site in connection with construction with construction activities or in
connection with a bona fide retail mobilehome, travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor
home or camping trailer sales lot or park.
SECTION IV
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION IV
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
4000 RESERVED
4001 RESERVED
4002 RESERVED
4003 RESERVED
4004 RESERVED
4005 RESERVED
4006 RESERVED
4010 Board of Adjustment (Amended by City Ordinance 397 on 9-8-1997)
The City Council shall also serve as the Zoning Board of Adjustment (The
Board). The Board is hereby vested with power and authority in appropriate
cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make such
exceptions to the terms of this ordinance, in harmony with the general purpose
and intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein contained for
the purpose of rendering full justice and equity to the general public.
The Board of Adjustment may adopt rules to govern the proceedings, provided,
however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this ordinance. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman who may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of the
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon such question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed and shall be public record.
4011 Appeals
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by the person affected by any
decision of any administrative office with respect to this ordinance. Appeals shall
be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered by the
administrative office by filing notice of appeal specifying the grounds.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken, certified to the Board after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record or application on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of an
appeal, give the public notice as well as due notice to the parties, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by attorney or by agent.
4012 Jurisdiction and General Powers
The Board of Adjustment is hereby authorized to act in the following and limited to the
following areas:
(a) Require the discontinuance of non-conforming uses under any plan
whereby the full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite
period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the
neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the
regulations of this ordinance. It is the declared purpose of this ordinance
that non-conforming uses be eliminated and be required to conform to the
regulations prescribed in the preceding articles of this ordinance, having
due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered
in the light of the public welfare and the conservation and preservation of
property.
The Board of Adjustment shall from time to time on it’s' motion or upon
cause presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence,
continuation, or maintenance of any non-conforming use within the City. It
is the declared purpose of this ordinance that nonconforming uses be
eliminated and be required to conform to the regulations prescribed in the
preceding articles of this ordinance.
(b) To hear and decide is an error in any determination made the enforcement
of find the following appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or by an administrative official in this Chapter. The
Board must find the following in order to grant an appeal:
1. That there is a reasonable difference of interpretation as to the
specific intent of the zoning regulations or zoning map.
2. That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to
one property inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly
situated.
3. The decision of the Board must be such as will be in the best
interest of the community and consistent with the spirit and interest
of the City's zoning laws.
(c) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Chapter. The
term "special exception" shall mean a deviation from the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance, specifically enumerated herein, which shall be
granted only in the following instances, and then only when the Board finds
that such special exception will not adversely affect the value and use of
adjacent or neighboring property or be contrary to the best public interest:
1. To reconstruct, extend or enlarge a building occupied by a
nonconforming use on the lot or tract occupied by such building,
provided that the reconstruction, extension, or enlargement does not
prevent the return of the property to a conforming use.
2. To deviate yard requirements in the following circumstances:
a. An exception from the front yard requirements where the
actual front yard setback of an abutting lot does not meet the
front yard exception where the actual rear yard setback of any
four (4) or more lots in the same block do not meet the rear
yard requirements of these regulations.
b. A yard exception on corner lots.
c. An exception where the existing front yard setbacks of the
various lots in the same block are not uniform, so that anyone
of the existing front yard setbacks shall, for a building hereafter
constructed pr extended, be the required minimum front yard
depth.
3. To waive or reduce off-street parking and loading requirements
when the Board finds the same are unnecessary for the proposed
use of the building or structure for which the special exception
request applies.
(d) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of
this Chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of said laws will
result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall
be observed and substantial justice done. The term "variance" shall mean a
deviation from the literal provisions of .the Zoning Ordinance which is
granted by the Board when strict conformity to the Zoning Ordinance would
cause an unnecessary hardship because of circumstances unique to the
property on which the variance is granted. Except as otherwise prohibited in
this Section, the Board is empowered to authorize a variance from a
requirement of the Zoning Ordinance when the Board finds that all of the
following conditions have been met:
1. That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest; and
2. That literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topography or other extraordinary or exceptional physical situation
or physical condition unique' to the specific piece of property in
question which means that it cannot be common to other properties
in the area.
4050 Article Changes and Amendments
4051 Official Zoning Map
The official zoning map of the City of Abernathy shall be kept in the office of the City
Secretary.
4052 Changes and Amendments
The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by
ordinance the boundaries of the district, or the regulations herein established.
4053 RESERVED
4054 Public Hearing
A public hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting any
proposed amendment, supplement, or change. Notice of such hearing shall be
given by publication one (1) time in the official newspaper of the City, stating the
time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15)
days from date of publication.
4055 Protest
If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been
filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of
twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending
two hundred (200) feet or if those directly opposite thereto extending two
hundred (200) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment
shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the
governing body, as per Article 1011e, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes.
4060 Procedure for Change of Zoning Request Application
4061 Application
A zoning change request shall be completed in duplicate, which includes a
description of the subject property. The applicant shall state the specific zoning
classification desired and shall not list alternatives. Three (3) copies of a
planimetric map showing the subject property drawn to scale shall accompany
the application showing: boundary dimensions, adjacent property within two
hundred (200) feet including owners of record and addresses as shown on the
tax rolls, and all existing buildings on the subject property.
4062 Council Public Hearing
The zoning change request is scheduled for a public hearing before the Council
at their next regular meeting following an eighteen (18) day administrative period.
Fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, a notice of public hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the City and all property owners within two
hundred (200) feet of the subject property shall be notified.
4063 RESERVED
4064 Council Action
Action by the City Council is final and the same request may not be brought
before the Council again for one (1) year unless the Council shall determine that
extenuating circumstances exist. A notation by the Council on its minutes on the
prior denial of an application shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of
extenuating circumstances.
4065 Preparation of Ordinance
Contingent upon approval of the request by the Council, the applicant shall
provide a description of subject property suitable for the preparation of an
ordinance within ninety (90) days of Council approval. Field notes of a survey of
the property are considered suitable descriptions.
When correct field notes are not provided to the City within ninety (90) days,
previous action by the Council is null and void.
4070 CONDITIONAL USES
4071 Title and Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to provide for review and discretionary approval
of uses typically having unusual site development features or unique operating
characteristics requiring special consideration so that they may be located,
designed, and operated compatibly with uses on surrounding properties and
within the City at large. The Conditional Use Procedure process is intended to
encourage broad public review and evaluation of site development features and
operating characteristics, and to ensure adequate mitigation of potentially
unfavorable impacts.
4072. Concurrent Applications
Application for a Conditional Use Permit and for Rezoning for the same property
may be made concurrently, subject to the fees applicable to both a Conditional
Use Permit and a Rezoning.
4073 Application and Fee
Application for a conditional Use Permit shall be filed with the Building Official.
The application shall include the following:
a. Name and address of the owner and applicant.
b. Address and legal description of the property.
c. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the
applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property.
d. The property address and the name and mailing address of the owner of
each lot within 200 feet of the subject property and a map with parcels
keyed to the ownership and address data.
e. A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use including any data pertinent to the findings required for
approval of the application. For uses involving public assembly or
industrial processing or uses potentially generating high volumes of
vehicular traffic, the zoning administrator may require specific information
relative to the anticipated peak loads and peak use periods relative to
industrial processes and the ability of the use to meet performance
standards, or substantiating the adequacy of proposed parking, loading
and circulation facilities.
f. Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement plans
and such additional maps and drawings all sufficiently dimensioned as
required to illustrate the following:
1. The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
2. The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks.
3. The location, height, bulk, general appearance and intended use
of existing and proposed buildings on the site, and the
approximate location of existing buildings on abutting sites within
50 feet.
4. The location of existing and proposed site improvements including
parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access,
landscaped areas, utility or service areas, fencing and screening,
signs and lighting.
5. The location of watercourses and drainage features.
6. The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and
loading spaces, and a calculation of applicable minimum
requirements.
7. The relationship of the site and the proposed use to surrounding
uses, including pedestrian and vehicular circulation, current use of
nearby parcels, and any proposed off-site improvements to be
made
g. Any applicable fee established by the City Council.
4074 Public Hearing, Notice and Procedure
The Public Hearing and Notice and Procedure shall be the same as for a change
in zoning.
4075 Conditions of Approval (Amended by City Ordinance 397 on 6-14-1999)
a. The City Council may establish conditions of approval. Conditions may
include, but shall not be limited to requirements for special yards, open
spaces: buffers, fences, walls, and screening; requirements for installation
and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures;
requirements for street improvements and dedications, regulation of
vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; regulation of signs;
regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; requirements for
maintenance of landscaping and other improvements; establishment of
development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; and
such other conditions as the Commission may deem necessary to insure
compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety,
and welfare.
b. The applicant for a Conditional Use Permit for the placement of a mobile
home or I-IUD-Code manufactured home must provide, upon application
for the permit, a minimum of four (4) photographs of the home to be
placed in the City. Such photographs must include a picture of each side
of the home. In addition, within thirty (30) days after the home has been
placed on the property, the applicant must meet the following conditions
to specifications acceptable to the City: (1) build a front porch of not less
than 4' x 6', with stable railing attached; (2) build a rear porch at least 4' x
4', with stable railing attached; (3) provide either a gravel, asphalt or
concrete off street drive-way or parking area; and (4) provide a skirt for
the mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured unit.
4076 Lapse of a Conditional Use Permit. (Amended by City Ordinance 333 on
5/8/1989 and City Ordinance 425 on 8/10/2000)
Unless a longer or shorter time shall be specifically established as a condition of
approval, a Conditional Use Permit shall lapse and shall become void 120 days
following the date on which such permit became effective, unless prior to
expiration a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and
diligently pursued toward completion, or a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the use, or the site is occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is
required.
4077 Suspension and Revocation
a. Upon violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance, or, if granted
subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, a Conditional
Use Permit shall be suspended upon notification to the owner of a use or
property subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
b. The City Council shall hold a Public Hearing within forty (40) days of such
notification and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, or
condition is .being complied with, may revoke the Conditional Use Permit
or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
regulation, general provision, or condition.
c. The decision of the Council to revoke a Conditional Use Permit shall be
effective immediately
5000 ENFORCEMENT
5005 General Requirements
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Building Official. All
applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat submitted in
duplicate (2 copies) drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or
tract of land to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the
property, all means of ingress and egress, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of such
application and plat shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector. Prior to
the issuance of any building permit, the Building Inspector shall determine-that
the application and improvements to be constructed comply with the
requirements and provisions of this ordinance.
5010 Certificate of Occupancy
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied, or
changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the
Building Inspector stating that the building or proposed use of a building or
premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these regulations.
5015 Application
Certificates of Occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for
building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the completion or
alterations of such building in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the Building Inspection Office
and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having an interest in the
building.
5020 Penalty of Violation
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance or fail to comply with any of the requirements, or who shall build or
alter any building or use in violation of any detail or plan submitted and approved
hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not
more than two hundred (200) dollars and each day shall constitute a separate
offense. The owner of any building or premises where any thing in violation of
this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, persons or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may
have assisted in the commission of such violations, shall be guilty of a separate
offense and upon conviction, shall be fined as herein provided.
6000 84 VALIDITY, REPEAL, ENACTMENT
6005 Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any part or provision thereof
other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
6010 Repeal
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed
6015 (Reserved)
6020 (Reserved)
DULY PASSED by the City Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, on November 18,
1985

Ordinance 557 Page 1
CITY ORDINANCE NO. 557
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ABERNATHY AMENDING
ORDINANCE 310 (ZONING CODE) OF THE CITY OF
ABERNATHY AND REPEALING ALL LAWS OR ORDINANCES
OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH;
ESTABLISHING STANDARD RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR
THE INSTALLATION, USE, PLACEMENT, AND LOCATION OF
MOBILE HOMES, HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES,
MODULAR HOMES, AND PROVIDING FOR MANUFACTURED
HOME PARKS, PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS;
PROVIDING FOR A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND
PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, the City of Abernathy, Texas, has authority to regulate, limit, prohibit, and direct
the installation, placement, and planning of housing within the municipality through zoning,
land use, and its powers to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
WHEREAS, the City of Abernathy, Texas, has adopted various ordinances causing confusion
and conflicts regulating mobile homes, HUD-Code manufactured homes and modular homes;
and
WHEREAS, portions of the City’s current zoning ordinances: Ordinance No. 310, Ordinance
No. 333, Ordinance 393, Ordinance 412, Ordinance 417, and Ordinance 425; and are found to be
disorganized and confusing and the City desires to amend certain provisions and re-codify and
establish a more uniform Code in order to update its Ordinances with the State of Texas
Manufactured Housing Standards Act (MHSA) as codified in the Texas Occupations Code; and
WHEREAS, the City Council for the City of Abernathy desires to amend and clarify its rules,
procedures, and guidelines related to Mobile Homes, HUD-Code Manufactured Homes, and
Modular Homes as they are defined under the MHSA; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Abernathy, Texas, finds that it is in the best interest
of the public safety, health and general welfare, as well as to proper planning and management of
zoning and land use, to amend its ordinances regulating Mobile Homes, HUD-Code
Manufactured Homes, and Modular Homes as they are defined under the MHSA;
WHEREAS, a public hearing on this matter was held by the City Council as required by law;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF ABERNATHY,
TEXAS:
Ordinance 557 Page 2
SECTION 1 - OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS.
THAT Ordinance 310 (Zoning Code) is amended as stated herein and only those parts of said
Ordinance or other ordinances that conflict herein are hereby replaced and repealed and declared
no further in force or effect.
SECTION 2 - CONTROLLING ORDINANCE
This ordinance shall control over any conflicting terms of Zoning Ordinance 310 and any other
ordinances amending ordinances thereunder, except as may be otherwise stated herein.
SECTION 3 - DEFINITIONS
a. “BUILDING OFFICIAL” – The City Manager or the person or department to whom
the city manager may delegate the BUILDING OFFICIAL duties including the physical
inspection of property to ensure each major component meets zoning and building codes;
foundation, plumbing, electrical wiring, roofing, and fire egress.
b. “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY” – a document issued by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL that authorizes a building or structure to be used or occupied by the proposed
use upon being inspected and found to be in compliance with the requirements of all City
ordinances.
c. “MOBILE HOME” - a structure constructed before June 15, 1976, according to the
rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, built on a
permanent chassis, designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities, transportable in one
or more sections, and in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40
body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet. Tex. Occ. Code §
1201.003 (20).
d. “HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME” - a structure constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities,
transportable in one or more sections, and in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet
in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square
feet. Tex. Occ. Code § 1201.003 (12). (A HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME
displays a red certification label on the exterior of each section. This label serves as the
manufacturer’s certification that the section is built in accordance with Federal Housing
and Urban Development standards.)
e. “MANUFACTURED HOME” or “MANUFACTURED HOUSING” – is a HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME or a MOBILE HOME. Tex. Occ. Code § 1201.003
(18).
Ordinance 557 Page 3
f. “MODULAR HOME” – a structure designed for the occupancy of one or more families,
that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular
components built at a location other than the permanent site; and designed to be used as a
permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is
transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation
system. Tex. Occ. Code § 1202.002. (A MODULAR HOME will have a blue decal issued
by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation signifying that the home has been
built to comply with the International Residential Code.)
g. “HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK” - A unified development of ten or
more MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES for rent or lease, and including common
areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry and utility services, storage, and
similar services for the convenience of residents of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK.
h. “MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE” - An area within a HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK which is designed for and designated as the location
for a single MANUFACTURED HOME and the exclusive use of its occupants.
i. “MANUFACTURED HOME STAND” - That portion of a MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACE upon which the MANUFACTURED HOME is placed.
j. “PIT SET FOUNDATION” A foundation system designed to give a low profile
appearance resembling a "site" built home on slab foundation which incorporates a full
perimeter support wall constructed of poured concrete or concrete block resting on an
excavated footing which has been installed so that it forms a barrier to the entry of water
underneath the home and acts as a short retaining wall.
k. “STREET LINE” - the line of the tract or lot which adjoins a street or roadway upon
which there is situated either street numbered houses or businesses or a combination of
both. Where curbing is present, the farthest edge of the curbing from the center of the
street shall be considered the STREET LINE. Where a curb is not present, the STREET
LINE shall be considered to be 9½ feet from the actual property line nearest the street or
roadway.
l. “PERSON, FIRM OR CORPORATION” - includes a natural person, entity, firm,
partnership, association, limited liability company, joint venturer, or corporation.
Other terms herein shall have the meanings defined in other ordinances of the City, except where
the context clearly requires otherwise.
SECTION 4 - MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED
No MOBILE HOME shall be permitted within the City limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
Any MOBILE HOME located in the City legally, prior to the enactment of this ordinance and
Ordinance 557 Page 4
used and occupied as a residential dwelling shall be allowed to remain, but shall not be replaced
with another MOBILE HOME under any circumstance.
SECTION 5 - UNLAWFUL PARKING, USE OR LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED
HOMES
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, locate or permit the parking or
location of any HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME upon any lot, street or tract of land
unless the lot or tract of land is entirely within an approved HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK.
SECTION 6 - EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOMES
This ordinance does not make unlawful any MANUFACTURED HOME already in place and
complying with all laws when this ordinance becomes effective. However, after the effective
date of this ordinance, if any nonconforming MANUFACTURED HOME is removed from its
location, the following shall apply:
a. If it is a MOBILE HOME, it shall not be allowed to relocate within the city limits of the
City of Abernathy, Texas; and
b. If it is a HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME all provisions of this ordinance shall
apply.
SECTION 7 – MANUFACTURED HOME USE
A MANUFACTURED HOME shall not be used as an office or business building in any zoning
district, except as an office on the site in connection with:
a. a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, or
b. a bona fide retail MANUFACTURED HOME sales lot or park.
SECTION 8 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who commits any of the following shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than FIVE HUNDRED
DOLLARS ($500.00) for:
a. Any violation of this ordinance; or
b. Providing false information to a City official concerning licensing or permitting under
this ordinance this ordinance or compliance with this ordinance.
Each day or portion of a day during which any violation occurs or continues shall be a separate
offense.
SECTION 9 - PERMISSIBLE PARKING OR LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED
HOUSING.
A HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME may be parked or located or permitted to be parked
or located upon any lot or tract of land not prohibited above as long as long as such HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME complies with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and the
Ordinance 557 Page 5
provisions of state law. Any person, firm or corporation who desires to park or locate a HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME as permitted in this ordinance, shall make application for a
housing installation permit with the BUILDING OFFICIAL of the City of Abernathy, Texas.
The fee for the housing installation permit shall be $0.05 PER SQUARE FEET of enclosure.
Before granting a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall insure
that the following requirements are met:
a. Setbacks. No HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME may be placed on any lot or
tract within the City of Abernathy, Texas, in such manner that any part of the HUD
MANUFACTURED HOME or any extension thereto is situated within 5 feet of any side
lot or tract line whenever the lot or tract is bordered by a lot or tract of land on either side
of such lot or tract land so occupied, and is set back less than 25 feet from the front
STREET LINE. Whenever the lot or tract of land is situated at an intersection of two
different streets, or roadways, the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME or any extension
thereof shall not be parked nearer than 5 feet from the inside lot or tract line and not
nearer than 15 feet from the side STREET LINE adjacent to the street intersecting the
street upon which are situated homes or businesses which have street addresses and not
nearer than 25 feet to the front STREET LINE.
b. Anchoring. A HUD MANUFACTURED HOME must be anchored in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions and anchored, as well as supported and
blocked, in accordance with the standards for HUD MANUFACTURED HOUSING
established or maintained by the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs.
c. Porches. A porch is required at each point of entry to the home. Each porch must be of
sturdy construction. The minimum size requirement for any front porch shall be four foot
by six foot (4’ X 6’) and all other porches shall have a minimum size requirement of four
foot by four foot (4’X4’). Any porch with a finished tread surface higher than twelve
(12) inches above the existing ground level must have handrails attached.
d. Driveway. Any HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME is required to have a concrete,
gravel, or asphalt driveway and parking area for off-street parking of vehicles. Where the
driveway and parking area adjoin a curb along any paved street, a concrete apron
extending five feet (5’) from the curb shall be required. Driveways shall not be located
within twenty feet (20’) of any street intersection.
e. Skirting. In addition to the requirements specified above, any HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME shall be properly skirted. Skirting shall be required around
the complete perimeter of said HUD MANUFACTURED HOME in accordance with the
following minimum specifications:
1. Skirting shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that prevents animals
from entering into the crawl space.
2. The following material (or its equivalent as approved by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL) is approved to be used for skirting:
a. manufactured vinyl skirting with vent panels;
b. factory painted steel sheets, with appropriate “J-Trim” installed where the
skirting meets the home;
c. reinforced and painted Masonite, HardiPlank or other similar
commercially produced hard board siding products;
Ordinance 557 Page 6
d. reinforced and painted grooved plywood sheets commonly used as home
siding, with a 3/8 inch minimum thickness, rated for exterior use by the
manufacturer;
e. reinforced vinyl siding, rated for exterior use by the manufacturer;
f. mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
3. Screened vents are required to be used with all skirting to allow for air circulation
under the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME.
4. Used materials for skirting are strictly prohibited.
SECTION 10 - MODULAR HOME
A MODULAR HOME may be parked or located or permitted to be parked or located upon any
lot or tract of land which has 6,000 square feet of land or more, whenever such lot or tract is
unoccupied other dwelling within the City limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, as long as such
MODULAR HOME complies with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and the provisions
of state law. Any person, firm or corporation who desires to park or locate a MODULAR
HOME as permitted in this ordinance, shall make application for a housing installation permit
with the BUILDING OFFICIAL of the City of Abernathy, Texas. The fee for the housing
installation permit shall be $0.05 PER SQUARE FEET of enclosure.
A MODULAR HOME may be placed in a single-family zoned area consistent with this
Ordinance and, must:
1. have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each singlefamily
dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized
housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax
appraisal roll in the county in which the properties are located;
2. have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on
which the modular housing is proposed to be located;
3. have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on
which the modular housing is proposed to be located, as well as required herein;
4. comply with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard
offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site
requirements applicable to single-family dwellings;
5. be securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
For purposes of Section, "value" means the taxable value of the modular housing and the lot
after installation of the housing. TEXA OCC. CODE 1202.253.
Ordinance 557 Page 7
Before granting a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall insure
that the following requirements are met:
a. Setbacks. No MODULAR HOME may be placed on any lot or tract within the City of
Abernathy, Texas, in such manner that any part of the HUD MANUFACTURED HOME
or any extension thereto is situated within 5 feet of any side lot or tract line whenever the
lot or tract is bordered by a lot or tract of land on either side of such lot or tract land so
occupied, and is set back less than 25 feet from the front STREET LINE. Whenever the
lot or tract of land is situated at an intersection of two different streets, or roadways, the
MODULAR HOME or any extension thereof shall not be parked nearer than 5 feet from
the inside lot or tract line and not nearer than 15 feet from the side STREET LINE
adjacent to the street intersecting the street upon which are situated homes or businesses
which have street addresses and not nearer than 25 feet to the front STREET LINE.
b. Foundation. In accordance with the Building Code of the City, each MODULAR
HOME shall be anchored to a permanent foundation. A PIT SET FOUNDATION is
required if the MODULAR HOME is placed on any lot or tract of land within the city
limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, which is not located entirely within an approved
HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
c. Anchoring. A MODULAR HOME shall be anchored in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and anchored, as well as supported and blocked,
in accordance with the standards for MODULAR HOUSING established and/or
maintained by the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs.
d. Floor Level. Any MODULAR HOME placed on any lot or tract of land within the city
limits of the City of Abernathy, Texas, not located entirely within an approved HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK must be installed so that finished floor at any
entrance does not extend to a height greater than twelve (12) inches above the existing
ground level.
e. Porches. A porch is required at each point of entry to the home. Each porch must be of
sturdy construction. The minimum size requirement for any front porch shall be four foot
by six foot (4’ X 6’) and all other porches shall have a minimum size requirement of four
foot by four foot (4’X4’). Any porch with a finished tread surface higher than twelve
(12) inches above the existing ground level must have handrails attached.
f. Driveway. Any MODULAR HOME is required to have installed, a concrete, gravel, or
asphalt driveway and parking area for off-street parking of vehicles. Where the driveway
and parking area adjoin a curb along any paved street, a concrete apron extending five
feet (5’) from the curb shall be required. Driveways shall not be located within twenty
feet (20’) of any street intersection.
g. Skirting. In addition to the requirements specified above, any MODULAR HOME shall
be properly skirted. Skirting shall be required around the complete perimeter of said
MODULAR HOME in accordance with the following minimum specifications:
1. Skirting shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that prevents animals
from entering into the crawl space.
2. For any MODULAR HOME the following material (or its equivalent as approved
by the appropriate city officials) is approved to be used for skirting:
a. manufactured vinyl skirting with vent panels;
b. reinforced and painted Masonite, HardiPlank or other similar
commercially produced hard board siding products;
Ordinance 557 Page 8
c. Poured Concrete
d. Mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
3. For any MODULAR HOME required to utilize a PIT SET FOUNDATION, the
only material approved to be used for skirting is:
a. Poured Concrete;
b. Mortared brick, stone, or concrete blocks installed on a permanent footing.
4. Screened vents are required to be used with all skirting to allow for air circulation
under the MODULAR HOME.
5. Used materials for skirting is strictly prohibited
SECTION 11 - INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Before a newly installed HUD MANUFACTURED HOME or MODULAR HOME may be
occupied, it must first be inspected by the City BUILDING OFFICIAL. Once the premises has
been inspected and found to be in compliance with all City ordinances, the BUILDING
OFFICIAL shall issue a CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
SECTION 12 – CONNECTION TO CITY UTILITY SERVICES
A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY is required prior to connecting any newly installed HUD
MANUFACTURED HOME or MODULAR HOME to the water and/or sewer service of the
City of Abernathy, Texas, in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the City.
SECTION 13 - HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS shall be subject to the following site
development regulations unless unique and unusual design restraints are shown. HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOMES and/or HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS are
only allowed in designated zones established by the City Zoning areas MF-2, C-1, I-1, and PD.
Unique shall be defined as not common to other typical properties in the community.
a. The minimum number of HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES contained
in any HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall be 10 spaces, and the
minimum site area shall be 45,000 square feet.
b. The minimum HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK site area per dwelling
unit shall be 4,500 square feet.
c. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have a minimum street yard
of 25 feet, and a minimum interior yard of 15 feet. No HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACE shall be permitted in any street yard.
d. The HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have direct access to a street
having a dedicated and accepted right of way of not less than 60 feet.
e. Interior vehicular circulation shall be provided by private internal streets paved to a width
of not less than 30 feet. Internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other
internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a paved cul-de-sac not to
exceed 400 feet in length.
Ordinance 557 Page 9
f. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE shall contain a minimum area of
4,500 square feet, adjacent to an internal street designed to permit movement of HUD
CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES to and from each space.
g. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE shall contain a minimum of 2.1
off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one of which shall be provided on
each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. The balance of the required
parking may be located in common parking area distributed throughout the HUD CODE
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK in a manner that provides reasonable and convenient
access to all MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES.
h. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME and any attached accessory structures
shall be separated from every other HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME, building,
or structure by at least 10 feet.
i. The minimum distance between a HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME STAND and
the pavement of an internal street, common parking area, or other common area shall be
10 feet.
j. A solid wall or fence at least six feet high shall be erected and thereafter properly
maintained along all boundaries of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK;
except,
1. Where the solid wall or fence would impede drainage;
2. Where the boundary of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
abuts another HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME development.
k. The height of the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME chassis above the ground
elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet at the low end.
l. Required street yards shall he landscaped, excluding necessary driveways and walkways
providing access to the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
m. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall provide for reasonable and
safe pedestrian access to and among each MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE and all
common facilities. Walks not designed in common with internal streets or parking areas
shall have a minimum paved width of two feet.
n. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall have a minimum of 300
square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit, with at least 150 square feet being
located on each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. The balance of the
required usable open space may be located in common open space areas distributed
throughout the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK in a manner that
provides reasonable and convenient access to all HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME SPACES.
o. Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
p. Each HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall be subject to site plan
review by the BUILDING OFFICIAL and subject to Zoning approval by the City.
SECTION 14- EXISTING HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
This ordinance does not make an existing or prior approved HUD CODE MANUFACTURED
HOME PARK or any MOBILE HOME park which is already in place and conforming to all
laws at the date this ordinance becomes effective. It is further provided that in the situation
where the HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MOBILE HOME park in
Ordinance 557 Page 10
existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance does not conform to the minimum spacing
requirements of this ordinance, such space may not again be occupied unless and until such
vacant space conforms to the minimum spacing requirements of this ordinance. It is the intent of
this ordinance to cause existing HUD CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKs and/or
MOBILE HOME parks to be brought up to the minimum spacing standards of this Ordinance as
an existing space becomes vacant.
SECTION 15 - NONLIABILITY
The City and its officers, agents and employees shall have no liability of any nature for any
actions, omissions, or other matters in any way concerning the subject matter of this ordinance.
SECTION 16 - CONSTITUTIONALITY
If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance shall held to be
held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such section, sub-section,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion shall be a deemed separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 17 – PUBLICAITON
The City Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to cause publication of this ordinance in
accordance with law.
SECTION 18 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the date of its passage and adoption by the
City Council of the City of Abernathy.
Public Hearing was held on the 9th day of June, 2014.
PASSED AND ADOPTED THIS THE 9TH DAY OF JUNE, 2014.