CODE OF ORDINANCES - CITY OF 
ALAMO HEIGHTS, TEXAS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 13, 1990 
Effective: September 1, 1990 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF ALAMO HEIGHTS, TEXAS 
____________ 
Bobby Rosenthal 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lawson Jessee 
Wes Sharples 
Fred Prassel 
Lynda Billa Burke 
John Savage 
City Council 
____________ 
J. Mark Browne 
City Manager 
Marian Vargas 
Information Services Manager 
____________ 
Cynthia Barr 
Finance Director 
____________ 
Jennifer Reyna 
City Secretary 
Lori Harris 
Human Resources Manager 
____________ 
Patrick Sullivan 
Public Works Director 
____________ 
Richard Pruitt 
Police Chief 
Buddy Kuhn 
Fire Chief 
____________ Michael S. Brenan 
City Attorney 
____________ Jason Lutz 
Community Development Services Department Director 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF ALAMO HEIGHTS, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
William D. Balthrope 
Mayor 
____________ 
Polly Zachry 
Ben F. Foster, Jr. 
Robert Biechlin 
Lon Carpenter 
Dr. Dan Peavy 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Brenan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Susan Hennessy 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Paul D. Sontag 
City Engineer 
____________ 
Lawrence C. Holley 
Police Chief 
____________ 
W. E. Renken 
Fire Chief 
PREFACE 
This Republication constitutes a complete republication of the ordinances of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1990 Code, as supplemented through March 10, 2003, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Eric Grant, Vice President, Kelly Heaton and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Michael S. Brenan, City Attorney, and Ms. Judith E. Surratt, City Secretary, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1237 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ALAMO HEIGHTS, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF THE PRIOR CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ALAMO HEIGHTS, TEXAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Alamo Heights, Texas" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 19, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. The prior Code of Ordinances is repealed effective September 1, 1990. 
Section 3. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed TWO THOUSAND AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($2,000.00) for violations involving fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, in all other cases the fine shall not exceed FIVE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($500.00). Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in a form indicating the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 5. This ordinance shall become effective September 1, 1990. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 13th day of August, 1990. 
;sigr; William D. Balthrope\ MAYOR 
ATTEST: 
;sigl; Susan Hennessy\ CITY SECRETARY  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The home rule charter of the city, as adopted by an election held on November 23, 1954, as amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 1739, adopted November 14, 2007, is set out as published in the city's 1965 City Code volume. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Current state law references follow outdated ones in brackets. 
State Law reference— Adoption of Home Rule Charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
 
PREAMBLE 
In thankful recognition of the leadership of Almighty God, we, the people of Alamo Heights, Texas, humbly invoking His blessings, do ordain and establish this Charter.  
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME 
 
Sec. 1. - Corporate name. 
All the inhabitants of the City of Alamo Heights, in Bexar County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said city are herein established, shall be a body politic, incorporated under and to be known by the name and style of the "City of Alamo Heights," with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limits of the City of Alamo Heights shall be as follows, to-wit; 
Beginning at the point where the North line of Tuxedo Avenue intersects the West line of Jones Maltsberger Road. 
Thence East along the North line of Tuxedo Avenue for a distance of 3,520 feet, more or less, to the point where the said North line of Tuxedo Avenue intersects the West line of Nacogdoches Road. 
Thence in a Northeasterly direction along the West line of Nacogdoches Road a distance of 1,340 feet, more or less, to the point where the West line of said Nacogdoches Road intersects a prolongation of the East-West dividing line of Block 5, Sylvan Hills Addition. 
Thence East along the dividing line of Block 5 for a distance of 560 feet, more or less, to the point where the said East-West dividing line of Block 5 intersects the West line of Broadway. 
Thence North along the West line of Broadway a distance of 350 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the said West line of Broadway with a prolongation of the North line of the East-West alley in Block 21, Oak Woods Subdivision. 
Thence East across Broadway and along the North line of the said East-West alley in Block 21, across Vanderhoeven Drive and along the North line of the East-West alley in Block 22, Oak Woods Subdivision, a total distance of 2,310 feet, more or less, to the point where the said North line of East-West alley in Block 22 intersects the West line of North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Thence in a Southerly direction along the West line of North New Braunfels Avenue a distance of 4,420 feet, more or less, to the point where the said West line of North New Braunfels Avenue intersects the North line of Redwood Avenue. 
Thence East a distance of forty feet, more or less, to the East line of North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Thence in a Southerly and Southwesterly direction along the East line of North New Braunfels Avenue for a distance of 5,860 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the said East line of North New Braunfels Avenue with the City Limits of the City of San Antonio in Burr Road. 
Thence West along the present North line of the City of San Antonio, a distance of 3,000 feet, more or less, to the intersection of said line with the center line of the San Antonio River. 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the Center line of the said San Antonio River a distance of 420 feet, more or less, to the intersection of said center line with the center line of Olmos Creek. 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the center line of Olmos Creek a distance of 5,680 feet, more or less to, to the intersection of said center line with the West line of the Jones Maltsberger Road, referred to on the incorporating plat filed for record July 6, 1922, and recorded July 17, 1922, as "Olmos Drive." 
Thence in a Northerly direction along the west line of the Jones Maltsberger Road (which is also the East City Limits line of the City of San Antonio) a distance of 1,450 feet, more or less, to an angle in said Jones-Maltsberger Road. 
Thence in a Northwesterly direction along the South line of Jones Maltsberger Road a distance of 720 feet, more or less, to an angle in said road. 
Thence in a Northerly and Northwesterly and Northeasterly direction along the West line of said Jones Maltsberger Road a distance of 2,405 feet, more or less, to the intersection of said West line of Jones Maltsberger Road with the North line of Tuxedo Avenue, which is the place of beginning.  
Sec. 2. - Extension of boundaries. 
(a)  Territory adjoining and contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Alamo Heights, as defined herein, may be annexed to said city, regardless of the shape or configuration or size thereof, upon application being made therefore, in writing, to the City Council of the City of Alamo Heights, describing the territory by metes and bounds, sought to be annexed, which said application shall be signed by a majority of those residing in said territory, who are qualified to vote for members of the Legislature of the State of Texas; which said application shall be proved by the affidavit of one or more persons that the signatures thereto are genuine. In the event it is found by the said city council that a majority of said qualified voters residing in such territory are favorable to annexation, then the said city council may, by ordinance, declare such territory annexed to the City of Alamo Heights, and the same shall thenceforth be an integral part of said city. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the owner of any uninhabited territory or property contiguous to the City of Alamo Heights, as defined in this Charter, from making application to the city council to have the same annexed to the city, and when such application is made and acted upon, an ordinance shall be passed, providing for the annexation of such property, and said property when so annexed, shall be covered by the same rules and regulations as other territory annexed under the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Annexation of additional territory to the city limits may also, in addition to the above prescribed method, be made by the city council initiating and ordering an election for the extension of the territorial limits of the city in accordance with the procedure and methods provided and set forth in Chapter 43 Local Government Code, and which Chapter is here adopted and made a part of this Charter. 
(c)  Whenever any territory is annexed to the City of Alamo Heights, persons residing in such territory shall thereafter be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of said city, and shall thereafter be subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Alamo Heights and to all taxes levied by the city, and shall be bound by all the acts, ordinances, rules and regulations governing other citizens of said city.  
ARTICLE III. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 1. - Council manager government. 
The municipal government provided for by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager" form of government. Pursuant to its provisions, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution, laws and statutes of the State of Texas and by this Charter, all powers of the City of Alamo Heights (referred to as the city) shall be vested in an elected city council (referred to as the city council) which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint a city manager, who in turn, will be held responsible to the city council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner not be prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by the United States Constitution, Texas Constitution, laws or statutes of the State of Texas, and ordinances adopted by the city.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND THEIR ELECTION 
 
Sec. 1. - Wording interpretation. 
The gender of the wording throughout this Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex. All singular words shall include the plural and all plural words shall include the singular. All references to state law or laws of the State of Texas, however expressed in this Charter, shall mean "as presently enacted or as may be amended or superceded." The use of the word city in this Charter shall mean the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, and the use of the word Charter shall mean the Home Rule Charter.  
Sec. 2. - City officials. 
The municipal government of the city shall consist of a city council composed of a mayor and five (5) council members. Said mayor and council members shall be elected from the city at large. The above named officers shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city. Other officers of the city shall be a city manager, city attorney, public works director, police chief and fire chief, and such other officers as the city council may from time to time direct, who shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council in accordance with this Charter.  
Sec. 3. - City elections. 
A.  All city elections shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Election Code and other applicable law. 
B.  The general city election shall be held annually during the month of May or such date as required by the Texas Election Code. The city council shall be responsible for specifying locations and times for holding such elections. 
C.  The city council may, by resolution, order a special election for purposes consistent with this Charter and laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall be responsible for specifying locations and times for holding such elections. 
D.  Municipal elections shall be conducted by election officials appointed by the city council or contracted with the county elections office, as prescribed by law. 
E.  All municipal elections shall be publicized in accordance with the Texas Election Code.  
Sec. 4. - Candidates to run for places; places designated. 
Candidates for city council shall run for Place No. One, Place No. Two, Place No. Three, Place No. Four, or Place No. Five, or for mayor, as the case may be, and shall be voted on and elected accordingly, by the vote of the qualified voters of the city at large. A candidate may not run for more than one elected position of the city.  
Sec. 5. - Candidates, how elected. 
The candidate receiving the largest number of votes of the entire city cast for the place which he seeks shall be elected to the respective office for which he is a candidate.  
Sec. 6. - Election returns and canvass. 
The returns of every municipal election shall be handled in accordance with the Texas Election Code. These returns shall be delivered from the election judges to the person performing the duties of the city secretary at City Hall as soon as possible after the closing of the polls. Election returns, general and special, shall be presented to the city council at their next meeting in accordance with the Texas Election Code, at which time the city council shall canvass and declare the results of the election, which shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.  
Sec. 7. - Terms of office of elected officers. 
Council members in Places 3, 4, and 5 shall be filled by election in May of each even numbered calendar year, and the offices of mayor and council members for Places 1 and 2 shall be filled by election in May of each odd numbered calendar year, or when their successors are elected and qualified.  
Sec. 8. - Installation of elected officers. 
Each newly elected person to the city council shall be inducted into office at the first city council meeting following the official canvassing of the election. At such meeting, the oath shall be administered in accordance with the city Charter.  
Sec. 9. - Qualifications of elected officers. 
The city council shall be the judge of the qualification of its own members and of the mayor. No person shall be eligible to the office of mayor or the office of council member unless he or she is a qualified elector and has resided in the city one year, next preceding the election. If the mayor or any council member moves from the city during the term of office for which he is elected, his office shall be deemed vacant.  
Sec. 10. - Limitations of elected officers. 
No member of the city council shall hold any other employment or office under the city government while he is a member of said city council, unless herein otherwise provided. No member of the city council, or any other officer of the city, shall be directly or indirectly interested in any work, business or contract, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from the city treasury, nor be the surety of any person having a contract, work or business with said city, for the performance of which security may be required, nor the surety on the official bond of any city officer. Direct or indirect interest in any work, business or contract shall be defined as "substantial interest" per Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code.  
Sec. 11. - Vacancy. 
A.  The office of a council member or the mayor shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, forfeiture of, or removal from office by any manner authorized by law. If any member of the city council, or the mayor, ceases to possess the required qualifications for his office, or is convicted of a felony, he shall automatically be deemed to have forfeited such office. Such forfeiture shall be declared by resolution, and enforced by the city council. If there is a declared vacancy in the office of mayor, the city council shall appoint a mayor from among the remaining city council members who shall assume that office until the next scheduled city election. If the mayor pro tempore is selected as mayor, the city council shall elect a new mayor pro tempore at the next regular meeting following the declared vacancy. If the remaining council members refuse to serve as mayor, the city council may appoint a qualified resident to serve as mayor until the next scheduled city election. If a vacancy occurs in the first year of a two-year term, the person appointed as mayor shall have to stand for election at the next scheduled city election to serve out the one-year remaining on that term. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of a declared council member vacancy, the remaining council members shall appoint a qualified person to fill that vacancy for the remainder of that term, or until the next scheduled city election, whichever occurs first. Any person appointed to a vacancy which occurs in the first year of a two-year term, shall have to stand for election at the next scheduled city election to serve out the one-year remaining on that term.  
Sec. 12. - Mayor pro tempore. 
At the first meeting of each new city council, or as soon thereafter as practicable, one of the council members shall be elected mayor pro tempore, who shall hold his office for one year. In case of the failure, inability or refusal of the mayor to act, the mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of mayor. When serving as mayor as the presiding officer at city council meetings, the mayor pro tempore shall have the same rights and privileges as provided for by Article VI, Section 1, of this Charter, and shall be entitled to vote. In the case of absence from the city or the failure, inability or refusal of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of mayor, the city council may, at a city council meeting, by a vote of three affirmative votes, elect an acting mayor pro tempore from the existing council members, who shall serve as mayor with all of the powers and privileges of mayor until either the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall resume his duties of office. When such acting mayor pro tempore is serving as the presiding officer at city council meetings, he shall have all the powers set forth in Article VI, Section 1 of this Charter, but shall be entitled to vote.  
Sec. 13. - Compensation of mayor and council members. 
The mayor and council members shall receive one dollar ($1.00) per year as compensation and may be reimbursed for their expenses incurred in their official duties.  
ARTICLE V. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF OFFICERS AND OTHER PUBLIC OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 1. - Oath. 
All officers of the city, whether elective or appointive, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by the Constitution of this state and by executing such bond as may be required under the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the city.  
Sec. 2. - Duties of mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
A.  The mayor occupies the highest elective office in the city and shall preside at meetings of the city council. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the city council. The mayor shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the city council, on legislative or other matters, except in case of a tie, when the mayor shall cast the deciding vote. 
B.  The mayor pro tempore shall be a council member elected by the city council at the first regular meeting after each election of council members and/or mayor. The mayor pro tempore shall act as mayor during the disability or absence of the mayor, and in this capacity shall have all the rights conferred upon the mayor and shall still be entitled to vote as a council member per Charter Article IV, Section 11.  
Sec. 3. - Powers of the city council. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Except where in conflict with and otherwise expressly provided by this Charter, the city council shall have all powers authorized to be exercised by the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State of Texas and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the city manager; 
(2)  Appoint the municipal judge(s) of the municipal court; 
(3)  Approve the appointment and removal of the city attorney; 
(4)  Establish administrative departments; 
(5)  Adopt the budget of the city; 
(6)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs; 
(7)  Provide for and appoint a planning and zoning commission, board of adjustment and other boards, commissions and committees as deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards, commissions and committees. Such boards, commissions or committees shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by city ordinance or by law; 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city and the official zoning map; 
(9)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans in cooperation with the planning and zoning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of specific areas of the city; 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans in cooperation with the planning and zoning commission for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed, in whole or part, by disaster; 
(11)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares, or tariffs made by any person owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city; 
(12)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein; provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits; and provide for the condemnation of dangerous or dilapidated structures or buildings, and such buildings or structures calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction; 
(13)  Fix and regulate rates and charges of all municipal utilities and public services and operate municipal utilities; and 
(14)  Adopt development master plans and subdivision plats.  
Sec. 4. - City manager. 
A.  Appointment. The city council shall appoint, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city council, a city manager who shall serve as chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for administration of all the affairs of the city, with only those exceptions that are named in this Charter. City council may enter into a contract with the city manager outlining terms and conditions of employment, compensation and separation. 
B.  Exemption. No mayor or member of the city council shall, during the term to which he is elected and for two (2) years thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
C.  Compensation. The city council shall fix the compensation of the city manager, and the city manager's compensation may be amended from time to time, in accordance with the city manager's experience, qualifications and performance. 
D.  Suspension or removal. The city manager may be removed at the pleasure of the city council by the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council. 
E.  Acting city manager. In case of the disability or suspension of the city manager, the city council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform the duties of the office or appoint an interim city manager. By letter filed with the city secretary and copies provided to the mayor and city council, the city manager may designate a qualified administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager in case of the temporary absence of the city manager. The city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager returns. 
F.  Duties and responsibilities. The city manager shall: 
1.  Appoint, suspend and remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for in this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant thereto; 
2.  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law of this Charter; 
3.  See that all state laws and city ordinances are effectively enforced; 
4.  Attend or designate a city employee to attend city council, commission, and board meetings, with the right to take part in discussion, but shall not vote; 
5.  Prepare or designate an appropriate department head or city employee to prepare items for inclusion in the official agenda of all city council meetings and meetings of all boards and commissions; 
6.  Prepare and recommend to the city council the annual budget and capital improvement budget and administer the budgets as adopted by the city council; 
7.  Keep the city council advised, at least quarterly, as to the financial conditions of the city and make recommendations concerning the affairs of the city; 
8.  Make reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, or agencies subject to the city manager's direction or supervision; 
9.  Designate an appropriate department head or city employee to keep a written inventory of all real property and all permanent equipment belonging to the city, said inventory to be subject to annual audit. A system shall be established to control the use and replacement of expendable items; 
10.  Execute all contracts as authorized by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Charter; and 
11.  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the city council, which are consistent with this Charter and state and federal laws.  
Sec. 5. - City secretary. 
A.  The city secretary shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. The city secretary shall report to the city manager. The city secretary shall be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council. 
B.  The city secretary shall: 
1.  Give notice of all official public meetings of the city council, commissions, and boards in a manner consistent with this Charter and state laws; 
2.  Attend or designate a city employee to attend public meetings and hearings of the city council; 
3.  Keep the minutes of the proceedings of all public official meetings and hearings of the city council in a manner prescribed by the city council consistent with applicable law; 
4.  Act as a custodian of all official records of the city council; 
5.  Hold and maintain the seal of the city and affix this seal to all appropriate documents; 
6.  Authenticate, by signature and seal, and record all ordinances, resolutions and proclamations of the city; 
7.  Act as agent for the purposes of serving civil process; 
8.  Assist the city manager with the maintenance and public information request of all records; 
9.  Perform such other duties, as may be required by the city council or city manager, which are consistent with this Charter and state and federal law; and 
10.  Schedule and oversee all city elections in accordance with the Texas Election Code and any other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 6. - Finance director. 
The finance director shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. The finance director shall report to the city manager. The finance director shall be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council. 
The finance director shall give bond in favor of the city in such amount, and in such form as the city council may require, with sufficient security to be approved by the city, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties. He shall receive and securely keep all moneys belonging to the city, and make all payments from the same upon authorization of the city. He shall render a full and correct statement of his receipts and payments to the city council, at their first regular meeting in every quarter and whensoever, at other times, he may be required by them so to do. He shall do and perform such other acts and duties as the city manager may require. 
The finance director shall have the responsibility of assessing and collecting all ad valorem taxes or overseeing the contractor approved by the city with the responsibility of assessing and collecting all ad valorem taxes. The finance director shall keep complete and accurate records of the same, and shall have such other duties as are given to him by this Charter and which may be hereafter assigned to him by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 7. - Police chief. 
The chief of police shall be in charge of the police department and shall have the powers and duties as is provided by state law and such other duties and responsibilities as the city manager from time to time may assign to him. 
The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of city council and meet the standards of the State Laws of Texas. The chief of police shall report to the city manager. The chief of police may be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council.  
Sec. 8. - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall be the legal adviser and counsel to the mayor, city council, city manager, department heads, and city boards and commissions. The city attorney shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of city council. He shall prepare or approve all city ordinances and resolutions and shall attend all meetings of the city council. He shall be appointed either on a part time or a full time basis and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be assigned to him by the city council or the city manager. The city council may provide for such services by contract with a duly qualified law firm. 
The city attorney shall have the authority of a municipal prosecutor, and may recommend additional municipal and assistant municipal prosecutors to the city manager, who, with the consent and approval of the city council, shall have the authority to employ such municipal and assistant municipal prosecutors. 
The city manager, with the consent and approval of the city council, shall have the authority to appoint special counsel to represent the city in collecting taxes, or to represent the city in legal proceedings filed by or against the city and in any extraordinary legal matters.  
Sec. 9. - Public works director. 
The public works director shall be responsible for overseeing all capital improvement projects to be done by the city; he shall be adviser to the city on all public works projects; he shall be general adviser to the board of adjustment and the planning and zoning commission, and shall have such other responsibilities and duties as the city manager from time to time may assign to him. 
The public works director shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of city council. The public works director shall report to the city manager. The public works director may be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council.  
Sec. 10. - Fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be in charge of the fire department and shall have the powers and duties as is provide by state law and such other duties and responsibilities as the city manager from time to time may assign to him. 
The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of city council and meet the standards of the State Laws of Texas. The fire chief shall report to the city manager. The fire chief may be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council.  
Sec. 11. - Bond for appointive officers. 
The city council shall have the right to require bond from any appointive officers or employees of the city in such amounts as the city council from time to time may fix by ordinance or resolution and conditioned by the faithful discharge of the duties of his office and accounting for all moneys, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such officers or employees; and all such bonds shall be signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State, and the premiums accruing thereon shall be paid by the city.  
Sec. 12. - Resignation of officers. 
Resignation of any officer authorized by this Charter to be elected or appointed shall be made by filing a written resignation with the city secretary.  
Sec. 13. - Removal of officers or officials. 
In the event the city manager position is vacant, the city council shall have the power to remove any officer or official reporting to the city manager, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard in his defense.  
ARTICLE VI. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 1. - Presiding officer. 
The mayor shall preside over all meetings of the city council. He may participate in the discussion of matters coming before the city council and shall be entitled to a vote only in the event of a tie, but shall have no veto power. If the mayor and the mayor pro tempore are absent, acting mayor pro tempore may be appointed to preside.  
Sec. 2. - Meetings. 
Petitions and remonstrances may be presented to the city council. The city council shall hold stated meetings at such times and places as they shall by resolution direct. The mayor, city manager, or on the application of three council members, may call special meetings by notice to each member of said council, the city secretary and city attorney, in accordance with state law.  
Sec. 3. - Rules of the city council. 
The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members.  
Sec. 4. - General authority. 
The city council shall have power to pass, publish or amend or repeal all ordinances, rules, and police regulations, not contrary to the Constitution of this state, for the good government, peace and order of the city and the trade and commerce thereof, that may be necessary or proper to carry into effect the powers vested by this Charter in the city, the city government or in any department or office thereof; to enforce the observance of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations, and to punish violations thereof.  
Sec. 5. - Powers. 
Any powers given to the city that are not specifically placed in the city manager, mayor or some other official, either by statutes or this Charter, shall be exercised in behalf of the city by the city council. All powers so exercised shall be by ordinance or resolution duly passed.  
Sec. 6. - Quorum. 
The mayor and three council members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the city council. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore and three council members shall constitute a quorum. In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the acting mayor pro tempore and three council members shall constitute a quorum. Except where a larger number of votes are required by state statute to pass a specific ordinance, no ordinance, resolution, or other action of the city council shall be effective unless it receives at least three affirmative votes.  
Sec. 7. - Legislative procedure. 
All meetings of the city council shall be public, except when otherwise authorized by state law, and minutes of all open proceedings shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the city. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by the "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of city secretary. Every ordinance hereafter adopted shall be systematically numbered and it shall only be necessary to record the number and caption or title of ordinances in the minutes of the city council meeting.  
Sec. 8. - Style of ordinances. 
The style of all ordinances of the city shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas," but the same shall be omitted when the ordinances of the city are codified and published in book or pamphlet form by the city, or under the authority of its governing body.  
Sec. 9. - Ordinances now in effect. 
All ordinances of the city now in existence and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the city council.  
Sec. 10. - Ordinances, publication thereof. 
Every ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at any later time(s) specified in the ordinance, except that every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture shall become effective only after having been published in its entirety, summary form or brief description after adoption, in a newspaper of general circulation of the city in accordance with state law.  
Sec. 11. - Ordinances, pleading of, and admissibility in evidence. 
It shall be sufficient in all judicial proceedings to plead any ordinance of the city by caption without embodying the entire ordinance in the pleadings, and all pleaded ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted in evidence in any suit and shall have the same force and effect as the original ordinance. Certified copies of the ordinances may also be used in evidence in lieu of original ordinances.  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL POWERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Enumerated powers not exclusive. 
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers enumerated in the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. All powers of the city, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the manner prescribed herein, or when not prescribed herein, then in the manner provided by the general laws of Texas relating to cities.  
Sec. 2. - Fire prevention. 
The city council shall have power by ordinance or otherwise to provide means for protection against conflagrations and for guarding against fires. It may prescribe fire limits, stipulate and provide for minimum requirements for construction of buildings within such fire limits, regulate or prohibit the erection, building, replacing or repairing of buildings within such limits; may prescribe that the buildings within such fire limits be made or constructed of fire-resistant material; and may further prescribe limits within which only fire-resistant roofing may be used; it may also by ordinance regulate, prescribe, govern or forbid the storage of lumber, building material of any kind or inflammable or explosive goods, wares and merchandise of any and every kind within certain limits and prescribe limits within which such materials may be stored, housed or carried.  
Sec. 3. - Health regulations. 
A.  Regulations: The city shall have the power to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its inhabitants by establishing all necessary rules and regulations protecting the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
1.  The city council shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to regulate, license and inspect public or private persons, firms, institutions, corporations, common carriers, or associations operating, managing, or conducting any activities, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(a)  Place of public accommodation, hotel or any other public sleeping or eating place; 
(b)  Place or vehicle where food or drink of any kind is manufactured, prepared, stored, packed, served, sold or otherwise handled within the city or limits of said city; all food and beverage vendors and samplers must have a health permit which must be obtained prior to an event; 
(c)  Any and all health conditions; and 
(d)  Sanitary wastewater disposal system. 
2.  The city shall have the power to; 
(a)  Define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the city and outside the city limits for a distance in accordance with state law; and 
(b)  Have the power to police in all parks or grounds, streets right-of-way owned by the city or under lease to the city and lying both outside and inside said city; and 
B.  Penalties or fines: The city shall have the power to provide for the fixing of penalties for failure of any person, firm, corporation or association to comply with any such rules and regulations so prescribed by the city council under the provisions of this section; it being the intention to vest in the city council not only the powers expressly enumerated in this section but all other powers reasonably necessary for the protection of the health of the city and its citizens.  
Sec. 4. - Other enumerated powers. 
The city may assess, levy and collect any and all character of taxes for general and special purposes on all subjects or objects, including occupation taxes, license taxes and excise taxes, which the city may lawfully assess, levy and collect under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance of bonds or notes of the city, and may issue warrants in payment of lawful obligations of the city; may create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature of public works and improvements whether for pleasure or otherwise; may define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, comforts, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and all nuisances and cause thereof; may regulate and restrict the construction, height, and the material used in all buildings and maintenance and occupancy thereof; may license any lawful business, occupation or calling that is susceptible to the control of the police power; may license, regulate, control or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards within the corporate limits of said city; may provide for public library and maintenance thereof; may provide that gas companies, bus companies, telephone companies, telecommunication companies, and electric light companies, or any other companies or individuals furnishing public utility service, to make and furnish extension of their service to such territory within the corporate limits as may be prescribed from time to time by ordinances; may provide for the issuance of permits for erecting all buildings, for the inspection of the construction of buildings, in respect to proper wiring for electric lights and other electric appliances, piping for gas flues, chimneys, fire escapes, plumbing and sewer connections, and to enforce proper regulations in regard thereto; may provide for the enforcement of all ordinances enacted by the city, by a fine as authorized by state law; provided that no ordinance shall prescribe a greater or less penalty than is prescribed for a like offense by the laws of this state.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 1. - General. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may create or establish, abolish or consolidate, as many departments or officers as it may deem necessary for the best interest of the city.  
Sec. 2. - Police department. 
The city shall have a police department which will be under the general supervision of the chief of police. The city council shall by the budget ordinance provide for the number of police officers and shall establish the budget. The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the qualifications for all officers; shall make provisions for their removal from office; shall provide for the giving of bonds for faithful performance of their duties in office; and shall make such other regulations as might be deemed necessary for the control and operation of the police department. Such officers shall have like powers, rights and authorities as are vested under the Statutes of Texas.  
Sec. 3. - Fire department. 
The city shall have a fire department which will be under the general supervision of the fire chief. The city council by budget ordinance shall provide for a fire department consisting of paid firefighters and the city council shall provide by ordinance for the number of firefighters and establish the budget. The fire chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the qualifications for all firefighters, shall make provisions for removal of firefighters and such other provisions as might be necessary for supervision and control of firefighters. The fire chief shall establish such other rules and regulations for a fire department as might be necessary for the proper control and operation of same.  
Sec. 4. - Recreation department. 
The city shall have the right to establish a recreation department and appropriate necessary funds for the operation of the same. 
The city shall have the authority to enter into contracts or agreements with other municipalities or political subdivisions in carrying out a joint recreational program for the city and adjoining political subdivisions.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 1. - City ownership and operation thereof. 
A.  In general. The city shall have power to build, construct, purchase, own, lease, maintain and operate, within or without the city limits, light and power systems, water systems, sewer systems or sanitary disposal equipment and appliances, natural gas systems, parks and swimming pools, and any other public service or utility; power to mortgage and encumber such system or systems in the manner provided by state law; and all the powers which the city might exercise in connection with such public utilities and public services under state law, including the power to demand and receive compensation for service furnished for private purposes, or otherwise, and with full and complete power and right of eminent domain proper and necessary efficiently to carry out said objects. 
B.  City water system. The city shall have the exclusive right to own, erect, improve, enlarge, maintain and operate water works systems for the use of said city, its inhabitants and the public; shall regulate the same and have power to prescribe rates for water furnished, with power to levy higher rates for water sold for use outside the city limits, and to acquire by purchase, donation, condemnation or otherwise, suitable grounds within the limits of the city, on which to erect any such works and the necessary right of way, and to acquire by purchase, donation, condemnation or otherwise, suitable grounds within or without the limits of the city on which to erect any such works and the necessary right of way in any outstanding franchise which may now or hereafter be owned by any individual, corporation, or other municipality, and to do and perform whatsoever may be necessary to operate and maintain such water works or water works system, and to compel the owners of all property and the agents of such owners or persons in control thereof to pay all charges for water furnished upon such property. The city shall have all the powers and privileges pertaining to water and water systems as are granted to home rule cities under state law including but not limited to the sale or lease of the system. The city shall have the right to use so much of the water and water facilities of said city as may be deemed necessary in connection with the operation of the fire department, city buildings, public parks, streets, swimming pools, and other public functions of the city. 
C.  City sewer system. The city shall have the exclusive rights to own, erect, maintain and operate sewer systems or sewage systems for the use of said city and its inhabitants; to regulate the same and to have power to prescribe rates for the service so furnished and to acquire by purchase, donation, condemnation or otherwise, suitable grounds, within or without the limits of the city, on which to erect any such sewer system or systems, sewage disposal plant or plants, and filtering beds and emptying grounds for sewage systems, and to compel owners of property and the agents of such owners or persons in control thereof, to pay all charges for sewer service furnished upon such property, and shall have power to compel owners of property and the agents or persons in control thereof to connect with such sewer systems, and to pass all ordinances necessary for the enforcement of this power, and shall have the power by ordinance to prohibit the use of sewers for oil waste, chemicals or salt water disposal. The city shall have all the rights, powers and privileges pertaining to sewers as is given to home rule cities under state law including but not limited to the sale or lease of the system; the city may permit other municipalities to place connecting sewer lines through the city and to maintain them. 
D.  Power to contract for public utilities. The city is authorized to enter into contracts to sell, acquire or lease with individuals, corporations, partnerships, or other municipal corporations, for furnishing in whole or in part any public utility or portions of public utility systems that might be needed by the city or the citizens of the city. The consideration for such contracts or leases may in the discretion of the city council be paid by the city or prorated to the individual users of the utility covered by such contractor lease; or to permit individuals, corporations, partnerships or other municipal corporations to furnish in whole or in part any public utility or portion of any public utility direct to the citizens of the city on such terms as the city may direct. 
E.  Right to purchase commodities or services essential to city or its citizens. The city shall have the power to purchase electricity, gas, oil, or any other article, commodity or service essential to a proper conduct of all the affairs of the city and of its inhabitants on such terms as the city council may deem proper, for sale and distribution to the inhabitants of the city or adjacent territory.  
Sec. 2. - Regulation of public utilities. 
A.  To the extent allowed by law, the city council shall have the power by ordinance, after notice to the utility and hearing before the city council, to fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of compensation to be charged by any person, firm or corporation enjoying a franchise in the city, or engaged in furnishing a public utility service in the city, and shall in determining, fixing and regulating such charges, fares or rates of compensation, base the same upon the fair value of the property of such person, firm or corporation devoted to furnishing service to such city or the inhabitants thereof. The city council may prescribe the character, quality and efficiency of service to be rendered, and shall have the power to regulate and require the extension of adequate lines or service of such public utility within such city by such person, firm or corporation, taking into consideration the cost to the utility, and from time to time may alter or change such rules, regulations, and compensation, provided that, in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensation of determining the reasonableness thereof, no stock or bonds authorized or issued by any corporation enjoying such franchise shall be considered unless on proof that the same have been actually issued by the corporation for money paid and used for the development of the corporate property, labor done or property actually received, in accordance with the laws and Constitution of this state applicable thereto. In order to ascertain all facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be a reasonable rate or regulation, the city council shall have full power to inspect the books of any such utility serving the inhabitants of the city and compel production of records and the attendance of witnesses for such purpose. 
B.  Any company, corporation or person engaged in furnishing to the inhabitants of the city any light, power, gas, telephone, transit or other public utility services, may be required at any time by ordinance or resolution of the city council to file with the city council sworn written reports pertaining to their operations and business within the city, and such report shall contain such data, facts and information as may be required by such ordinance or resolution, which shall also fix the time within which the report shall be filed. 
C.  In addition to the foregoing powers, the city shall have all the powers and privileges provided for by state law in regulating public utilities.  
ARTICLE X. - CONTRACTS 
 
Sec. 1. - General. 
All contracts that the city has at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect. This provision shall include, but not be limited to, all bonded indebtedness, contracts for professional services, contracts for improvements, lease contracts, or any other agreement binding upon the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, immediately prior to the adoption of this Charter.  
Sec. 2. - Personal services. 
No employment contract shall ever be made which binds the city for personal services or be rendered for any stated period of time unless recommended by the city manager and approved by the city council. All appointive employees shall be subject to peremptory discharge, and when discharged shall be entitled to compensation up to and including the date of their discharge, any provision to the contrary in this Charter notwithstanding.  
Sec. 3. - Goods, materials, services or supplies. 
The city or any agent of the city acting for it shall not make any contract for goods, materials, services, or supplies for the current use of any department of the municipality for more than one year, except as in this Charter provided, unless said contract and the cost thereof has been included in the annual budget of the city and unless an appropriation has been made therefore, and no contracts or purchase shall exceed the amount appropriated. All contracts in excess of the state law requirement shall be made upon specifications or qualifications, and no contract shall be binding until it has been signed by a designated representative of the city. Whenever the costs of any contracts charged to any appropriation equal the amount of such appropriation, no person representing the city shall sign or make any additional contracts chargeable to such appropriation. Any contract for current expenditures exceeding the amount set up in the budget or the appropriation therefore shall be void unless approved by the city council.  
Sec. 4. - Competitive bidding. 
The city shall comply with state law in awarding contracts requiring competitive bidding.  
ARTICLE XI. - OWNERSHIP OF REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 1. - Acquisition of property. 
The city shall have the power and authority to acquire by purchase, gift, device, deed, condemnation, or otherwise, any character of property, within or without its municipal boundaries, including any charitable or trust funds.  
Sec. 2. - Real estate, etc. owned by the city. 
All real estate owned in fee simple title, or held by lease, sufferance, easement or otherwise; all public buildings, fire stations, parks, streets and alleys, and all property, whether real or personal, of whatever kind, character or description, now owned or controlled by the city, shall vest in, inure to, remain, and be the property of said city under this Charter; and all causes of action, rights or privileges of every kind and character, and all property of whatsoever character or description which may have been held, and is now held, controlled or used by said city for public uses, or in trust for the public, shall vest in and remain and inure to the city under this Charter, and all contracts, suits and pending actions to which the city was or now is a party, plaintiff or defendant, shall not be affected or terminated by the adoption of this Charter, but shall continue unabated.  
Sec. 3. - Parks, playgrounds, etc. 
The city shall have exclusive control of all city parks and playgrounds, whether within or without the city limits, and to control, regulate and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon; to provide for raising, grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening, erecting buildings, swimming pools and wading pools, and other structures, providing amusement therein for establishing walks and paving driveways around, in and through said parks, playgrounds, and other public grounds, speedways or boulevards owned by it, and lying both outside and inside the municipal boundaries.  
ARTICLE XII. - STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 1. - Street powers. 
The city shall have exclusive control of all alleys, streets, gutters and sidewalks situated within the city, and the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, extend, widen, straighten, abandon and close, lower, grade, narrow, care for, supervise, maintain and improve any public street, alley, avenue, or boulevard, and for any such purposes to acquire the necessary lands and to appropriate the same under the power of eminent domain. The city shall also have the power to name or rename, vacate and abandon and sell and convey in fee that portion of any street, alley, avenue, boulevard or other public thoroughfare or public grounds, and to convey in fee the same in exchange for other lands, over which any street, alley, avenue or boulevard may be laid out, established and opened; and the city's right to sell and dispose of in fee any part of a street, alley, avenue or boulevard so vacated and abandoned, or the city's right to convey same in exchange for other lands to be used in laying out, opening, widening and straightening any street, shall never be questioned in any of the courts of this state. The procedure for closing streets and alleys shall be in conformity with due process of law and shall be particularly prescribed and provided for by ordinance passed in the usual manner by the city council.  
Sec. 2. - Street improvements. 
The city shall have the power to improve any street or highway within its limits by filling, grading, raising, paving or repaving the same in a permanent manner, or by the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters or necessary appurtenances thereto, including sewers and drains.  
Sec. 3. - Regulation of vehicles. 
The city council shall have all the authority given cities under state law, and the power by ordinance to control the operations of all character of vehicles using public streets, including motorcycles, motor-scooters, bicycles, automobiles, taxicabs, trucks, trailers, tractors, buses, house moving dollies, or any type vehicle; and to prescribe the speed of the same, the qualifications of the operators of the same, the routing of the same, and the lighting of same by night; and to provide for the giving of bond or other security for the operation of same.  
Sec. 4. - Established speed zones and parking areas. 
The city council shall have the authority to limit the speed of vehicles in school zones, near churches, hospitals, and dangerous corners, and such other places as it may deem advisable, and to limit or prohibit the parking of vehicles near schools, churches, business or other congested areas, or where the limiting or restricting of the parking of vehicles is required in providing the safe movement of traffic for the protection of life or property.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 1. - Public property exempt from exemptions. 
No public property, or any other character of property owned or held by said city, shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature.  
Sec. 2. - City funds not subject to garnishment. 
No funds of the city shall be subject to garnishment and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings except as required by state law.  
Sec. 3. - Notice of claims. 
Before the city shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injury of any person or for damages to or destruction of property of any kind, the city manager shall be given notice in writing of such death, injuries, damages or destruction within ninety (90) days after the same has been sustained, stating when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred and the apparent extent thereof, and an estimate of the damages sustained. Such notice shall be filed with the city secretary, and such filing will constitute notice to the city. The city council is hereby authorized and directed to make and fix by ordinance such additional rules and regulations governing the city's liability for damages as the city council may deem advisable.  
Sec. 4. - Right of eminent domain. 
The city shall have the right of eminent domain and the power to condemn and appropriate private property for public purposes, whether said property be within or without the city limits, in such cases as is now or may hereafter be provided by state law. This shall apply also to fee simple titles. The city may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the Constitution and/or laws of this state.  
Sec. 5. - May accept governmental aid, etc. 
The city may accept monetary aid or other character of aid or benefit from the federal government, the state government, the county government, and from any agency thereof, and/or any individual, and/or a private agency; and shall have the full right, power and authority to do the things and perform the acts necessary to permit the city to receive such aid.  
Sec. 6. - City not required to give bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any suit or proceeding in which the city is a party for any bond, undertaking or other security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city in any of the state courts, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond had been given, and the city shall be liable as if the security or bond had been duly executed.  
Sec. 7. - Franchises and special privileges. 
A.  The right to control, easement, use and ownership and title to the streets, highways, public thoroughfares and property of the city, its avenues, parks, bridges and all other public places and property, are hereby declared to be inalienable except by ordinance duly passed by four affirmative votes of the city council, and no grant of any franchise or lease, or right to use the same, either on, through, along, across, under or over the same, by any private corporation, association or individual shall be granted by the city council for a longer period than thirty (30) years unless submitted to the vote of the legally qualified votes of the city in the manner provided for in the Texas Transportation Code. 
B.  The city council may, of its own motion, submit all of such applications to an election at which the people shall vote upon the proposition therein submitted, the expense of such election in all cases to be borne by the applicant. 
C.  No franchise shall ever be granted until it has been approved by the city council, after having been considered at two (2) regular meetings of the city council, nor shall any such franchise, grant or privilege ever be made unless it provides for adequate compensation or consideration thereafter to be paid to the city. 
D.  Every such franchise or grant shall make adequate provision, by way of forfeiture of the grant or otherwise, to secure efficiency of public service at reasonable rates and to maintain the property devoted to the public service in good repair throughout the term of grant of said franchise. 
E.  No franchise grant shall ever be exclusive. 
F.  The city council may prescribe the forms and methods of the keeping of accounts of any grantees under franchise, provided that the forms and methods of keeping such accounts have not already been prescribed by a state or federal law or agency.  
Sec. 8. - Retirement or pensions for employees. 
The city shall have the right to grant to its employees benefits of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, or any other pension or retirement system available to cities.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FINANCES 
 
Sec. 1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be established by the city council.  
Sec. 2. - Budget. 
The city manager shall prepare a budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the city for the succeeding year and such budget shall be presented to the city council for consideration and approval. Such budget shall be prepared in conformity with state law. No public money shall ever be spent or appropriated, except in case of an emergency, or public calamity, unless funds are currently in the possession of the city to cover said expenditures or appropriation.  
Sec. 3. - Depository. 
The city council is authorized to select one or more depositories for city funds in accordance with state law.  
Sec. 4. - Bonds, warrants, etc. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power and authority by ordinance duly passed, and it is hereby expressly authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of refunding bonds of the city previously issued. 
(b)  In keeping with the Constitution of Texas, and not contrary thereto, the city shall have the power to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, warrants, time warrants, revenue warrants, notes, and other evidence of indebtedness as now authorized or as may be hereafter authorized to be issued by cities and towns in accordance with state law. 
(c)  In all elections to determine the expenditures of money or the assumption of debt of any nature, qualified voters shall be deemed to be those who are qualified under the general laws of Texas, or by the General Laws of the State of Texas. 
(d)  Ordinances authorizing any bonds, warrants, revenue warrants, notes or other evidences of indebtedness to be issued shall provide for the creation of a sinking fund sufficient to pay the principal and interest of such bonds when and as the same become due and payable. Such sinking fund, in excess of the amount necessary to pay the principal and interest of the bonds when and as the same become due and payable, may each year be invested, in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Any officer or agent of the city who shall unlawfully or knowingly divert or use said funds or cause or permit same to be diverted or used for any other purpose except that for which the fund is created or herein expressly authorized to be invested shall be deemed guilty of a felony and subject to prosecution as provided under the general laws of the State of Texas. 
(f)  What is known as "Bond and Warrant Law," the same being Article 2368a of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas, and being the Acts of 1931 Legislature, Page 269, Chapter 163, and all amendments thereafter made or that may be hereafter made, which are applicable to cities and towns, are hereby adopted by the city.  
Sec. 5. - Audit and examination of city books and accounts. 
The city council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books of accounts of each and every department of the city in accordance with state law. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants who shall be selected by the city council, and a contract entered into from year to year; and such contract shall provide that the books of the city shall be audited at least annually, and such auditors' report to the city council shall be accessible to the public or for publication.  
ARTICLE XV. - TAXES AND TAXATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Tax administration. 
A.  The city may require the finance director to assess and collect taxes. The finance director shall be the city tax assessor and collector and shall be appointed by the city manager. The tax assessor and collector shall provide a bond with such sureties and in such amount as the city may require. The city shall pay the premiums on such bond. The city council may provide for such services by contract. 
B.  The city council shall have the power, and is hereby authorized, to levy, assess, and collect annual taxes not to exceed the maximum limit set by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, as they now exist or as they may be amended, on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of all property having a location within the corporate limits of the city and not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
C.  All taxes due the city shall be payable to the city and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved. All such taxes not paid prior to the due date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as may be provided by law. 
D.  Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approval tax rolls shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from the obligation to pay such current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, unless otherwise provided by law.  
Sec. 2. - Tax liens, liabilities and suits. 
A.  All property having its location in the city on January 1 st of each year shall stand charged with a lien in favor of the city from said date for the taxes due thereon. The lien provided hereby shall be superior to all other liens except other tax liens, regardless of when such other liens were created. All persons purchasing any of said property on or after January 1 st in any year shall take the property subject to the lien herein provided. In addition to the lien herein provided on January 1 st on any year, the owner of property subject to taxation by the city shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The city council shall have the power to contract for the collection of delinquent taxes owing to the city. 
B.  The city shall have the power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and foreclosure. In such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the city assessment rolls in insufficient to identify such property, the city shall have the right to plead a good description of the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien and/or for personal judgment against the owner for such taxes as such ownership and property appears on the certified tax roll.  
ARTICLE XVI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 1. - Creation and jurisdiction. 
The city council shall establish and cause to be maintained a municipal court. The court shall have all the powers and duties as are now, or as may be, prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. 
A.  The city council shall appoint, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the city council, such municipal judges of the municipal court, as may be necessary, all of whom shall be competent, duly qualified attorneys licensed and practicing for at least five (5) years in the State of Texas. In the event a duly qualified attorney is not available, the city council shall then select a qualified person to be the municipal judge. The municipal judge(s) of the municipal court(s) shall be appointed to a term in accordance with state law. The municipal judge(s) shall receive compensation as may be determined by the city council. 
B.  Municipal judge shall have the power to punish for contempt to the same extent and under the same circumstance as the Justice of the Peace may punish for contempt of criminal cases. 
C.  The clerk and deputy clerks of the municipal court(s) shall have the power to administer oaths, certify affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court and perform all usual and necessary acts in conducting the business of the court(s), including but not limited to, the keeping of records and accounts of the municipal court(s). 
D.  All special expenses and fines imposed by the municipal court(s) shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city, as may be consistent with present and future laws.  
ARTICLE XVII. - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - General. 
The city may regulate the erection, building, placing, moving or repairing of buildings or other structures, within such limits of the city as it may designate and prescribe, in order to guard against the calamities of fire, flood, or windstorm, and may within said limits prohibit the moving or putting up of any building or other structure from without said limits, and may also prohibit the removal of any building or other structure from one place to another within said limits, and may direct that all buildings or other structures within the limits so designated as aforesaid shall be made or constructed of fire-resistant materials, and may declare any dilapidated building or structure to be a nuisance and direct the same to be repaired, removed or abated in such manner as they shall direct; to declare all buildings and other structures in the fire limits which they deem dangerous to contiguous buildings, or in causing or promoting fires, to be nuisances, and require and cause the same to be removed in such manner as they shall prescribe.  
Sec. 2. - Building lines. 
The city shall have the power, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, acting through its governing body, under the public power, to provide by suitable ordinance building lines on any street or streets, or any block of any street or streets, and to require their observance by suitable penalties.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Sec. 1. - In general. 
The city council shall have full power and authority to zone the city and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the same under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and legislative bodies thereof under state law.  
Sec. 2. - Zoning ordinance. 
The zoning ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, which is in effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter, shall remain in effect. The city council will have the authority to repeal, amend, modify, or rewrite the zoning ordinance in compliance with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code.  
Sec. 3. - Planning and zoning commission. 
The city council shall pass appropriate ordinances establishing a planning and zoning commission, which commission shall have the powers and authorities as set forth in the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and such additional powers and privileges as given by this Charter and as may be given to it by the city council. Such ordinances shall provide for rules and regulations governing the planning and zoning commission. 
The mayor from time to time shall appoint up to twelve (12) persons to serve on the planning and zoning commission, which appointments, shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The persons so appointed shall serve for two years or until their successors are appointed and qualified or unless removed by the council. Said persons serving on the commission shall serve without pay.  
Sec. 4. - Board of adjustment. 
The city council shall establish by ordinance a board of adjustment which shall have all the powers and privileges set forth in the Texas Local Government Code, and such additional powers and privileges as may be assigned to it by ordinance duly passed by the city council. 
The members of the board of adjustment shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council in accordance to the Texas Local Government Code.  
ARTICLE XIX. - INTIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, adopted May 23, 2011, amended art. XIX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. XIX, §§ 1—11, pertained to the recall of officers, and derived from Ord. No. 1739, adopted Nov. 14, 2007. 
 
Sec. 1. - Scope of initiative, referendum and recall. 
The qualified electors of the city shall have the right to initiate an ordinance, rescind at the polls an ordinance approved by the city council, or recall and remove the mayor or any member of the city council as in this Charter provided. Ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, fixing public utility rates, zoning or rezoning property, any action not subject to initiative or referendum as provided by state law or any ordinance submitted by the council of its own initiative to a vote of the electors shall not be subject to initiative or referendum. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 2. - Petitions. 
Bx;efore the question of initiative, referendum or recall shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the City, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary; which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty percent (20%) of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city, but in no event less than 500 such petitioners in the case of initiative or referendum and no less than 300 such petitioners in the case of recall. Each signer of such petition shall personally print his name thereto in ink or and shall write after his name his place of residence, giving name of street and number of place of residence, and shall also write thereon his date of birth and the day of the month and year his signature was affixed. If the voter registration number is provided, the date of birth and residence address is not required on the petition per the Texas Election Code. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 3. - Form of petition. 
The petition mentioned above must be addressed to the City Council of the City of Alamo Heights. A petition initiating an ordinance must include the full text of the proposed ordinance. A petition of referendum must identify the number, date and full caption of the ordinance to be submitted to the qualified electors for their consideration. A separate petition shall be submitted for each ordinance to be considered under this article. A petition demanding recall must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. 
The signatures to petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate paper there shall be attached a statement of the circulator that he personally circulated the foregoing paper, that all the signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"STATE OF TEXAS 	) 
	) 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 	) 
 
"I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Signature _____ 
Sworn and subscribed before me this _______ day of 20_______ 
___________ 
Notary Public in and for Bexar County, Texas" 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 4. - Various papers constituting petition. 
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper, or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto. Verification provided for in the preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts, or copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective to be counted which were placed thereon more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of city secretary. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 5. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
All papers and documents comprising a single petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the same day, and the city secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the mayor and members of city council. Within five (5) days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine the validity of the submitted petition in accordance with this article and state law. The city secretary shall certify the result of this examination to the city council at its next regular meeting following the above period of examination. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 6. - Election to be called. 
If the city council does not pass and approve an ordinance supported by an initiative petition or rescind an ordinance supported by a referendum petition within forty (40) days or in the event of recall, if the officer, whose removal is sought, does not resign within five (5) days after such petition shall have been duly presented to the city council of the City of Alamo Heights as provided in the preceding section of this article, then it shall become the duty of said city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such election; and the date of which election shall be in accordance with state and federal law. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 7. - Initiative or referendum election form of ballot. 
Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot title which shall contain a clear, concise statement, without argument, of the substance of such ordinance. The ballot used shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot. 
Should a majority of the votes cast at such election be for the ordinance titled on the ballot, the ordinance shall be deemed passed and approved. Should a majority of the votes cast at such election be against the ordinance titled on the ballot, such ordinance shall be deemed rescinded or disapproved. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 8. - Recall election form of ballot. 
The form of ballot to be used for a recall election shall be as follows: "Shall (name of person) be removed from office (name of office) by recall?" Immediately following the above question there shall be provided on the ballot, in separate lines, in the order here set out, the words: "FOR the recall of (name of person)" and "AGAINST" the recall of (name of person)." 
Should a majority of the votes cast at such recall election be for the recall of such officer named on the ballot, he shall be deemed removed from office. Should a majority of the votes cast at such recall election, however, be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, such officer shall continue in office for the remainder of his term. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 9. - Recall, restrictions thereon. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any elective officer of the City of Alamo Heights within six months after his election, within six (6) months after an election for such officer's recall, or within or within six months of such officer's term expiring. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 10. - Failure of city council to call an election. 
In the event that all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the petition, or order such election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said city council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such initiative, referendum or recall, then the County Judge of Bexar County, Texas, shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 11. - One or more officers may be recalled at same election. 
The mayor and/or one or more council members may be recalled at the same election; and, if in such recall election there shall as a result of such election, remain the mayor or one or more council members who are not recalled, then the mayor, council member or council members not recalled shall discharge all of the duties incumbent upon the governing body of said city until the vacancy or vacancies created at such recall elections are filled by an election for that purpose; but if in any proposed recall election it is proposed and submitted to recall all the members constituting said city council, then there shall be submitted in the recall petition the names of candidates to fill the vacancies proposed to be created by such election and their names shall be placed upon the ballot; but the name of such officers proposed to be recalled shall not appear on the ballot as candidates. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 12. - Vacancies in city council due to recall, how filled. 
If at any recall election it is not proposed and submitted to recall all of the members constituting said city council, but only one or more and fewer than all, and such election shall result in favor of the recall of one or more of said officers proposed to be recalled, then it shall be the duty of the remaining member or members not recalled and constituting the governing body of the city, within five days after such election is held, to meet, canvass the returns, declare the result of the election, and on the same date order an election to fill such vacancy or vacancies; which election shall be held in accordance with state law. No vacancy caused by recall shall be filled by the city council of the City of Alamo Heights, but only by election. The remaining members not recalled and constituting the governing body of the city shall constitute a quorum and take all necessary actions to continue conducting city business until the vacancies have been filled by election. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
Sec. 13. - Repealing ordinances; publication. 
Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors shall be published and may be amended or repealed by the council, as in the case of other ordinances; provided, however, that no ordinance adopted at the polls under the initiative shall be amended or repealed by the council within one (1) year of adoption and no ordinance repealed at the polls under a referendum shall be amended or repealed by the council within two (2) years of adoption. 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 2, 5-23-11)  
ARTICLE XX. - SAVING CLAUSE, ETC. 
All powers granted heretofore to cities are hereby preserved. In case of any irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this Charter and any superior law, the powers of the city and its officers shall be defined in such superior laws. In case of any insufficiency or omission by this Charter, which insufficiency or omission may be supplied by reference to the general laws, such provisions of the general laws are hereby adopted, and the city shall have and exercise all of the powers that it could have acquired by expressly adopting and incorporating into this Charter all of the provisions of such superior and general laws, it being the intent of this Charter that no lawful power of the city shall fall because of any omission, insufficiency or invalidity of any portion of portions of this Charter. The insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or portions of this Charter shall not in any wise affect the remainder of the Charter, but the same shall be construed as if adopted without such portion and/or portions so found invalid or impotent.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Alamo Heights, Texas" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1965, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1965, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
Alderman. The word "alderman" shall mean a member of the city council, other than the mayor, and shall include the term "councilman." 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Alamo Heights, in the County of Bexar and State of Texas. 
City secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the city. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Alamo Heights, Texas printed as Part II of this volume. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. Whenever the words "council" or "this council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Bexar, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway," when used in this Code, shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall, will. The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "will" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street," when used in this Code, shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Construction of words and phrases, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.011 et seq.  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Alamo Heights, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Alamo Heights, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1965, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Fines and penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)  A person who commits an offense under this Code, or under any rule or police regulation of the city, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine. If the offense is a violation of any ordinance, rule, or police regulation governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, the fine shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); in all other cases, the fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  In all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the state in which concurrent jurisdiction has been vested in the municipal court under the Code of Criminal Procedure article 4.14, a person who commits an offense under any of such laws shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this Code continues is a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003; further penalty limits, V.A.C.C.P. art. 4.14.  
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1965, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(4)  Making any appropriation; 
(5)  Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(11)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations or streets, or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(13)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home-rule municipality has full power of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072; form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq.; adoption and use of seal, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.016; open governing and open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; municipal emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Official holidays—Listed. 
(a)  The official holidays for the city are: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Martin Luther King Day; 
(3)  President's Day; 
(4)  Good Friday; 
(5)  Battle of Flowers Parade; 
(6)  Memorial Day; 
(7)  Independence Day; 
(8)  Labor Day; 
(9)  Veteran's Day; 
(10)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(11)  Day after Thanksgiving; 
(12)  Christmas Eve; 
(13)  Christmas Day. 
(b)  If any of the above holidays fall on a Saturday, the Friday preceding will be observed as a holiday and if any fall on Sunday, the following Monday will be observed as a holiday. 
(Code 1965, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2109 , 9-24-18)  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—City hall to be closed; not to affect fire and police departments. 
On official holidays of the city, the city hall shall be closed and no official business shall be transacted. Provided however, that the fire and police departments shall be in no way affected by legal holidays; and provided further, that municipal court may be held on legal holidays. 
(Code 1965, § 2-2)  
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Declaration of other holidays. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to declare by proclamation additional holidays for special occasions. 
(Code 1965, § 2-3)  
Sec. 2-4. - Waiver of provisions of Charter Article XIII, Section 3. 
Neither the mayor nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have authority to waive any of the provisions of Article XIII, Section 3, of the Charter of the city, but same may be waived only by a resolution of the city council made and passed before the expiration of the period of ninety (90) days provided for in such section of the Charter and which resolution shall be evidenced by the minutes and records of the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-4)  
Sec. 2-5. - Alteration of fees, charges, etc. 
All charges, rates, permit fees, license fees or other charges contained in any city ordinance now or hereafter adopted may be altered or amended by action by the city council in compliance with all applicable statutes, and such alteration or amendment shall be documented in the official minutes of the city council meeting in which such action was adopted. A current schedule of all rates, fees and charges, including the date each charge was last altered or amended shall be kept at city hall for public inspection and information. The intent of this section is to allow for periodic adjustments to user fees, charges and rates provided for in city ordinances without the necessity of formal adoption of a completely rewritten ordinance.  
Secs. 2-6—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY OFFICIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1800, adopted Dec. 8, 2008, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 2-26—2-31, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-14—2-17; Ord. No. 1296, adopted Mar. 29, 1993; Ord. No. 1504, adopted July 8, 2002; Ord. No. 1507, adopted July 22, 2002; Ord. No. 1550, adopted June 14, 2004; and Ord. No. 1619, adopted Jan. 9, 2006. 
Charter reference— Oath required of all appointed officers, Art. V, § 1; duties of city secretary set out, Art. V, § 4; duties of treasurer set out, Art. V, § 5; duties of city marshal set out, Art. V, § 6; duties of city attorney set out, Art. V, § 7; duties of city engineer set out, Art. V, § 8; control of officers, Art. V, § 12; bond for appointive officers, Art. V, § 13; resignation of officers, Art. V, § 15; removal of officers, Art. V, § 15; prohibition against city councilmen from holding other employment within the city, Art. IV, § 11; salaries of appointive officers to be set by council on or before the first day of March or next preceding election of the mayor, Art. VI, § 4. 
Cross reference— City secretary to be responsible for making election assessments, etc., as required by social security, § 2-72; city secretary also responsible to make required reports to Texas Municipal Retirement System, § 2-80; supervision of city engineer of earth fills, § 5-28. 
 
Sec. 2-26. - City officers and officials listed. 
(a)  In accordance with Article V of the Charter of the city, the following are the appointed officers of the city: 
(1)  City manager. 
(2)  Police chief. 
(3)  Fire chief. 
(4)  City attorney. 
(5)  Public works director. 
(6)  City secretary. 
(7)  Finance director. 
(b)  The following are city official positions not specifically listed in the Charter: 
(1)  City prosecutor. 
(2)  Assistant city manager. 
(3)  Community development director. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the authority to appoint and remove the city officers and officials listed hereinabove in subsection (a)(2) through (7) and subsection (b) with the approval of the city council. The city manager shall have the authority to immediately suspend with pay any city officer or official subject to review by the city council. The city manager shall have the authority to create additional city officer and official positions and enter into contracts for the engagement of city officers and officials with the approval of the city council. The city manager shall not be required to fill all of the city officer and official positions and more than one (1) of the city officer and official positions may be filled by the same person. The compensation for all city officers and officials shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1800, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 1891, 12-13-10)  
Sec. 2-27. - City departments. 
In accordance with Article VIII of the Charter of the city, the city manager, with the approval of the city council, may create or establish, abolish or consolidate as many departments as the city manager deems necessary for the best interest of the city. In addition to those departments which may be subsequently created, there shall be a police department under the general supervision of the police chief, a fire department under the general supervision of the fire chief, an administration and finance department with financial personnel under the general supervision of the finance director and all others under the general supervision of the city manager, a public works department under the general supervision of the public works director and a community development department under the general supervision of the community development director. For the purpose of brevity, the person who supervises a department (other than the police and fire departments) shall be referred to as the "director" of that department. If a person who supervises a department is referenced in this code by some title other than "director", the code shall be interpreted so that the reference will be to the "director" of that department. 
(Ord. No. 1800, § 2, 12-8-08)  
Sec. 2-28. - Indemnification of city officers and employees. 
(a)  The City of Alamo Heights will provide for the indemnification and legal defense of the officers and employees of the city, including members of the city council, boards, commissions, committees and volunteers approved by the mayor or the city manager, as the case may be, against any cost, loss, or expense, including court costs and attorney's fees, arising out of any act or actions of such person undertaken in good faith during the discharge of that person's official duties and committed within the scope of such person's authority. Such indemnification and legal defense shall be provided to the extent allowed by state law and shall not be provided for knowing, willful or intentional violations of any statute or ordinance. 
(b)  A person claiming the right to be indemnified and receive a legal defense under the City Charter and this section shall promptly submit the claim against such person to the city manager who shall first make a determination that indemnity and representation of the person is in the public interest and is not merely in the private interest of the person, that the act was within the scope of the official duties of the person and that the act was not based on the knowing, willful or intentional violation of a statute or ordinance. 
(c)  If the city manager determines that the person is entitled to indemnity and legal defense by the city, the city manager shall arrange for an appropriate legal defense against such claim (1) by insurers of the city and its personnel, or (2) by the engagement by the city of qualified representatives who shall provide a vigorous defense to the claim. If the city manager determines that the person's act was merely in the private interest of the person and not in the public interest, or that the person was not acting in the scope of his official duties, or that the act was based on the knowing, willful or intentional violation of a statute or ordinance, so that indemnification and legal defense should not be provided by the city, the person may appeal such determination to the city council which shall determine entitlement to indemnification and legal defense. 
(d)  If the claim is against the mayor or a member of the city council, the determination of providing indemnification and legal defense shall be referred directly to the city council. The person complained of shall abstain from participation and voting on the determination by the city council, in which event the other city council members shall constitute a quorum. If the mayor and all city council members are complained of, the city attorney shall determine whether the city should provide indemnification and legal defense to the persons against whom the complaint was filed. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an officer or employee of the city, including members of the city council, boards, commissions and committees, are charged in a complaint, information or indictment with a criminal offense, the City of Alamo Heights may reimburse the person for defense expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred in defending against the criminal charges if (1) the act was done in the bonafide performance of the person's official duties, (2) a public interest, rather than a private interest of the person, is served by the expenditure, and (3) the person is found not guilty after a trial or appeal, or the complaint, information or indictment is dismissed without a plea of guilty or nolo contendre being entered. Reimbursement for defense expenses in defending against criminal charges may not be paid if the person is found guilty of the charges. The city must defer its decision to pay the defense expenses until after final disposition of the charges. 
(Ord. No. 1848, 11-9-09)  
Secs. 2-29—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1750-B, § 4, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 2-46—2-51, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-27—2-32; and Ord. No. 1634, adopted April 24, 2006. 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Composition. There is hereby created and established for the city a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of twelve (12) members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters of the city. They shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, to serve for terms of two (2) years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and in the same manner. Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, for any reason. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The mayor and the members of the city council, city attorney and city engineer shall act as ex officio members of such commission. A quorum for the conduct of business shall be five (5) members of the commission. A simple majority vote of those commission members present at a meeting with a quorum present shall be required for the commission to take action. 
(b)  Responsibility. The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to study the present zoning ordinances of the city and make and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance for the zoning or rezoning the city in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or state law. Any person or corporation or group of persons having a proprietary interest in any property may petition the city council for a change or amendment in the provisions of the zoning code, or the city planning and zoning commission may on its own motion institute proposals for change and amendment in the public interest. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal by ordinance the regulations herein established as provided by the statutes of the State of Texas. 
(c)  Procedures. The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its membership and shall have power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses, provided that the cost of such services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the use of the commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council and same shall be subject to approval by such council. 
Such bylaws shall include among other items, provisions for: 1) Regular and special meetings, open to the public; 2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public; 3) Report to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually; and 4) Procedure for the holding of public hearings on its recommendations. 
When an application for amendment to the zoning district map has been denied by the city council, or withdrawn or abandoned by the applicant, a new application for the same or a similar change of zoning on the same property will not be received by the city planning and zoning commission until the expiration of six (6) months time from the date of such denial or unless the city planning and zoning commission shall find that conditions have changed so as to warrant an earlier hearing or that it is then in the public interest that an earlier rehearing be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1750-B, § 4, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10) 
Charter reference— Authorization to establish planning and zoning commission, Art. XVIII, § 3.  
Sec. 2-47. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Composition. There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members who are citizens and taxpayers of the City of Alamo Heights, each to be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. The mayor with the approval of the city council may appoint two (2) alternate members of the board of adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the mayor. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members, which is for a term of two (2) years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they shall be subject to removal the same as the regular members. The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The secretary shall not be a member of the board and shall not have a vote. 
(b)  Responsibility. When, in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board of adjustment may in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(4)  To require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses under any plan whereby the full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this ordinance, and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The board may, from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city. 
(c)  Procedures. The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and shall be held in the council chamber of the City of Alamo Heights. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department or board of the municipality affected by any decisions of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within the time specified by the rules of the board after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
At a public hearing relative to any appeal for a variance, any interested party may appear in person or by attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to justify the action of the board of adjustment on any appeal. Any special exception or variance granted or authorized by the board of adjustment under the provisions of this section shall authorize the issuance of a building permit for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the favorable action of the board unless said board shall in its action approve a longer period of time or prior to the expiration of the permit shall grant a longer period and so show such specific longer period in the minutes of its action. If the building permit shall not have been issued within said one hundred eighty-day period or such extended period as the board may specifically grant, then the special exception or variance shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such terminating and waiver shall be without prejudice to one (1) subsequent appeal to said board in accordance with regulations herein contained. 
In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas as existing or hereafter amended, revise or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this section or to affect any variance in said ordinance. 
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter. 
(d)  Repetitive filings prohibited. When an application for a variance has been denied by the board of adjustment, or withdrawn or abandoned by the applicant after a hearing thereon has commenced, a new application for the same or a similar variance on the same property will not be received by the board of adjustment until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such denial or withdrawal, unless the city's community development director shall find that conditions have changed so as to warrant an earlier filing or that it is in the public interest to reconsider the application. 
(Ord. No. 1750-B, § 4, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2050 , 5-9-16; Ord. No. 2146 , § 1, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 2-48. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  Composition. There is created an architectural review board consisting of seven (7) members who are residents and qualified voters of the city. Each member of the architectural review board shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, and shall serve for terms of two (2) years or until reappointed or replaced by action of the mayor and city council. All acts of the architectural review board shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members/alternates, and a quorum for meetings shall be at least four (4) members/alternates. The architectural review board shall have the powers and duties specified in this article and shall comply with the procedures specified in this article. Two (2) alternate members may also be appointed by the city council to serve when one or more regular members are absent or unable to fulfill their duties for a meeting or agenda item for consideration. Any such participating/voting alternate [shall] be designated by the chair at the start of the meeting or agenda item. An alternate member serves for the same period as a regular member and is subject to removal in the same manner as a regular member. A vacancy among the alternate members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members. 
(b)  Responsibility. The goals and purposes of architectural review are to: (1) Promote orderly and harmonious development of the city; (2) Encourage the attainment of the most desirable use of land and improvements; (3) Enhance the desirability of living conditions in the city; and (4) Promote high aesthetic quality of development in the city. 
The architectural review board shall consider the following when reviewing projects within its jurisdiction: 
(1)  Whether the design is compatible with the immediate environment of the site. 
(2)  In areas considered by the board as having a unified design character or historical character, whether the design is compatible with such character. 
(3)  Whether the design promotes harmonious transitions in scale and character in areas between different designated land uses. 
(4)  Whether the planning and siting of the various functions and buildings on the site create an internal sense of order and provide a desirable environment for occupants, visitors and the general community. 
(5)  Whether the amount and arrangement of open space are appropriate to the design and the function of the structures. 
(6)  Whether access to the property and circulation thereon are safe and convenient for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles. 
(7)  Whether natural features are appropriately preserved and integrated with the project. 
(8)  Whether the materials, textures, colors and details of construction and plant material are appropriate expression to the design and function and whether the same are compatible with the adjacent and neighboring structures, landscape elements and functions. 
(9)  Whether the landscape design concept creates a desirable and functional environment. 
(10)  Whether plant material is suitable and adaptable to the site, capable of being properly maintained on the site, and is of a variety which would tend to be drought-resistant and to reduce consumption of water in its installation and maintenance. 
(11)  Whether the design is energy efficient and incorporates renewable energy design elements including, but not limited to: 
a.  Exterior energy design elements. 
b.  Building siting and landscape elements. 
In applying the standards set forth in this section, the architectural review board may review each of the following items of the proposed project: 
1.  Uses and functions as they relate to the design of the project and adjacent uses. 
2.  Compatibility with neighboring properties and uses. 
3.  Visibility and effect upon view at all site lines. 
4.  Aesthetics. 
5.  Quality of design. 
6.  Character. 
7.  Scale. 
8.  Building materials. 
9.  Color. 
10.  Site development characteristics including, but not limited to: 
a.  Lot size. 
b.  Building coverage. 
c.  Setbacks. 
d.  Building height. 
e.  Location upon the site. 
f.  Open space. 
g.  Pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle circulation. 
11.  Environmental factors including, but not limited to: 
a.  Noise. 
b.  Emission of smoke, fumes and odors. 
c.  Fire safety, life safety and fire access. 
d.  Disturbance of existing topography, trees, shrubs and other natural features. 
e.  Water percolation, grading and drainage and impermeability of soils. 
12.  Building and building components including, but not limited to: 
a.  Stairs, ramps, escalators, moving sidewalks, elevators or downspouts on the exterior of buildings. 
b.  Flues, chimneys, exhausts fans, air conditioning equipment, elevator equipment, fans, cooling towers, antennae or similar structures placed upon the roof or the exterior of the building. 
c.  Sun shades, awnings, louvers or any visible device for deflecting, filtering or shielding the structure or interior from the elements. 
d.  Balconies, penthouses, loading docks or similar special purpose appendages or accessory structures. 
13.  Accessory structures, including garages, sheds, utility facilities and waste receptacles. 
14.  Other on-site improvements including, but not limited to: 
a.  Parking and other paved areas. 
b.  Landscaping. 
c.  Lighting. 
d.  Signs and graphics. 
e.  Artwork, sculpture, fountains and other artistic features. 
15.  Energy efficiency and renewable energy design elements including, but not limited to: 
a.  Exterior energy design elements. 
b.  Internal lighting service and climatic control systems. 
c.  Building siting and landscaped elements. 
16.  Such other features as affect the design and ultimate appearance of the work, as determined by the architectural review board. 
(c)  Procedures. The architectural review board shall meet at least monthly upon call (as determined by need) and shall prescribe forms, applications, rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. All meetings of the architectural review board shall be open to the public. 
At the time and place set for hearings, the board shall hear evidence for and against applications. The board may continue hearings from time to time. 
The architectural review board shall recommend to the city council that the design for a project be approved, disapproved or approved with modifications, including the imposition of conditions by making findings in accordance with the standards contained in this article and such additional standards as may be adopted and published by the city council from time to time. 
The architectural review board shall send a report not less than once a year to the city council for the purpose of communicating the concerns of the board with respect to the city's plans, policies, ordinances and procedures as those affect the projects which the board reviews. 
The city council shall consider the recommendation of the architectural review board as soon as practicable after final recommendation of the architectural review board. The city council may take one (1) of the following actions: 
(1)  Disapprove the project. 
(2)  Approve, or approve with modifications to the project. 
(3)  In its discretion, refer the application back to the architectural review board. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Absences. A regular member shall be automatically removed from the architectural review board, and a vacancy shall be created, upon the failure to attend four (4) regular convened meetings of the board, in any rolling twelve-month period. In the event a regular meeting is called, but a quorum is not convened: Any member who fails to confirm availability to city staff at least six (6) hours prior to meeting shall be deemed absent. Nothing in this section shall restrict the removal of any member as provided elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances. Nothing in this section shall limit a removed member from reappointment. 
(Ord. No. 1750-B, § 4, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2151 , §§ 1, 2, 1-27-20)  
Sec. 2-49. - Public notification. 
In addition to the requirements of state law and except for consideration of requests for the erection of signs, requests considered by the city's boards and commissions shall be subject to the following public notification requirements: 
(1)  Erect yard sign notifying public of nature of request and date, time and place of public hearing on subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting; 
(2)  Post notice of nature of request and date, time and place of public hearing on city's website at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting; and 
(3)  Mail written notice to property owners of record within two hundred (200) feet of subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, which shall contain: 
a.  The exact address of the property, if known, or the location of the property, if the exact address is not known, and the nature or purpose of the application; and 
b.  The time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1750-B, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Secs. 2-50—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RETIREMENT PLANS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt pension and retirement plan for city employees generally, Art. XIII, § 8. 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.; proportionate retirement program, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 803.001 et seq.; state regulations concerning actions of participating municipalities, 34 Tex. Admin. Code 125.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Social security for city employees—Execution of agreements. 
(a)  The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of applicable state and federal laws relative to federal old age and survivors' insurance benefits for employees of the city, including the fire and police departments. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43) 
State Law reference— Coverage for employees of political subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 606.021 et seq.  
Sec. 2-72. - Same—Duties of city secretary. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare in connection with the federal old age and survivors' insurance program. 
(Code 1965, § 2-44)  
Sec. 2-73. - Same—Fund established. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the federal old age and survivors' insurance law, under applicable state and federal laws. Such money so allocated shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1965, § 2-45)  
Sec. 2-74. - City to make contributions. 
Commencing on the first day of April, 1967, the city shall pay the social security payments due by the city, i.e., the employer's share of the total contribution, and the necessary withholdings shall be made from the employees' pay which is required by law to be paid by employees receiving salaries from the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-46)  
Sec. 2-75. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Election to participate. 
On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 852.001, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted. 
(Code 1965, § 2-47) 
Editor's note— Ordinances listed below represent amendments to the Texas Municipal Retirement System which are not set out in the Code: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 
1317 	11-27-93 	1, 2 
1345 	12-12-94 	
1489 	11-19-01 	
2092 
11-13-17 	1—3 
 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt Texas Municipal Retirement System, Art. XIII, § 8.  
Sec. 2-76. - Same—Employees included. 
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, beginning upon the date such person becomes an "employee" as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001. 
(Code 1965, § 2-48)  
Sec. 2-77. - Same—Adding or discontinuing participants. 
The city may, in the future, refuse to add new departments or new employees to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1965, § 2-49) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 852.101 et seq.  
Sec. 2-78. - Same—Rate of deposits and contributions. 
Deposits and contributions to the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be seven (7) percent computed on salaries and earnings not to exceed the maximum salary. 
(Code 1965, § 2-50; Ord. No. 2092 , 11-13-17) 
State Law reference— Collection of contributions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.401 et seq.  
Sec. 2-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the agreement in Ord. No. 1244, the provisions of § 2-79, which pertained to the maximum earnings subject to contributions for the Texas Municipal Retirement System has been deleted by the editor.  
Sec. 2-80. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Remittance and reports to board of trustees. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, as required by such board under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001, and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all other reports and certificates which may be required of the city under the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1965, § 2-52)  
Sec. 2-81. - Retirement benefits for volunteer firemen—Distinguished from Firemen's Relief and Retirement Law. 
Any funds appropriated by the city for special retirement benefits to its volunteer firemen shall in no way be considered or made part of the funds provided for under the Texas Local Fire Fighters Act, V.T.C.A. art. 6243e, which from time to time has been amended by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 2-53)  
Sec. 2-82. - Same—Eligibility. 
A person who has served creditably and actively for a period of twenty (20) years with the city volunteer fire department and who has reached his fifty-fifth birthday and is in good standing shall be entitled to the benefits provided for in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2-54)  
Sec. 2-83. - Same—Limitation of benefits. 
The fact that a person may be entitled to benefits under state Firemen's Relief and Retirement Law shall in no way entitle him to any benefits whatsoever from funds appropriated by the city for the special benefits of volunteer firemen who have served, or are serving with the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-55)  
Sec. 2-84. - Same—Amount of benefits. 
The amount of benefits to be paid to a person entitled to benefits hereunder shall from time to time be determined by the volunteer firemen's advisory board, which shall use as a standard a sum of not more than the difference between what a person may be actually receiving in the way of retirement or pension under the state Firemen's Relief and Retirement Law and what he would have received had he been paid twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month under the state fund, provided however, such payment by the city shall never exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. 
(Code 1965, § 2-56)  
Sec. 2-85. - Same—Benefits to cease at death. 
All benefits to be paid hereunder shall be personal to the volunteer fireman and shall cease at his death. 
(Code 1965, § 2-57)  
Secs. 2-86—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 1229, adopted April 9, 1990, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. V, §§ 2-101—2-115. 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; designation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Definition of municipal records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the City of Alamo Heights or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-102. - Additional definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
(1)  Department head means that officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
(2)  Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
(3)  Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
(4)  Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
(5)  Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
(6)  Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-110. 
(7)  Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-106. 
(8)  Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-105. 
(9)  Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-107. 
(10)  Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 2, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-103. - City records declared public property. 
All city records as defined in section 2-101 are hereby declared to be the property of the City of Alamo Heights. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 3, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-104. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 4, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-105. - Designation of records management officer. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the City of Alamo Heights. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 5, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-106. - Records management committee. 
There shall be no records management committee for the City of Alamo Heights. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 6, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-107. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the City of Alamo Heights for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 7, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-108. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 8, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-109. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 9, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-110. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 10, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-111. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 11, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-112. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the records management officer. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 12, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-113. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-107 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained from the records management officer. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 13, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-114. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 14, 4-9-90)  
Sec. 2-115. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. 
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 16, 4-9-90)  
Secs. 2-116—2-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT FOR CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1686, §§ 1—19, adopted Nov. 27, 2006, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 2-151—2-171. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Statement of purpose. 
The citizens and businesses of Alamo Heights are entitled to have fair, ethical and accountable local government which earns the public's full confidence for integrity. The strong desire of the city to fulfill this expectation therefore requires that city officials, both elected and appointed, and employees: 
• Comply with both the letter and spirit of the laws and policies affecting the operations of government; 
• Be independent, impartial and fair in their judgment and actions; and 
• The office or position be used for the public good, not for personal gain. 
To this end, the city council has adopted this code of ethics and conduct for city officials and employees to assure public confidence in the integrity of local government and its effective and fair operation. 
(Ord. No. 1686, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings subscribed to them in this section: 
Business. A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other for profit or non-profit entity. 
City council. The legislative and governing body of the city consisting of the mayor and council city members. 
City official. Any member of the city council and any appointed member of a board, commission, or committee set up by ordinance, charter, state law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis. 
Employee. Any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time basis, including independent contractors hired by the city for repetitive performance of services, but not independent contractors engaged for occasional services. 
(Ord. No. 1686, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-153. - Act in the public interest. 
Recognizing that stewardship of the public interest must be their primary concern, city officials and employees will work for the common good of the people of Alamo Heights and not for any private or personal interest, and they will assure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims and transactions coming before the city council, boards, commissions, and committees. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 1, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-154. - Comply with the law. 
City officials and employees shall comply with the laws of the nation, the State of Texas, and the City of Alamo Heights in the performance of their public duties. These laws include, but are not limited to: the United States and Texas constitutions; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, election campaigns, financial disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open processes of government; and city ordinances and policies. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 2, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-155. - Conduct of city officials and employees. 
The professional and personal conduct of city officials and employees must be above reproach and avoid even the appearance of impropriety. City officials and employees shall refrain from abusive conduct, personal charges or verbal attacks upon the character or motives of other city officials and employees, board, commission, and committee members and the public. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 3, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-156. - Respect for process. 
City officials and employees shall perform their duties in accordance with the processes and rules of order established by the city council and boards, commissions, and committees governing the public deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful involvement of the public, and implementation of policy decisions of the city council by city staff. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 4, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-157. - Conduct of public meetings. 
City officials have an obligation to attend meetings and be prepared for public issues; listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the body; and focus on the business at hand. They shall refrain from interrupting other speakers, making personal comments not germane to the business of the body, or otherwise interfere with the orderly conduct of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 5, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-158. - Decisions based on merit. 
It is expected that city officials and employees review material, participate in discussion and base their decisions on the merits and substance of the matter at hand. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 6, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-159. - Communication. 
Prior to permitting final action to be taken on a matter under consideration city officials and employees shall publicly share substantive information, which they may have received from sources outside the public decision-making process, that is relevant to such action by the council, boards, commissions, or committees. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 7, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-160. - Conflicts of interest and disclosure. 
City officials and employees shall familiarize themselves and abide by the following conflicts of interest and disclosure statutes and principles: 
(1)  Section 171 of the Local Government Code which requires council members and certain officers to file an affidavit disclosing a substantial interest in a business or property that would be beneficially affected by a decision of the city council and thereafter abstaining from participation in discussion and voting on the matter. Once the disclosure is made the city official is to remove themselves from the meeting area to ensure their presence does not hinder the discussion of the item or influence the vote. 
(2)  Section 176 of the Local Government Code which requires city council members and the city manager to file a conflicts disclosure statement disclosing any business relationship with a person or business doing business with the city or being considered by the city for a business relationship. 
(3)  Section 176.003(a)(2)(B) of the Local Government Code which requires the disclosure of gifts of an aggregate value of more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in the twelve (12) month period preceding a transaction described in Section 176, other than gifts of food, lodging, transportation, or entertainment accepted as a guest. 
(4)  Sections 553.001—553.003 of the Government Code which requires the filing of an affidavit before the date the city will acquire a property in which public servants have a legal or equitable interest. 
(5)  City employees shall disclose potential conflicts of interest to their supervisor and avoid participation in the handling of matters wherein employees have a personal interest. 
(6)  In order to assure their independence and impartiality on behalf of the public good, city officials and employees are prohibited from using their positions to influence government decisions in which they have a personal interest. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 8, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-161. - Corruption. 
City officials and employees shall familiarize themselves and abide by the Penal Code mandates concerning corruption, including specifically Section 36.02 prohibiting bribes, Section 36.08(d) prohibiting illegal benefits, Section 36.09 prohibiting receipt of prohibited gifts, Section 39.02 concerning abuse of official capacity and Section 39.06(a) concerning misuse of official information. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 9, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-162. - Political advocacy. 
City officials and employees shall not utilize the city's name or logo for purposes of endorsing any political candidate or business. City employees shall not engage in electioneering while on the job. Electioneering means working for the election of a candidate to political office. 
City employees shall not be appointed or retained on the basis of their political support or activities. Employees shall not engage in political activities relating to a campaign for elective office while in uniform or on active duty. Employees elected to city offices shall be required to resign their employment upon acceptance of the office. 
City employees are prohibited from using their municipal title or position in any advertisement or endorsement of products, persons or activities, without exclusive authorization by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 10, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-163. - Confidential information. 
City officials and employees shall respect the confidentiality of information concerning city property, personnel or proceedings of the city. They shall neither disclose confidential information without proper legal authorization, nor use such information to advance their personal interests. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 11, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-164. - Use of public resources. 
City officials and employees shall not use public resources generally unavailable to the public, such as city staff time, equipment, supplies or facilities, for private gain or personal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 12, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-165. - Representation of private interests. 
In keeping with their role as stewards of the public interest, city officials and employees shall not appear on behalf of private interests of third parties before the council or any board, commission, committee, or proceeding of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 13, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-166. - Advocacy. 
City officials and employees shall represent the official policies or positions of the city council, board, commission, or committee to the best of their ability when designated as delegates for this purpose. When presenting their individual opinions and positions, city officials and employees shall explicitly state they do not represent their body or the City of Alamo Heights, nor will they allow the inference that they do. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 14, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-167. - Policy role of city officials and employees. 
City officials and employees shall respect and adhere to the city governmental structure as outlined in the city's Charter, policies and procedures. In this structure, the city council determines the policies of the city with the advice, information and analysis provided by the public, boards, commissions, and committees and city staff. Except as provided by the city ordinance, city officials therefore shall not interfere with the administrative functions of the city or the professional duties of the city staff; nor shall they impair the ability of staff to implement council policy decisions. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 15, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-168. - Independence of boards, commissions, and committees. 
Because of the value of the independent advice of boards, commissions, and committees to the public decision-making process, city officials shall refrain from using their position to influence unduly the deliberations or outcomes of board, commission, and committee proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 16, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-169. - Positive work place environment. 
City officials shall support the maintenance of a positive and constructive work place environment for city employees and for citizens and businesses dealing with the city. City officials shall recognize their special role in dealing with city employees and refrain from creating the perception of inappropriate direction to staff. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 17, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-170. - Implementation. 
As an expression of the standards of conduct for city officials and employees expected by the city, the Alamo Heights Code of Ethics and Conduct is intended to be self-enforcing. It therefore becomes most effective when city officials and employees are thoroughly familiar with it and embrace its provisions. Ethical standards shall be included in the regular orientations for candidates for city council, applicants to boards, commissions, and committees and newly elected and appointed officials and new employees. City officials and employees entering office, including those appointed to boards, commissions and committees shall sign a statement affirming they have read and understood the City of Alamo Heights Code of Ethics and Conduct. In addition, the code of ethics and conduct shall be reviewed periodically by the city council, boards, commissions, and committees, and the city council shall consider recommendations from boards, commissions, committees, employees, and citizens for revision as it becomes necessary. 
STATEMENT OF COMMITMENT 
As a member of the Alamo Heights City Council or of an Alamo Heights city board, commission or committee or an employee, I agree to uphold the Code of Ethics and Conduct and conduct myself by the following model of behavior. 
I will: 
• Recognize the worth of individual city officials and employees and appreciate their individual talents, perspectives and contributions; 
• Help create an atmosphere of respect and civility where individual city officials, city staff and the public are free to express their ideas and work to their full potential; 
• Conduct my personal and public affairs with honesty, integrity, fairness and respect for others; 
• Respect the dignity and privacy of individuals and organizations; 
• Keep the common good as my highest purpose and focus on achieving constructive solutions for public benefit; 
• Avoid and discourage conduct which is divisive or harmful to the best interests of Alamo Heights; 
• Treat all people with whom I come in contact in a manner I wish to be treated; 
• Before I speak or act I will ask myself the following questions: 
1.  Is it the truth? 
2.  Is it fair to all concerned? 
3.  Will it build goodwill and better relationships? 
4.  Will it be beneficial to all concerned? 
I affirm that I have read and that I understand, accept and support the City of Alamo Heights Code of Ethics and Conduct. 
_____
Council, Board, Commission, Committee, Employee 
_____
Position 
_____
Signature          Date 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 18, 11-27-06)  
Sec. 2-171. - Compliance and enforcement. 
The Alamo Heights Code of Ethics and Conduct expresses standards of ethical conduct expected for city officials and employees of the city council, boards, commissions, and committees. City officials and employees themselves have the primary responsibility to assure that ethical standards are understood and met, and that the public can continue to have full confidence in the integrity of government. The chairs of boards, commissions, and committees and the mayor have the additional responsibility to intervene when city officials' actions appear to be in violation of the code of ethics and conduct and are brought to their attention. The city council may impose sanctions, such as reprimand, formal censure, or loss of committee assignment, on city officials whose conduct does not comply with the city's ethical standards. The city council also may act to remove members of boards, commissions, and committees from office. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 19, 11-27-06)  
Secs. 2-172—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FISCAL AND BUDGETARY POLICY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, adopted March 26, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 2-201—2-217. 
State Law reference— General fiscal powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022; municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 102.001—102.111; audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 103.001—103.004; Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 2256.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Statement of purpose. 
Financial policies set forth the basic framework for the fiscal management of the city. Policies, which are reviewed and approved by the city council, will be reviewed and updated annually to ensure that the city maintains a sound financial position in each of the city's fund and account groups. The policy will provide guidelines for short and long term decision making. Implementation of this policy will: 
(1)  Demonstrate to the citizens of Alamo Heights, the investment community, and the bond rating agencies that the city is committed to a strong fiscal operation; 
(2)  Provide precedents for future policy-makers and financial managers on common financial goals and strategies; 
(3)  Fairly present and fully disclose the financial position of the city in conformity to generally accepted accounting principals (GAAP); and 
(4)  Demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal and contractual issues in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code and other legal mandates. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-202. - Governmental funds. 
The budgeted funds for the city may include the following governmental funds: 
General fund which accounts for all financial resources except those required to be accounted for in another fund, and include basic governmental services, such as police, fire, emergency medical services, public works, community development, streets, solid waste, parks and administration functions, among others. 
Special revenue funds (SRF) account for specific revenues that are legally restricted for specified purposes. The city currently budgets seven (7) SRF funds. 
Debt service fund accounts for the payment of general long-term debt principal and interest if applicable. 
Capital project funds are used to account for the acquisition or construction of major capital facilities other than those financed by enterprise activities. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-203. - Basis of accounting and basis of budgeting. 
(a)  The city accounts and budgets for all governmental funds using the modified accrual basis of accounting. This basis means that revenue is recognized in the accounting period in which it becomes available and measurable, while expenditures are recognized in the accounting period in which they are incurred. Because the appropriated budget is used as the basis for control and comparison of budgeted and actual amounts, the basis for preparing the budget is the same as the basis of accounting. Exceptions to the modified accrual basis of accounting include: 
• Encumbrances, which are treated as expenditures in the year they are encumbered, not when expended. 
• Grants, which are considered revenue when awarded, not received. 
• Principal and interest on long-term debt, which are recognized when paid. 
General government funds include the general fund, special revenue funds, debt service fund and general capital project funds. 
(b)  The basic framework for preparing the budget should include the following concepts: 
(1)  Planning. The budget process will be coordinated so that major policy issues are identified prior to the budget approval date. This will allow city council adequate time for consideration of appropriate decisions and analysis of financial impacts. 
(2)  Preparation. The Charter requires "that city council shall on the 15th day of May each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, prepare a budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the city for the succeeding year". No budget will be adopted or appropriations made unless the total estimated revenues, income and funds available shall be equal to or in excess of such budget or appropriations, except otherwise provided. 
(3)  Proposed budget. A proposed budget shall be prepared by the city manager with participation of the city's department heads and other executive staff. 
a.  The budget shall include four (4) basic segments for review and evaluation: 
• Revenues. 
• Personnel costs. 
• Operations and maintenance. 
• Capital and other non project costs. 
b.  The budget review process will include city council participation and will allow for sufficient time to address policy and fiscal issues by the city council. 
c.  A copy of the proposed budget will be filed with the city secretary when it is submitted to the city council. 
(4)  Balanced budget. The goal of the city is to balance the operating budget with current revenues, whereby, current revenues would match and fund on-going expenditures/expenses. Excess balances in the operating funds from previous years would then be used for non-recurring expenditures/expenses or as capital funds. 
(5)  Adoption. Upon finalization of the proposed budget, the city council will hold a public hearing for citizen input, and subsequently adopt by ordinance the final budget as amended. The budget will be effective for the fiscal year beginning April 1st. The Annual Operating Plan document may be submitted annually to the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) for evaluation and consideration for the Distinguished Budget Presentation Award. 
(6)  Reporting. Summary financial reports will be presented quarterly to update the city council on the city's overall budget and financial status. 
(7)  Control and accountability. Each department head will be responsible for the administration of his/her departmental budget. This includes accomplishing the programs adopted as part of the budget and monitoring each department budget for compliance with spending limitations. Transfers of appropriation or budget amendments require either city council or city manager approval as outlined below. 
(8)  Budget amendments. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable that the total revenues available within any fund contained in the budget will be insufficient to meet the total fund appropriations, the city council may authorize by ordinance to increase estimated revenues or to decrease appropriations within the fund. The following criteria will be used in evaluation of budget amendments: 
• Is the request necessary? 
• Why was the item not budgeted in the normal budget process? 
• Can a transfer be done within the Division to remedy the condition? 
Availability of revenues or funding sources must be identified prior to adoption. 
The city will amend the budget at year end, if needed, for revenue based expenditures that exceeded budgeted amounts due to increased revenue and recognize any grant funded expenditures for grants received after the budget was adopted or last amended. The city may also amend the budget if necessary as part of a mid-year review process for any capital project timing adjustments from prior year, as well as, any other known adjustments needed and approved at that time. 
(9)  Contingency appropriations. The budget may include a contingency appropriation within the administrative operating department budget. These funds are used to offset expenditures for unexpected maintenance or other unanticipated expenses that might occur during the year. Currently, the city maintains contingency appropriations for insurance deductibles, unexpected legal expenses, equipment repairs and other expenses that are difficult to anticipate or estimate. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-204. - Revenue management. 
(a)  Characteristics. The city will strive for the following optimum characteristics in its revenue system: 
(1)  Simplicity. The city, where possible and without sacrificing accuracy, will strive to keep the revenue system simple in order to reduce compliance costs for the taxpayer or service recipient. 
(2)  Certainty. A knowledge and understanding of revenue sources increases the reliability of the revenue system. The city will understand its revenue sources and enact consistent collection policies to provide assurances that the revenue base will materialize according to budget. 
(3)  Equity. The city shall make every effort to maintain equity in its revenue system; i.e., the city should seek to minimize or eliminate all forms of subsidization between entities, funds, services, utilities, and customer classes, and ensure an on-going return on investment for the city. 
(4)  Revenue adequacy. The city should require there be a balance in the revenue system; i.e., the revenue base will have the characteristics of fairness and neutrality as it applies to cost of service, willingness to pay, and ability to pay. 
(5)  Realistic and conservative estimates. Revenues will be estimated realistically, and conservatively, taking into account the volatile nature of various revenue streams. 
(6)  Administration. The benefits of a revenue source should exceed the cost of levying and collecting that revenue. 
(7)  Diversification and stability. A diversified revenue system with a stable source of income shall be maintained. This will help avoid instabilities in revenue sources due to factors such as fluctuations in the economy and variations in the weather. 
(b)  Other considerations. The following considerations and issues will guide the city in its revenue policies concerning specific sources of funds: 
(1)  Cost/benefit of incentives for economic development. The city will use due caution in the analysis of any incentives that are used to encourage development. A cost/benefit (fiscal impact) analysis will be performed as part of the evaluation. 
(2)  Non-recurring revenues. One-time or non-recurring revenues should not be used to finance current ongoing operations. Non-recurring revenues should be used only for non-recurring expenditures and not for budget balancing purposes. 
(3)  Property tax revenues. All real and business personal property located within the city will be valued at one hundred (100) percent of the fair market value for any given year based on the current appraisal supplied by the Bexar County Appraisal District. 
Conservative budgeted revenue estimates result in a projected ninety-eight (98) percent budgeted collection rate for current ad valorem taxes. Two (2) percent of the current ad valorem taxes will be projected as the budget for delinquent ad valorem tax collection. For budgeting purposes, the city will forecast the current year's effective tax rate at the current collection rate of ninety-eight (98) percent, unless prior collection history indicates otherwise. 
(4)  Interest income. Interest earned from investments will be distributed to the funds in accordance with the equity balance of the fund from which the monies were provided to be invested. 
(5)  User-based fees and service charges. For services associated with a user fee or charge, the direct or indirect costs of that service will be offset by a fee where possible. 
(6)  Intergovernmental revenues. All potential grants will be examined for matching requirements and must be approved by the city council prior to making application of the grant if time allows. It must be clearly understood that operational requirements (ongoing costs) established as a result of a grant program could be discontinued once the term and conditions of the program have been completed. 
(7)  Revenue monitoring. Revenues as they are received will be regularly compared to budgeted revenues and variances will be investigated, and any abnormalities will be included in the quarterly report to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-205. - Expenditure policies. 
(a)  Appropriations. The point of budget control is at the department level budget for all funds. Any transfer or appropriation between funds must be approved by the city council. Transfer of appropriations between departments may be authorized by the city manager without city council approval. 
(b)  Purchasing. All city purchases of goods or services will be made in accordance with the city's current purchasing policy and with state law. The city's purchasing policy requires all contracts greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) be approved by the city council. Materials and other bid items may be purchased up to the twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) limit allowed by state law without city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-206. - General fund revenue policies. 
(a)  All new programs or service enhancements shall be implemented according to council direction as a part of the budget process. In the event additional revenues are required to implement a new program or service enhancement, the fiscal impact of the program change will be considered by the staff to determine if a new revenue source or increase in existing revenue will be needed. The analysis shall include the applicability of user fees as a source of revenue to support the new or expanded program. 
(b)  Through the proposed budget the city shall strive to develop a balance in major revenue sources to protect the financial stability of the city in the event of severe fluctuation in the national and/or local economy. This balance will maintain a diversified and stable revenue system. The major revenue sources of the general fund are sales tax, ad valorem taxes and all other charges for services. 
(c)  Charges for services shall be reviewed and updated as a part of the budget process. The review will consider the cost of providing the service and a review of similar charges in comparable cities in the region. 
(d)  Revenues shall be projected based on actual collections from the preceding year and estimated collections of the current fiscal year, while taking into account known circumstances that will impact revenues for the new fiscal year. Revenue projections will be made conservatively. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-207. - Utility fund revenue policies. 
(a)  A cost of service rate study will be conducted to determine a benchmark rate necessary to fund the utility for five (5) years. Updates to the study will be performed as recommended to ensure that the rates in effect will fund the utility budgets. These rates should be sufficient for funding a depreciation reserve which will accumulate resources to replace or rehabilitate aging infrastructure which no longer can be serviced by regular maintenance. Attempts should be made to fund the reserve at a level approximate to annual depreciation of assets as reported in the city's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. 
(b)  Utility fund revenues are budgeted on the basis of a normal year, not on the basis of forecasted extreme wet or dry years. The city will make every reasonable effort to ensure accurate measurement of water purchased and sold. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-208. - Debt service fund revenue and expenditure policies. 
(a)  The city will issue only multi-year debt and the debt will be used to fund capital projects that cannot be funded by current revenues except as may be otherwise required by an emergency or other unforeseen circumstance. 
(b)  To minimize interest costs on issued debt, the city will structure debt with maturities not to exceed the life of the assets funded. Longer issues may be authorized in the unusual case of a substantially longer life or other extenuating circumstances. The final maturity date for any multi-year debt will not exceed the expected useful life of the capital improvement so financed. 
(c)  An evaluation of existing and projected overlapping and direct debt shall be reviewed by the council as well as any committee appointed by the council to develop recommendations for proposed new debt for the city. Estimates of growth shall be conservative and consideration will be given as to the city's future ability to repay the debt and maintain an ability to issue additional unforeseen debt. 
(d)  The city will set appropriate debt limits in accordance with state law and local charter. Financial limitations through appropriate debt service coverage ratios should be established prior to insurance of general obligation debt to positively impact bond ratings. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-209. - Special revenue funds revenue and expenditure policies. 
Special revenue fund revenue sources include donations and contract payments from intergovernmental sources. Funds received are normally restricted for use as indicated by the contract or donor. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-210. - Fund balance policies. 
(a)  The proposed general fund budget shall be submitted to the city council with a fund balance reserve of not less than four (4) months of recurring operating appropriations. 
(b)  Debt service fund balances shall be sufficient to meet future debt service payment of general obligation debt outstanding. A comprehensive and routine analysis of debt capacity will be made when debt is issued to establish a minimum required percentage of the principal to be maintained. Debt service fund balances in excess of this requirement may be drawn down to be used to reduce ad valorem tax revenue for bond principal and interest payments on existing or new debt. Consideration will be given to the impact such use would have on future tax rate calculations. 
(c)  All other fund balances shall be maintained at a level necessary to ensure stability in the event of a decline in revenues dedicated to that fund. Fund balance requirements shall always be in agreement with bond covenants. 
(d)  Fund balances which exceed the minimum levels established for each fund may be appropriated for non-recurring capital projects or programs or in emergency situations. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-211. - Operating fund expenditures. 
(a)  Operating fund expenditures shall be accounted for and budgeted in the four (4) major categories: 
(1)  Personnel. 
(2)  Commodities. 
(3)  Contractual. 
(4)  Capital outlay. 
(b)  The proposed budget shall appropriate sufficient funds for operations to maintain existing quality and scope of city services and, where appropriate, include funds for expanded or new services. 
(c)  The city will regularly examine programs and services in order to reduce operating cost or enhance service levels without cost increases. 
(d)  Personnel service expenditures will reflect the minimum staffing to provide approved quality and scope of city services. 
(e)  The city will provide a competitive compensation and benefit plan to attract and retain quality employees in order to provide high quality service. 
(f)  Supply expenditures shall be sufficient to ensure optimal productivity of city employees. Maintenance expenditures shall be sufficient to ensure a relatively stable level of maintenance expenditures each budget year and to enhance and prolong the life of capital equipment and property. 
(g)  Expenditures for new capital equipment shall be made only to enhance employee productivity, improve quality of service, or expand scope of services. 
(h)  The city will evaluate the methods for providing public services in order to reduce operating expenditures and/or enhance quality and scope of services without increased costs. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-212. - Capital project expenditures. 
(a)  The city may develop a multi-year capital budget, which identifies all projects likely to be constructed within a five-year period. The multi-year budget will reflect for each project the likely funding source and timeframe for completion. 
(b)  Capital projects will be constructed to: 
(1)  Protect or improve the community's quality of life. 
(2)  Protect or enhance the community's economic vitality. 
(3)  Provide significant rehabilitation of city infrastructure for sustained service. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-213. - Budget contingency plan. 
This policy is designed to establish general guidelines for managing revenue shortfalls resulting from local and national economic downturns that adversely affect the city's revenue streams. 
(1)  Immediate action. Once a budgetary shortfall is projected, the city manager will take the necessary actions to offset any revenue shortfall with a reduction in current expenses. The city manager may: 
a.  Freeze all new hire and vacant positions except those deemed to be a necessity. 
b.  Review all planned capital expenditures. 
c.  Delay all "non-essential" spending or equipment replacement purchases. 
(2)  Further action. If the above actions are insufficient to offset the revenue deficit and the shortfall continues to increase, the city manager will further reduce operating expenses to balance the variance. 
a.  Any resulting service level reductions, including workforce reductions, will be addressed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-214. - Accounting, auditing and financial reporting. 
(a)  Accounting. The city is solely responsible for the recording and reporting of its financial affairs, both internally and externally. The city treasurer is the city's chief financial officer and is responsible for establishing the structure for the city's Chart of Accounts and for assuring that procedures are in place to properly record financial transactions and report the city's financial position. 
(b)  Audit of accounts. In accordance with the Charter, an independent audit of the city accounts will be performed every year. The auditor is retained by and is accountable directly to the city council. 
(c)  External reporting. Upon completion and acceptance of the annual audit by the city's auditors, the city shall prepare a written Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) which shall be presented to the city council within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the city's fiscal year end. The CAFR shall be prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principals (GAAP) and shall be presented annually to the Government Finance Officer Association (GFOA) for evaluation and consideration for the Certificate of Achievement in Financial Reporting. 
(d)  Internal reporting. The administrative and finance department will prepare internal financial reports, sufficient to plan, monitor and control the city's financial affairs. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-215. - Asset management. 
(a)  Cash management and investments. The city council has formally approved a separate Investment Policy for the City of Alamo Heights that meets the requirements of the Public Funds Investment Act (PFIA), Section 2256 of the Texas Local Government Code. This policy is reviewed annually by the city council and applies to all financial assets held by the city. 
(b)  Fixed assets. These assets will be reasonably safeguarded and properly accounted for, and prudently insured. 
(1)  Capitalization criteria. For purposes of budgeting and accounting classification, the following criteria must be capitalized: 
a.  The asset must be owned by the city. 
b.  The expected useful life of the asset must be longer than one (1) year, or extend the life of an identifiable existing asset by more than one (1) year. 
c.  The original cost of the asset must be at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
d.  The asset must be tangible. 
e.  On-going repairs and general maintenance are not capitalized. 
(2)  New purchases. All costs associated with bringing the asset into working order will be capitalized as part of the asset cost. This will include start up costs and engineering or consultant-type fees as part of the asset cost once the decision or commitment to purchase the asset is made. The cost of land acquired should include all related costs associated with its purchase. 
(3)  Improvements and replacement. Improvements will be capitalized when they extend the original life of an asset or when they make the asset more valuable than it was originally. The replacement of assets components will normally be expensed unless they are of a significant nature and meet all the capitalization criteria. 
(4)  Contributed capital. Infrastructure assets received from developers will be recorded as equity contributions when they are received. 
(5)  Distributions systems. All costs associated with public domain assets, such as streets and utility distribution lines will be capitalized in accordance with the capitalization policy. Costs should include engineering, construction and other related costs including right of way acquisition. 
(6)  Reporting and inventory. The administrative and finance department will maintain the permanent records of the city's fixed assets, including description, cost, department of responsibility, date of acquisition, depreciation and expected useful life. Periodically, random sampling at the department level will be performed to inventory fixed assets assigned to that department. Responsibility for safeguarding the city's fixed assets lies with the department supervisor or manager whose department has been assigned the asset. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-216. - Other funding alternatives. 
(a)  Grants. All potential grants will be examined for any matching requirements and the source of those requirements identified. Grant funding will be reviewed to clearly identify funding sources, outcomes and other relevant information for presentation and approval by the city council. The city council must authorize acceptance of any grant awarded. 
(b)  Use of reserve funds. The city may authorize the use of reserve funds to potentially delay or eliminate a proposed bond issue. This may occur due to higher than anticipated fund balances in prior years, thus eliminating or reducing the need for debt proceeds, or postpone a bond issue until market conditions are more beneficial or timing of the related capital improvements does not correspond with the planned bond issue. Reserve funds used in this manner are replenished upon issuance of the proposed debt. A reimbursement ordinance will be adopted to authorize replacement of these reserves. 
(c)  Leases. The city may authorize the use of lease financing for certain assets when it is determined that such an arrangement is advantageous to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Sec. 2-217. - Conclusion. 
These policies should be used to frame major policy initiatives and be summarized in the budget document. These policies address both the need for a long-term view and the fundamental principle of a balanced budget. 
(Ord. No. 1705, Exh. A, 3-26-07)  
Secs. 2-218, 2-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX 
 
Sec. 2-220. - Authority to levy. 
A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from the sale of telecommunications services within the city, as is provided for by state law. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
( Ord. No. 2120 , § 3, 2-11-19)  
Sec. 2-221. - Rate of tax. 
The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
( Ord. No. 2120 , § 3, 2-11-19)  
Sec. 2-223. - Notice to comptroller. 
The city manager shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by certified or registered mail a copy of this ordinance [from which this article derives] along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion regarding this ordinance [from which this article derives]. 
( Ord. No. 2120 , § 3, 2-11-19)  
Chapter 3 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 1750-C, Ord. No. 1750-A, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, repealed Ch. 3, §§ 3-26—3-37, which pertained to alcoholic beverages and derived from Code 1965, §§ 4-1, 4-2, 4-14—4-16, 4-18—4-24. The user's attention is directed to § 10-46 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.002; board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.013; zoning districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005; regulation of signs by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipality may regulate parking on private property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The zoning regulations and the districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical and cultural importance and significance, or for the general welfare of the city. They have been designed to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for business, residence and other purposes; and in the case of designated places and areas of historical and cultural importance, to regulate and restrict the construction, alteration, reconstruction or razing of buildings and other structures. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide SF-A and SF-B zoning regulations in the single-family residential districts to: 
(1)  Assure that structures are compatible in scale with those of structures seen traditionally in residential neighborhoods of Alamo Heights in order to: 
(a)  Maintain the traditional scale of structures as seen along the street; 
(b)  Minimize visual impacts of larger structures on adjacent properties; 
(c)  Promote access to light and air from adjacent properties; and 
(d)  Promote structures that are proportional to their lot size. 
(2)  Adjust height standards that set absolute height limits. 
(3)  Establish standards to reduce the visual impact of parked cars and front facing garage doors in order to retain the sense of front yards along blocks of existing single-family homes. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
Certain words in this ordinance not heretofore defined are defined herein as follows: 
(A)  Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "building" includes the word "structure;" the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "tract;" the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
Abutting. Having lot lines or district boundaries in common. 
Accessory building or structure. In a residence district, a subordinate building attached or detached and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure such as a private garage for automobile storage, tool house, lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop, quarters for servants employed on the premises, children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of business or the use of such accessory structure as a separate domicile. 
Actual grade. Actual grade shall mean the existing natural ground elevation around the structures foundation prior to any cut/fill or disturbance of soil. 
Administrative officer. The city's duly designated official charged with administration and enforcement of the ordinances and codes of the City of Alamo Heights having to do with land use and building. 
Alley. A public right-of-way or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon which may not be used as street frontage or primary access. 
Apartment house. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three (3) dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three (3) or more families living in independent dwelling units; also called a multi-family residence and a multi-family dwelling. 
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family dwelling or apartment house arranged designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals. 
Amusement, commercial (indoor only). Such activity may consist of a bowling alley, indoor ice skating, indoor archery, badminton or handball and similar activities when such facilities are only secondary housed in an enclosed air conditioned building which is acoustically treated to prevent the sounds of the interior activity from being audible on the exterior of the building and subject to all the other regulations of this article. 
Articulation. To provide architectural variation to wall planes for the purpose of preventing long monotonous walls by providing either at least a two (2) foot by ten (10) foot wall offset or a combination of structural architectural and utilitarian features. 
Average grade. Average grade shall mean the average of the highest and lowest existing ground elevation points around the structures foundation. 
Bakery or confectionery shop (retail). An establishment preparing and selling at retail on the premises, cakes, pastry, candies, breads and similar food items. The total establishment shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area and shall not emit perceptible odors outside the building. 
Basement story. A building story which is partly underground, but having at least one-half (½) of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. Such basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height. 
Beverage sale, alcoholic, package store. Such store shall be conducted and operated for the sale of liquors as defined and used in the Texas Liquor Control Act and shall involve the sale of spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors, including beer in unbroken packages for off-premises consumption. 
Beverage sale, wine or beer. For on-premises consumption when served with food by a bona fide restaurant or cafeteria only. 
Block. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if said word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two (2) streets which intersects said street on the said line. 
Buildable area. The area of a lot located between the required minimum front, side and rear setbacks, as specified by the Zoning Code. 
Building. Any structure designed, built or intended for shelter, enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind; and when separated by an absolute fire separation, each portion of such building so separated, shall be deemed a separate building. 
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance there from marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
Carport. Carport shall mean a building or structure used primarily for vehicle storage that is open on at least two (2) sides. 
City council. The official governing body of the City of Alamo Heights. 
Cleaning shop or laundry, self-service. An establishment where individual garments or a bundle of garments belonging to an individual or family are cleaned or laundered in small automatic machines under the supervision of the customer, which establishment does not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in area and which does not employ more than five (5) employees. 
Cleaning and pressing shop. Such establishment shall be constructed and equipped so that no lint, dust, steam or other particulate matter or noise is exhausted or emitted from the building. 
Custom personal service. An establishment providing such services as shoe repair, tailoring, weaving, dress making, travel consultant, health or reducing salon and similar services to the person. 
Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space. 
College, university or private school. An institution established for educational purposes and offering a curriculum similar to the public schools or an accredited college or university, but excluding trade and commercial schools. 
Condominium. The use of a site for dwelling units intended for separate ownership, together with common areas serving all dwelling units. Condominium projects shall be considered as multi-family projects and be developed accordingly. 
Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. 
Covered parking space. Covered parking space shall mean an area designated for storage of vehicles under a cover or roof and shall include carports or garages. 
Day nursery or kindergarten school. An establishment where four (4) or more children are left for care or training during the day or a portion thereof. 
District zoning. A section of the City of Alamo Heights for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the land and buildings are uniform. 
Dripline. The periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines projected down from the farthest edges of the crown of the tree. 
Drive-through facility shall mean a business facility wherein accommodations are constructed so that neither party to a business transaction must exit the business building or the vehicle of the customer in order to conduct the business transaction. This definition does not apply to a curbside transaction whereby a customer remains in or on a vehicle and a representative of a business comes to the vehicle to conduct a business transaction. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
Dwelling, single-family, attached. A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party walls or common walls, which correspond to platted zero lot lines and are located immediately adjacent thereto. Included under this use category are townhouses, row houses, and similar structures. 
Dwelling, two-family. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than two (2) families. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home residence of three (3) or more families. 
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as a single living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
Family. One (1) or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than two (2) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Fix-it shop. An establishment for the repair of household items such as bicycles, lawnmowers, appliances, tools, toys and similar items, but no such items shall be stored outside the building and no welding or machine equipment shall be operated so as to create conditions obnoxious to adjacent property. 
Floor area. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building each floor level, but excluding basements. 
Floor area ratio (FAR). A ratio of the total above ground gross floor area of all structures on a site to the total square footage of a lot (for example, a FAR of .53 for a seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square foot lot is three thousand nine hundred seventy-five (3,975) gross square feet (.53 × 7,500) of floor area). 
The following areas shall be included when computing the gross floor area: 
(1)  Exterior walls: The thickness of the wall shall be included in the calculation; 
(2)  Above grade floor area: Any room that has a wall surface that extends more than three (3) feet above grade; 
(3)  Laundry rooms, mechanical rooms, storage rooms, built-in cabinets and media niches; 
(4)  Mezzanines and lofts; 
(5)  Floor area used by stairways, elevators, escalators and similar features. The floor area of each run of stairs shall be counted once; 
(6)  Vaulted ceilings: the floor area shall be counted at the actual floor area only and not in the air spaces; 
(7)  Usable spaces (generally defined as having a five (5) foot minimum height) such as rooms, closets and cabinets under a run of stairs; 
(8)  Exterior structures and additions with a solid roof and enclosed on more than two (2) sides in whole or part with permanent solid walls or windows such as porches, balconies, patios and breezeways; 
(9)  Attached and detached garages and carports; and 
(10)  Accessory buildings such as sheds, pool houses, guest houses, bonus rooms and second units. 
The following areas shall not be included when computing the gross floor area: 
(1)  Below grade floor area: any area that has a wall surface that extends less than three (3) feet above grade; 
(2)  Porches, balconies, patios, breezeways, decks, overhangs, eaves, cantilevers and awnings with solid roof-like cover, but not enclosed on more than two (2) sides; 
(3)  Porches, balconies, patios, breezeways and decks that do not have a solid roof-like cover; and 
(4)  Attic space that is not habitable. If made habitable in the future, shall be included in floor area ratio. 
Frontage. All of the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on a side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Front entryway feature. An architectural or utilitarian feature that defines the front door of a building that can either project out from a wall plane (such as a stoop) or be inset (such as an arched entry open on two (2) sides). 
Garage. Garage shall refer to a structure or building used primarily for vehicle storage which is enclosed on three (3) or more sides. 
Gasoline service station. An establishment dispensing motor vehicle fuel, lubricants, tires and batteries. No commodities shall be displayed nearer to the front property line than the pump island located nearest to the front property line. 
Hotel. A building, designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals where customary hotel services, such as linen, maid and telephone service, and the use and upkeep of furniture and accommodations are provided to the individual guest rooms or units. 
Height. For the purposes of the SF-A and SF-B Districts, height is defined as follows: 
(1)  For lots that slope less than ten (10) percent upward or downward from the front property line to the rear property line, height is defined as the measurement from the average of the highest and lowest existing ground elevation points around the structure's entire foundation. 
(2)  For lots that slope ten (10) percent or more upward or downward from the front property line to the rear property line, height is defined as the measurement from and along the existing continuous grade with no wall exceeding the permitted height at any point within the lot. 
 
EXAMPLE: Height measurement on a sloping lot. 
For the purposes of zoning districts other than the SF-A and SF-B Districts, height is defined as follows: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to 1) the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, 2) to the deck line of mansard roofs, or, 3) to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for hip and gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the following uses shall be excluded to the extent of eight (8) feet of additional height; chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls. 
For properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany) and Austin Highway a maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet, from average grade, but not to exceed four (4) stories from the grade of land adjacent to the public rights-of-way frontage shall be permitted. 
 
EXAMPLE: Height measurement for properties located along Broadway (South of Albany) and Austin Hwy. A building story, partly underground, shall be considered a story, regardless of its height below or above average grade. 
Home occupations. A home occupation is an occupation customarily carried on in the home by a member of the occupant's family without structural alterations in the building or buildings or any rooms therein, without the installation of machinery or additional equipment, other than that customary to normal household operation, without the employment of additional persons, without the use of a sign to advertise the occupation, without the use of premises' address in any form or type or advertising, without offering any commodity for sale on the premises and which does not create obnoxious noise or other obnoxious conditions to abutting residential property and which does not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Hospital (acute care). An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
Impervious cover. Any surface material or surface treatment or surface condition which sheds fifty (50) percent or more of rainfall, or water, which falls on it. 
Landscape/landscaping. Landscape or landscaping includes natural or artificial exterior (outdoor) forms, features, furniture and plantings, including ground and water forms, vegetation, pedestrian circulation, walks and other landscape features. 
Lot. Land, which may consist of multiple platted lots or portions thereof, occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
Lot area. The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
Lot, corner. A lot situated at the junction of two (2) streets and having an exterior exposure along both streets extending from an intersection. 
Lot coverage. For the purposes of the SF-A and SF-B Districts, lot coverage includes the total lot area covered by a roof, floor or other structures, except eaves. Coverage is measured to the outside faces of exterior walls or to the omitted wall lines (see example below), at any height, whichever produces the largest area. Carports, sheds, side and rear porches, covered pedestrian-walkways, breezeways, arbors, gazebos and covered patios are included in lot coverage calculations. 
 
For the purposes of zoning districts other than the SF-A and SF-B Districts, lot coverage includes the percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot. 
EXAMPLE: Omitted wall line. 
Lot depth. The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage. A lot having each of two (2) opposite sides abutting or having frontage upon separate streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot width. The average width of the lot as measured between the side lot lines midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
Main building. The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
Manufactured housing. Manufactured housing means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. 
Modular housing. Modular housing means a dwelling that is constructed in one (1) or more modules at a location other than the homesite, or is constructed utilizing one (1) or more modular components, and which is designed to be used as a permanent residence when the modular components or modules are transported to the homesite and are joined together, or are erected, and installed on a permanent foundation system. 
Nonconforming use. A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nonconforming structure. A building or structure which contains a use which conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is situated, but which does not conform to one (1) or more of the area, height or parking regulations prescribed herein for the district in which it is situated. 
Occupancy. Occupancy as used herein pertains to and is the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. A change of occupancy is not intended to include a change of tenants or proprietors. 
Off-street parking incidental to main use. In all dwelling districts shall consist of a garage, carport or paved parking space. None of such facilities shall be used in residential districts for parking of other than passenger type motor vehicles and small trucks which do not exceed one (1) ton in capacity. 
Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches. 
Pervious cover. Any surface material, treatment or condition which absorbs fifty (50) percent or more of rainfall, or water, which falls on it (the inverse of "impervious cover"). 
Pervious paving. Any paving material for driveways, sidewalks and other hardscape features that meets the definition of "pervious cover" that includes, but is not limited to, crushed rock and pervious pavers accompanied by a documented assertion from a licensed contractor, architect or engineer that the paving meets the aforementioned definition of "pervious cover." An unfinished surface, such as dirt or grass that is not accompanied by an engineered paving system, does not qualify. 
Pilaster. A non-load-bearing architectural feature that provides physical relief for a building façade at regular intervals; i.e. an exterior, decorative column that is embedded in a solid wall and projects outward to provide architectural relief to a building façade. 
Porte-cochere. A roofed structure attached to a main structure, which covers a driveway to provide either a temporary or long-term parking area. 
Projecting bay or box window. Windows that project from the wall plane of a building that are surrounded by a symmetrical enclosure (trapezoidal or rectangular in shape) cantilevered over the ground, therefore, not requiring the support of a permanent foundation. 
Premises. Land together with any buildings or structures occupying it. 
Private garage. An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage space. 
Retail general. Sale or rental of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use. Typical uses may include, but not limited to, department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores and establishments providing the following products or services: household cleaning and maintenance products, cards, stationery, notions, books, cosmetic and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys and hand-crafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishings and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts, antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, interior decorating services, office supplies, bicycles and auto parts (inside a building with no repair services). "Retail general" shall not include any retail stores whose primary product is intended for individuals twenty-one (21) years of age or older including, but not limited to, humidors, general tobacco shops or vaping stores, head shops, hookah lounges, flea markets, secondhand or thrift stores, the display and sale of heavy machinery, building materials, used appliances, used furniture or salvage materials; adult dress, toy, or novelty shops, and excluding the sale or offering for sale of commodities displayed outside of a building, except for limited promotional events. 
Ribbon driveway. A driveway that consists of two (2) ribbons of paving with a strip of grass, other planting material or gravel in-between to minimize stormwater drainage. Individual ribbons shall only be permitted within the boundary of the homeowner's private property and shall measure between 1.5 and 2.5 feet in width. 
Schools, public or parochial. A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including private or trade or commercial schools. 
Servant or caretaker's quarters (detached). A secondary detached dwelling structure located on lot with a main residential structure and used as living quarters for persons employed on the premises only, and not for rent or use as a separate domicile of other than persons employed on the premises. 
Shall and may. "Shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. "May" is discretionary. 
Shop or office for home maintenance service. Quarters housing the business office and equipment of home maintenance operations, such as plumbing repairs, painting, heating, air-conditioning or pool service, but excluding the storage in the open, unenclosed by a building, of any supplies, fixtures or commodities used by such service. 
Signs, civic, church or school. Bulletin boards or directional signs for churches, public schools, public buildings and service clubs provided such signs do not exceed six (6) feet in height and are placed on private property. 
Signs, name plate. A name plate not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and not of the flashing, intermittently lighted or revolving type and containing only the name and address of the occupant of the premises. 
Signs, real estate. Non-illuminated signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in Business District One (B-1) and Business District Two (B-2) and not exceeding six (6) square feet in all other zoning districts. Such signs shall be located entirely on private property and affixed to a structurally sound building, fence, wall, post, or other structure on the premises advertised, and may advertise property only for which it is zoned. 
Stores other than listed. Retail establishments whose products are not listed or permitted in the B1, B2, and B3 zoning districts or whose primary product is intended for individuals twenty-one (21) years of age or older including, but not limited to, humidors, general tobacco shops or vaping stores, head shops, hookah lounges, flea markets, secondhand or thrift stores, the display and sale of new or used automobiles, heavy machinery, building materials, used appliances, used furniture or salvage materials; adult dress, toy, or novelty shops, and excluding the sale or offering for sale of commodities displayed outside of a building. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half. A story having an average height of not more than eight (8) feet, covering a floor area of not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the area of the floor of the first story below. 
Street. Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and not less than thirty (30) feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords primary access to abutting property. 
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street right-of-way. 
Structural alterations. Any change in any supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, partition, beam, rafter, joist, or girder, or any change in the pitch or height of the roof. 
Structure. A structure shall be interpreted the same as a building, but shall in addition, include such items as a free standing ground sign and pylon when erected on a base and not made integral with a building. 
Substantial porch. A covered front porch that has a minimum length of fifty (50) percent of the length of the front building façade and has a depth of at least eight (8) feet. 
Temporary field or construction office. A portable building or temporary building used as a field office for a real estate development or construction project, subject to obtaining a temporary permit from the city's administrative officer and subject to removal at the direction of the city's administrative officer. 
Telephone line or exchange. The telephone exchange when located in SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C, MF-D or P Districts shall not include public business office, storage or repair facilities. 
Tree. A tree shall be any of the following: 
(1)  A woody usually attaining a mature height of at least eight (8) feet. 
(2)  A plant listed as a tree in any of the following: 
(a)  "Forest Trees of Texas," by the Texas Forest Service of Texas A&M University System. 
(b)  Simon and Shuster's "Guide to Trees." 
(c)  The Audubon Society's "Field Guide to North American Trees." 
Townhouses, row houses, and similar structures. The use of a site for two (2) or more dwelling units, constructed with common or abutting walls and each located on a separate lot within the total development site, together with common areas serving all dwelling units. 
Wall plane. Wall plane shall mean the horizontal length of a wall inclusive of the vertical portion of a wall between the bottom (sill/sole) plate to the attached top plate. 
Yard. An open, unoccupied space (except for vegetation and surfacing) other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is unobstructed except as provided herein by any building from the ground to the sky. 
Yard, front. An open unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front property line (street right-of-way line) as used herein shall represent a line in front of which no building may be erected which line shall be determined as the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the main building line as specified for the district in which it is located. 
Yard, rear. An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted, extending across the rear of a lot from one (1) side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the main building and the rear lot line. The required rear yard shall have a minimum dimension as specified in the district in which the lot is situated. 
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one (1) or two (2) sides of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
Yard, corner side. An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one (1) side of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and a side lot line of a corner lot and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Zoning district map. The official certified map(s) upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which are an integral part of the zoning ordinance and together with the zoning text makes up the zoning regulations for the City of Alamo Heights. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1877, 8-23-10; Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 1963, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 2020 , 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2065 , 12-12-16; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 2146 , § 2, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 3-3. - Zoning districts established. 
The City of Alamo Heights, Texas, is hereby divided into nine (9) zoning districts. The use, height, area and parking regulations as set out herein are uniform in each district. The nine (9) districts established herein shall be known as: 
Abbreviated 
Designation 	Zoning District Name 
SF-A 	Single-family Dwelling District A 
SF-B 	Single-family Dwelling District B 
2F-C 	Two-family Dwelling District C 
MF-D 	Multiple-Family Dwelling District D 
P 	Parking District 
O-1 	Office District 
B-1 	Business District One 
B-2 	Business District Two 
B-3 	Business District Three 
 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-4. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map of the City of Alamo Heights, said map being a part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
Two (2) original, official and identical copies of the zoning district map are hereby adopted, each bearing the signature of the mayor and the attestation of the city secretary and said official zoning district maps shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
(1)  One (1) copy shall be filed with the city secretary and retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner. 
(2)  One (1) copy shall be filed with the administrative officer or a designee and shall be maintained up to date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. 
Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of the official zoning district maps. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-5. - Zoning district boundaries. 
The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are generally along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following platted lot lines; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits lines shall be construed as following city limits lines; 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as following street, highway or alley lines shall be construed as following such lines; 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams or drainageways shall be construed as following such centerlines; 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (4) above, shall be so constructed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale appearing on the map; 
(6)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (5) above, the board of adjustment shall interpret the location of the zoning district boundary in question. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-6. - Compliance required. 
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon, located within the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered or converted, shall be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district which such land or building is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-7. - New territory and land subject to zoning. 
(1)  Any territory which may hereafter become part of the City of Alamo Heights shall be temporarily classified SF-A, Single-Family Dwelling District, until permanent zoning has been established by the city council of Alamo Heights in accordance with procedures used for the adoption of original zoning regulations. 
(2)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way not subject to zoning regulation is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all areas shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
ARTICLE II. - LAND USE 
 
Sec. 3-8. - Use of land and buildings. 
Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the specified uses shown on the schedule as permitted in each district. No land shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, converted, designed, arranged or used for other than those uses specifically indicated as permitted uses in the district in which such land or building is located according to the following schedule of permitted uses: 
Use Type: 	SF-A 	SF-B 	2F-C 	MF-D 	P 	O-1 	B-1 	B-2 	B-3 
Primary Residential Uses 									
One-family dwelling (detached) 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
One-family dwelling (attached) 			• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Two-family dwelling 			• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Modular or manufactured housing 									
Multiple-family dwellings 				• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Special Uses 									
Church or rectory 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
College, university or accredited private school 	S 	S 	S 	S 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Day nursery or kindergarten school 			S 	S 					
Hospital, general acute care 			S 	S 			S 	S 	S 
Institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature 			S 	S 		S 	S 	S 	S 
Library or art gallery (public) 				• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Park or playground (public) 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Service center, municipal 			S 	S 					
School, public or parochial 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Utility and Service Uses 									
Electrical substation 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	• 	• 	• 
Electrical transmission line 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Fire station 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Local utility distribution line 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Local transit station or off-street turnaround 	S 	S 	S 	S 	• 	S 	• 	• 	• 
Radio, television or micro-wave towers 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Sewage pumping station 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Telephone line and exchange 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Water reservoir, well or pumping station, municipal 	S 	S 	S 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Accessory & Incidental Uses 									
Accessory building to residence 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Home occupation 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Off-street parking incidental to main use 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Servants or caretakers quarters (detached) 	• 	• 	• 	• 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Signs, name plate 				• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Signs, civic, church or school 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Sign, real estate (sale or rental) 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Swimming pool, private 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Temporary field or construction office 	• 	• 	Subject to approval by city's administrative officer 	• 	• 	• 
Business & Related Uses 									
Accountants, architects, dentists, engineers, lawyers, optometrists, physicians, realtors and offices with similar characteristics without the sale of merchandise from the premises 						• 	• 	• 	• 
Amusement, commercial (indoor only) 								• 	• 
Antique shop (inside building only) 							• 	• 	• 
Art gallery 							• 	• 	• 
Appliance repair, household (indoor storage) 							• 	• 	• 
Auto laundry 								• 	• 
Auto parts and accessory (indoors only) 							• 	• 	• 
Auto repair garage 								• 	• 
Auto sales, new (indoor display only) 								• 	• 
Bank, savings and loan 							• 	• 	• 
Barber or beauty shop 							• 	• 	• 
Bakery or confectionary shop (retail) 							• 	• 	• 
Beverage sale alcoholic; package store 							• 	• 	• 
Wine and beer with food for on-premises consumption 							• 	• 	• 
Camera shop 							• 	• 	• 
Cleaning shop or laundry, Self-service, cleaning laundry pick-up station, or pressing shop 							• 	• 	• 
Cleaning or laundry pick-up station 							• 	• 	• 
Cleaning or pressing shop 							• 	• 	• 
Clinic, medical or dental, or doctors office 						• 	• 	• 	• 
Custom personal service shop 							• 	• 	• 
Custom sewing and millinery 							• 	• 	• 
Drive-through facilities, single lane only 							S 	S 	S 
Drug store or pharmacy 							• 	• 	• 
Restaurant or cafeteria 							• 	• 	• 
Fix-it shop 								• 	• 
Florist shop, lath or greenhouse 							• 	• 	• 
Food store 							• 	• 	• 
Gasoline service station 								• 	• 
Gun shop 							S 	S 	S 
Insurance office 						• 	• 	• 	• 
Job printing and newspaper print shop 								• 	• 
Letter or mimeograph shop 							• 	• 	• 
Locksmith or key shop 							• 	• 	• 
Lodge or fraternal organization hall or headquarters 							• 	• 	• 
Offices for the businesses and professions specifically authorized in this schedule 	(Offices may only be located in the zoning districts specified herein for such permitted businesses and professions) 
Optometrist or optical shop with 
merchandise 							• 	• 	• 
Municipal offices, city hall 	S 	S 	S 	S 		• 	• 	• 	• 
Parking, commercial lot or garage (parking only) 					• 		• 	• 	• 
Pawnshops licensed by State of Texas 									• 
Retail general 							• 	• 	• 
Stores other than listed 							S 	S 	S 
Shop or office for maintenance service 							S 	• 	• 
Signs, advertising commodities sold on premises 							• 	• 	• 
Stock broker 						• 	• 	• 	• 
Studio, drama, speech, music or dance 							• 	• 	• 
Studio, display art and decorators objects 							• 	• 	• 
Studio, radio or television 							• 	• 	• 
Studio, photographer or artist 							• 	• 	• 
Theater, not of drive-in type 							• 	• 	• 
Title company 						• 	• 	• 	• 
 
Legend: 
• — Designates use permitted in zone 
S — Indicates specific use permit as provided in section 8-37 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1774, 6-9-08; Ord. No. 1877, 8-23-10; Ord. No. 1952, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 1953, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2006, 10-13-14; Ord. No. 2020 , 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2065 , 12-12-16; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
_____ 
Sec. 3-9. - Location of adult enterprises. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Code, no sexually oriented business, as defined in the Local Government Code, shall be established or maintained within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, regular place of religious worship, or residence. Measurements shall be made in a straight line from the nearest boundary of the property used for school, regular place of religious worship, or residence to the nearest part of the building in which such sexually oriented business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-10. - Conformity with minimum regulations. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district in which it is located unless it is in conformity with all the minimum regulations specified for that zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
ARTICLE III. - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT A (SF-A) AND SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT B (SF-B)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1920, adopted Jan. 23, 2012, repealed the former Art. III, Single-Family Dwelling District A(SF-A), §§ 3-11—3-20, and §§ 3-21 and 3-22 of Art. IV, Single-Family Dwelling District B(SF-B), and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1931, adopted July 9, 2012, corrected Ord. No. 1920, by repealing Art. IV, §§ 3-21—3-30. The former Arts. III and IV derived from Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008; and Ord. No. 1776, adopted July 21, 2008. 
 
Sec. 3-11. - Intent. 
The intent of the development standards in the SF-A District and the SF-B District is to allow for flexibility of a structure's mass and orientation based on lot size; and to ensure that properties undergoing redevelopment do not negatively impact the existing character and development patterns along block faces in the neighborhood; and to promote a scale compatible with the existing built-environment. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-12. - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the SF-A District shall be eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet for lots greater than fifty (50) feet wide, and no lot shall be reduced in area below this minimum requirement. 
The minimum lot area in the SF-B District shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, and no lot shall be reduced in area below this minimum requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-13. - Lot width. 
SF-A District 
The minimum lot width for lots in the SF-A District shall be sixty (60) feet and no lot shall be reduced in width below this minimum. 
SF-B District 
The minimum lot width for lots in the SF-B District shall be fifty (50) feet, and no lot shall be reduced in width below this minimum. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-14. - Front yard setbacks and front articulation. 
SF-A District 
Minimum front yard setback 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the SF-A District so as to have a smaller front yard than thirty (30) feet, except as specifically provided in section 3-81 special front yard regulations. 
Maximum front yard setback 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the SF-A District so as to have a greater front yard than thirty-five (35) feet. 
SF-B District 
Minimum front yard setback. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the SF-B District so as to have a smaller front yard than twenty-five (25) feet, except as specifically provided in section 3-81, special front yard regulations. 
Maximum front yard setback. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the SF-A District so as to have a greater front yard than thirty (30) feet. 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior front wall plane width without a minimum of a two (2) foot by ten (10) foot offset is thirty (30) feet or a combination of one (1) of the following architectural or utilitarian features every thirty (30) feet to break up the monotony of the facade: 
1.  Projecting bay or box windows, cantilevered, rather than supported by a permanent foundation (not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade length). 
 
2.  Stoops. 
 
3.  Porches (covered and unenclosed). 
 
4.  Balconies. 
 
5.  Structural window awnings or canopies. 
 
6.  Roof dormers. 
 
7.  Pilasters. 
 
8.  Chimneys (minimum depth of one (1) foot and not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade). 
 
9.  A second-story roof overhang (at least twenty-five (25) percent of the facade length). 
 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2029 , 9-28-15)  
Sec. 3-15. - Side yard setbacks and side articulation. 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter so as to have a smaller side yard on each side of a building than hereinafter specified, except as specifically provided in section 3-82, special side yard regulations. 
(1)  The minimum side yard setback for the main structure on the driveway side is ten (10) feet. 
(2)  The minimum side yard setback for the main structure on the non-driveway side is six (6) feet. 
(3)  The minimum side yard setback for an accessory structure is three (3) feet. 
Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior side wall plane width without a minimum of a two (2) foot by ten (10) foot offset is thirty (30) feet or a combination of one (1) of the following architectural or utilitarian features every thirty (30) feet to break up the monotony of the facade: 
1.  Projecting bay or box windows cantilevered, rather than supported by a permanent foundation (not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade length). 
2.  Stoops (not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade). 
3.  Porches (covered and unenclosed, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade). 
4.  Chimneys (minimum depth of one (1) foot and not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade). 
5.  Structural window awnings or canopies (not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the facade). 
6.  Roof dormers. 
7.  Pilasters. 
8.  A second-story roof overhang (at least twenty-five (25) percent of the facade length). 
9.  Porte-cocheres (see definition in section 3-2 and section 3-21, Required Off-Street Parking exception #4). 
Exception: The minimum an air conditioning unit or pool unit can be located from a property line or fence is three (3) feet and air conditioning units must be located as close as possible to a main or accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-16. - Rear yard setbacks. 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered so as to have a smaller rear yard than hereinafter specified, except as specifically provided in section 3-83, special rear yard regulations. 
(1)  The minimum rear yard setback for the main structure is twenty (20) feet for the first story and thirty (30) feet for a second story. 
(2)  The minimum setback of a garage from a main structure is four (4) feet. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback of an accessory structure is three (3) feet. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  The minimum an air conditioning unit or a pool unit can be located from a property line or fence is three (3) feet and air conditioning units must be located as close as possible to a main or accessory structure. 
(2)  For purposes of calculating rear yard setbacks for the main structure, a covered breezeway attached to both the accessory and main structures shall not be considered part of the main structure. The breezeway must be no more than eight (8) feet wide and twelve (12) feet tall, must be unenclosed, must be unscreened and must be free of any obstacles at ground level, excluding structural posts of the breezeway. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-17. - Lot coverage. 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
The maximum percentage of any lot area which may hereafter be covered by the main building and all accessory buildings on the lot or tract on which a building is located shall not exceed forty (40) percent. 
Exception: The maximum lot coverage shall exclude unenclosed roofed front porches up to fifteen (15) feet in height and free-standing entryway arbors with open-air lattice framework under fifty (50) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height; and other free-standing open-air lattice/trellis structures located within a side or rear yard up to twelve (12) feet in height, totaling three hundred (300) square feet or less and subject to other standards governing accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 1963, 4-8-13)  
Sec. 3-18. - Floor area ratio (FAR). 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
The floor area ratio (FAR), or ratio of the total above ground floor area of all structures on a site in the SF-A or SF-B Districts to the total square footage of a lot shall be 0.45 with an opportunity to reach 0.50 with any combination of the following "bonuses" to incentivize desirable results (amount of each bonus is shown in parentheses). 
1.  A 1:1.5 height-looming ratio for main structures (+.02); and/or 
2.  Side or rear street/alley access (+.02); and/or 
3.  A one-story garage (+.02); and/or 
4.  Preservation of fifty (50) percent of main structure (+.04). 
The maximum impervious cover in the front yard setback shall be thirty (30) percent of the total square footage within the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2029 , 9-28-15)  
Sec. 3-19. - Height. 
SF-A and SF-B Districts. 
No building or structure shall be erected, altered or converted or any use permitted to exceed the maximum heights hereinafter specified (see "Height" definition in section 3-2), with the exception of height "bonuses" specified hereinafter: 
(1)  Max height for main structures. 
(a)  Lots less than or equal to sixty-five (65) feet in width. 
The maximum building height for main structures is twenty-eight (28) feet to the top of ridge for lots up to sixty-five (65) feet in width. 
(b)  Lots greater than sixty-five (65) feet in width. 
The maximum building height for main structures is thirty-three (33) feet to the top of ridge for lots greater than sixty-five (65) feet in width. 
Exception: Chimneys can exceed the maximum height (including with "bonuses") by up to four (4) feet. 
(c)  Max height "bonuses" for main structures (utilize one (1) of the following): 
1.  One (1) foot bonus for every foot of lot slope (max. two (2) feet) as measured within the buildable area (per section 3-2 definition); or 
2.  Two (2) foot bonus for using minimum three (3) foot pier and beam foundation; or 
3.  Two (2) foot bonus for restricting height looming to 1:1.5; 
(d)  Max height for front entryway features. 
The maximum height for front door entryway features, such as stoops, is fifteen (15) feet (does not include porches or balconies). 
(2)  Height looming standard for a main structure: 
(a)  The maximum side wall plate of the main structure shall not exceed twice the width of the side setback in height (height looming standard). 
Exceptions for main structures: 
(1)  The first six (6) feet of wall plate below the ridge of a side gable roof are excepted from the height looming standard of a main structure, 
(2)  Chimneys are excluded from the height limits to the extent of eight (8) additional feet. 
(3)  Permitted institutions such as schools and churches may be erected to exceed two and one-half (2½) stories when set back from all property lines a distance equal to twice the height of the building. 
(3)  Max height for accessory structure(s): 
(a)  The maximum building height of an accessory structure with a sloping roof to top of ridge shall be twenty (20) feet for any lot depth. 
(b)  The maximum building height of an accessory structure with a flat roof to top of parapet shall be fourteen (14) feet for any lot depth. 
(4)  Max height "bonuses" for accessory structures (utilize one (1) of the following): 
1.  One (1) foot bonus for every foot of lot slope (max two (2) feet) as measured within the buildable area (per Sec. 3-2 definition); or 
2.  Two (2) foot bonus for restricting height looming to 1:1.5. 
(5)  Height looming standard for an accessory structure: 
(a)  Except for the first ten (10) feet of wall plate, the maximum side and rear wall plates of an accessory structure shall not exceed twice the width of the side setback in height (height looming standard). 
(6)  Height measurement for main and accessory structures: 
(a)  Height is to be measured from average grade for lots with less than ten (10) percent slope and by actual grade for lots with ten (10) percent slope or more per the section 3-2 definition of "Height." 
(b)  For flat roofs, height is limited to three (3) feet below the maximum height (including bonuses); the height maximum is measured to the top of the parapet or handrail, where they exist. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2029 , 9-28-15)  
Sec. 3-20. - Dormers. 
The minimum inset for dormers in all structures in the SF-A and SF-B Districts, as measured from the exterior wall face of the story below, shall be five (5) feet. The slope of the roof area covered by dormers shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the roof of the main structure or fifty (50) percent of the roof of accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12)  
Sec. 3-21. - Required off-street parking. 
In the SF-A and SF-B Districts, off-street parking shall hereafter be provided on each lot or tract upon which a building is erected or upon a contiguous lot or tract, and no building or structure or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged for any permitted use in the district in which it is located unless off-street parking facilities are provided in accordance with the following: 
Number of spaces and dimensions 
Two (2) covered parking spaces shall be required for each residential unit in the SF-A and SF-B Districts. Parking spaces shall be covered and located in a garage, carport (located no closer than four (4) feet from the rear of the main residential structure if detached) or a porte-cochere. Each parking space shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet by nine (9) feet clear dimension. No circular driveways or parking pads are allowed in the front yard setback for lots sixty-five (65) feet or less in width. No parking pads shall be allowed on city rights-of-way. 
Driveway specifications 
For all lots the minimum driveway width required is ten (10) feet. For lots less than or equal to sixty-five (65) feet in width, the maximum driveway width within the front setback is ten (10) feet, and the maximum curb cut and apron width is twelve (12) feet. For lots greater than sixty-five (65) feet in width, the maximum driveway width within the front setback is fourteen (14) feet, and the maximum curb cut and apron width is fourteen (14) feet (see exception (5) below). 
Exceptions: 
(1)  For lots greater than sixty-five (65) feet in width, garages may be attached to the main structure, provided that they are located towards the rear, beyond the midpoint of the main structure, and no closer than fifty (50) feet from the front yard property line, and accessed from the side to prevent garage doors facing the street. 
(2)  For all lots in the SF-A and SF-B Districts, garages may be attached to the rear of the main structure, provided that they utilize alley access (and are subject to the rear setback standards for main structures). 
(3)  All attached garages must meet the setback requirements for main structures. 
(4)  Porte-cocheres are governed as accessory structures and can meet the two (2) covered parking spaces requirement if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Must meet parking dimension requirements between structural supports; 
b.  Must be permanently attached to the main structure; 
c.  Must be open on three (3) sides; 
d.  Three-foot side setback (two-foot eave/overhang setback); 
e.  Maximum twenty-foot ridge height; 
f.  2:1 height looming applies (max. ten-foot exempt from height looming); 
g.  Must be set back eighteen (18) feet from the front facade; 
h.  Roof materials must match the existing materials on the main structure; 
i.  Structural supports must be clad to match the existing exterior wall/column finish materials of the main structure. 
(5)  The maximum curb cut on the side street of corner lots may be increased to twenty-four (24) feet in width to provide access to the required covered parking spaces only. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2146 , § 2, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 3-22. - Summary table for SF-A and SF-B Residential Design Standards. 
Summary Table for SF-A and SF-B Residential Design Standards 	City of Alamo Heights: January 2012 
	
SF-A 
(Min. Lot Area: 8,400 s.f.;
Min. Lot Width: 60 ft.) 	
SF-B
(Min. Lot Area: 7,500 s.f.;
Min. Lot Width: 50 ft.) 	Code References 
(Chapter 3: Zoning) 
Available Online at 
www.municode.com 
LOT WIDTHS 	
Less than or equal to 
65 ft. 	
Greater than 65 ft. 	
Less than or equal to 
65 ft. 	
Greater than 65 ft. 	

MAIN STRUCTURES: LOT STANDARDS 	

SETBACKS AND ARTICULATION 

FRONT YARD SETBACKS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-14 
 Min. Front Yard Setback 	30 ft. 	25 ft. 	
 Max. Front Yard Setback 			
 Unenclosed roofed front porches up to 15 ft. in height may encroach into the front yard setback. 
Qualifying porches must be at least 6 ft. deep and be at least half as wide as the front facade 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 	

FRONT ARTICULATION - Main structures 	Sec. 3-14 
 Main Structure: Max wall length without approved articulation(s) 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	

FRONT PROJECTIONS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-81 
 Max. projection into the front yard setback beyond any permitted porch or wall plane 	4 ft. 	4 ft. 	

SIDE YARD SETBACKS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-15 
 Min. Side Yard Setback - Main Structure 	12 ft. 	12 ft. 	
 Min. Side Yard Setback - Main Structure - No driveway provided along side of structure 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 	
 Min. Side Yard Setback - Main Structure - Driveway provided along side of structure 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	

SIDE ARTICULATION - Main structures 	Sec. 3-15 
 Main Structure: max. wall length without approved articulation 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	

SIDE PROJECTIONS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-15 
 Max. projection into the side yard setback 	4 ft. (Not to be less than 4 ft. from adjacent 
property line(s)) 	4 ft. (Not to be less than 4 ft. from adjacent 
property line(s)) 	

REAR YARD SETBACKS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-16 
 Min. Rear Yard Setback - 1st story (2nd story) 	20 ft. (30 ft.) 	20 ft. (30 ft.) 	
 Min. Setback of Detached Garage from Main Structure 	4 ft. 	4 ft. 	
 For purposes of calculating rear yard setbacks for the main structure, a covered breezeway attached to both the accessory and main structures shall not be considered part of the main structure. The breezeway must be no more than 8 ft. wide and 12 ft. tall, must be unenclosed, must be unscreened and must be free of any obstacles at ground level, excluding structural posts of the breezeway. 	

REAR PROJECTIONS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-83 
 Max. projection into the rear yard setback 	4 ft. 	4 ft. 	

HEIGHT 

HEIGHT MEASURED - Main structures 	Sec. 3-2 
Heights shall be measured from average grade around the proposed structure's footprint if the lot slopes <10% or from the actual grade if the lot slopes =10%. See ordinance definitions for specific details. 	

MAX. BUILDING HEIGHT - Main structures 	Sec. 3-19 
 Sloping Roof to Top of Ridge a b 	28 ft. 	33 ft. 	28 ft. 	33 ft. 	
 Flat Roof to Top of Parapet or Guard rail a b 	25 ft. 	30 ft. 	25 ft. 	30 ft. 	
   a Exception: Chimneys may exceed the height looming standard to a maximum 4 ft. 	
   b A maximum additional 2 ft. in height may be permitted if specific conditions as listed in this ordinance exist or bonuses are awarded. 	

HEIGHT LOOMING STANDARD - Main structures 	
 Max. Side Wall Plate Height as Ratio of Side Setback a b 	2:1 	2:1 	
   a Exception: The first 6 ft. of wall plate below the ridge of a side gable roof. 	
   b Exception: Chimneys may exceed the height looming standard to a maximum 8 ft. 	

DORMERS - Main structures 	Sec. 3-20 
 Main inset - As measured from the exterior wall face of the story below 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	
 Max. % of Roof Slope Area Covered by Dormers 	40% 	40% 	
 
Summary Table for SF-A and SF-B Residential Design Standards 	City of Alamo Heights: January 2012 
	
SF-A 
(Min. Lot Area: 8,400 s.f.;
Min. Lot Width: 60 ft.) 	
SF-B
(Min. Lot Area: 7,500 s.f.;
Min. Lot Width: 50 ft.) 	Code References 
(Chapter 3: Zoning) 
Available Online at 
www.municode.com 
LOT WIDTHS 	
Less than or equal to 
65 ft. 	
Greater than 65 ft. 	
Less than or equal to 
65 ft. 	
Greater than 65 ft. 	
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: LOT STANDARDS 	

SETBACKS 

SIDE YARD SETBACKS - Accessory structures (including pool's @ waters edge) 	Sec. 3-15 
 Min. Side Yard Setback 	3 ft. 	3 ft. 	

REAR YARD SETBACKS - Accessory structures (including pool's @ waters edge) 	Sec. 3-16 
 Min. Side Yard Setback 	3 ft. 	3 ft. 	

HEIGHT 

MAX. BUILDING HEIGHT - Accessory structures 	Sec. 3-19 
 Sloping Roof to Top of Ridge a 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	
 Flat Roof to Top of Parapet or guardrail a 	14 ft. 	14 ft. 	
   a A maximum additional 2 ft. in height may be permitted if specific conditions as listed in this ordinance exist or bonuses are awarded. 	

HEIGHT LOOMING STANDARD - Accessory structures 	
 Max. Side Wall Plate Height as Ratio of Side Setback as provided in design a 	2:1 	2:1 	
   a Exception: First story up to a maximum 10 ft. plate height, side gable exception does NOT apply 	

DORMERS - Accessory structures 	Sec. 3-20 
 Min. Inset - As measured from the exterior wall face of the story below 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	
 Max. % of Roof Slope Area Covered by Dormers 	50% 	50% 	
GENERAL: LOT STANDARDS 	

BUILDING RESTRICTIONS 
 Lot Coverage 	40% a 	40% a 	Sec. 3-17 
   a Excludes freestanding entryway arbors with open-air lattice framework under 50 sf. in area and 8 ft. in height; and other freestanding open-air lattice/trellis structures located within a side or rear yard up to twelve (12) feet in height, totaling three hundred (300) square feet or less and subject to other standards governing accessory structures. 	
 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 	.45 b 	.45 b 	Sec. 3-18 
 Floor Area Ratio is defined as the ratio of the total above ground floor area of all structures on a site to the total square footage of a lot. 	
   b Max. .50 FAR permitted within SF-A and SF-B based on awarded bonuses 	
 Max. Impervious Surface (Bldgs. and Paving) in Front Yard Setback 	30% 	30% 	

PARKING 
 Min. Covered Parking Spaces required (i.e., garage, carport, or porte-cochere) a b 	2 spaces 	2 spaces 	Sec. 3-21 
 Porte-Cochere - See definition under section 3-2 and specifications under section 3-21 	Permitted c 	Permitted c 	
 Circular Driveways and Parking Pads in Front Setback 	Not permitted 	Permitted 	Not permitted 	Permitted 	
 Driveway - Min. width 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	
 Driveway - Max. width in front yard setback 	10 ft. 	14 ft. 	10 ft. 	14 ft. 	
 Curb Cut and Driveway Apron - max. width d 	12 ft. 	14 ft. 	12 ft. 	14 ft. 	
   a Garages may be attached tot he rear of the main structure regardless of lot width when accessed fromthe alley. Must meet all requirements as applicable to main structures. 	
   b On lots greater than 65 ft. in width, garages may attach to the side of the main structure if they are located towards the rear, beyond the midpoint of the main structure, and no closer than 50 ft. to the front property line. Doors may not be street facing. 	
   c Must meet all conditions as required by code to be considered a permitted porte-cochere. 	
   d The maximum curb cut on the side yard of a corner lot may be 24 ft. for covered parking accessed from the side street. 	

MISCELLANEOUS 
Min. distance from property line or fence - Air conditioning units and pool equipment 	3 ft. 	3 ft. 	Secs. 3-15 and 3-16 
 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2029 , 9-28-15)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Art. III. 
 
Secs. 3-23—3-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (2F-C) 
 
Sec. 3-31. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-32. - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the 2F-C District shall be in accordance with the following, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling detached: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(2)  Single-family dwelling attached and two-family dwelling: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(3)  Two-family dwelling, District (2F-C) - approval with proposed change to lot size and density. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-33. - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the 2F-C District shall be in accordance with the following, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in width below the minimum requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling detached: Fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Single-family dwelling attached and two-family dwelling: Sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Two-family dwelling district (2F-C) - approval with proposed changes, refer to single-family. 
(4)  Minimum side yard for single-family and two-family structures shall be six (6) feet (non-driveway side) and ten (10) feet for the driveway side. 
a.  A looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies to the side yard setback. 
i.  The height looming ratio shall not apply to when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Corner side yards shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
(6)  Minimum side yard for single-family attached and two-family residences adjacent to SF-A or SF-B Zoning Districts shall be based on the following: 
a.  A minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet shall be required adjacent to the SF-A or SF-B Zoning Districts. 
i.  A minimum setback of six (6) feet (non-driveway side) and ten (10) feet for the driveway side shall be permitted for the remaining side yard setback, which is not adjacent to an SF-A or SF-B Zoning District. 
b.  A looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies to the side yard setback adjacent to SF-A or SF-B Zoning Districts. 
i.  The height looming ratio shall not apply to when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
c.  Corner side yards shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
(7)  Where multiple structures are arranged on a singular lot and have a height less than thirty (30) feet, a minimum building separation between structures shall be twelve (12) feet, provided that all building and fire codes have been met, pertaining to constructions types/standards. 
(8)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building; 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the side property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
i.  Corner side yards shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a side setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). 
i.  The height looming ratio shall not apply when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(9)  Every part of a required side yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices, roofs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed two (2) feet into the required side yard but not less than four (4) feet from the property line. 
a.  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two-foot side setback from the property line. 
(10)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any side yard in excess of eight (8) feet in height measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the city's administrative officer projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(11)  Air-conditioning units and pool units may encroach into the required side yard setback and maintain a minimum of three (3) feet from the property line. 
a.  All units shall be screened by (but not limited to) a structural fence, wall, partition, or vegetation. 
b.  All screening shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the top of the unit at installation. 
(12)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior side wall plane width without a minimum of a two (2) foot deep by ten (10) foot wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. 
a.  Articulation standards may be modified by recommendations from the architectural review board and council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-34. - Front yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the 2F-C District so as to have a smaller front yard than twenty-five (25) feet, except as specifically provided in section 3-81, special front yard regulations. 
The required front yard of twenty-five (25) feet is for a one-family dwelling attached unit facing the street from which the address is derived. Units to the rear of the initial unit do not add to the required front yard depth. This does not avoid the necessity to meet other requirements of the Zoning Code and other codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 3-35. - Side yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the 2F-C District so as to have a smaller side yard than hereinafter specified, except as specifically provided in section 3-82, special side yard regulations. 
(1)  Minimum side yard for one-family and two-family residences shall be five (5) feet. 
(2)  Minimum total side yards for one-family and two-family residences shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Maximum total required side yards for one-family and two-family residences shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 3-36. - Rear yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in 2F-C District so as to have a smaller rear yard than twenty-five (25) feet as follows: 
(1)  Every part of a required rear yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
(2)  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two (2) foot rear setback from the property line. 
(3)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building. 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the rear property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a rear setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). 
i.  Looming standards shall not apply when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(4)  No fence or wall, other than the walls of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any rear yard to exceed a height of eight (8) feet measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other structure. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the city's administrative officer projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(5)  Air-conditioning units and pool units may encroach into any required rear yard setback, but in no case closer than six (6) feet from the property line. 
a.  All units shall be screened by (but not limited to) a structural fence, wall, partition, or vegetation. 
b.  All screening shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the top of the unit at installation. 
(6)  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
a.  The height looming ratio shall not apply when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-37. - Lot coverage. 
The maximum percentage of any lot area in the 2F-C District which may hereafter be covered by impervious cover shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent. This section does not waive any other landscaping or stormwater requirements found within the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-38. - Height. 
No main building or main structure shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in the 2F-C District to exceed the maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, but not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) stories (see height definition). Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  Exception: Chimneys can exceed the maximum height by up to four (4) feet. 
(2)  No accessory structures shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in 2F-C Districts to exceed the maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Except for the first ten (10) feet of wall plate, the maximum side and rear wall plates of an accessory structure shall not exceed twice the width of the side setback in height (height looming standard). 
( Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1776, adopted July 21, 2008, repealed § 3-38, which pertained to height limitations and derived from Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008. See subsection 38-87(19) for similar provisions. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 3-39. - Required off-street parking. 
In the 2F-C District, off-street parking shall hereafter be provided on each lot or tract upon which a building is erected or upon a contiguous lot or tract, and no building or structure or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged for any permitted use in the district in which it is located unless off-street parking facilities are provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit, one (1) of which may be uncovered. 
(2)  Parking must be located in the rear or side of the property, behind the front face of the building. 
(3)  Parking spaces located adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be screened via a minimum three-foot fence or screening wall. 
(4)  Garages may be attached to the main structure, provided that they are set back behind the front wall plane and accessed from the side to prevent garage doors from facing the street. 
(5)  Porte-cocheres are governed as accessory structures and can meet the two (2) covered parking spaces requirement if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Must meet parking dimension requirements between structural supports; 
b.  Must be permanently attached to the main structure; 
c.  Must be open on three (3) sides; 
d.  Three-foot side setback (two-foot eave/overhang setback); 
e.  Maximum twenty-foot ridge height; 
f.  2:1 height looming applies (max. ten-foot exempt from height looming); 
g.  Must be set back eighteen (18) feet from the front facade; 
h.  Roof materials shall match the existing materials on the main structure; 
i.  Structural supports must be clad to match the existing exterior wall/column finish materials of the main structure. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 2146 , § 2, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 3-39.1. - Landscaping, sidewalks, screening, and lighting. 
(1)  Any property within the 2F-C District is required to conform with section 3-88, landscaping regulations, in addition to the following: 
(2)  An eight (8) foot wide landscape area must be provided along the rear property line when adjacent to SF-A or SF-B Zoning Districts. The landscaping must be contiguous with the entire length of the property line, except where interrupted by a drive to an alley. 
(3)  Double frontage lots: The front yards of a double frontage lot shall be landscaped. For these lots both street frontages shall be considered front yards. 
(4)  Canopy street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, within the public street rights-of-way. There shall be at least one tree planted for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof. 
a.  Minor variations from the twenty-five (25) feet spacing requirements are permitted to avoid conflicts with driveway locations and accommodate other design considerations. 
i.  Should insufficient right-of-way be available for the planting of trees, between the property line and the paved street, the ARB may recommend the required trees to be located on the applicant's property adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
b.  Allowable street trees shall be of the species identified in section 5-152 and must be a minimum size of four (4) inch caliper at planting. For trees located under overhead utilities, property owners may install tree species identified as allowable trees according to CPS Energy. The spacing requirements between trees shall be in accordance with the recommended spacing based on the type of tree planted. 
c.  Street trees shall be maintained to provide a clear canopy zone free of limbs, from ground level to eight (8) feet above ground level, for visibility and to avoid potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. Additional ground clearance may be required to accommodate emergency response vehicles. 
(5)  Planting strips shall be provided for within the public street right-of-way adjacent to curbs and be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. The minimum width may be adjusted based on existing conditions and available rights-of-way widths. 
(6)  Sidewalks of no less than five (5) feet in width shall be installed according to ADA standards, located within the public street right-of-way, along all street frontages, and adjacent to property lines. 
a.  Sidewalks locations may be modified (located on private property) in order to preserve existing trees, natural terrain, or insufficient right-of-way between the property line and street pavement. 
i.  Should the sidewalk encroach onto private property, a public access easement shall be provided. 
(7)  Planting standards. All required landscape areas shall comply with the standards of this subsection: 
a.  Native and adaptive species are preferred in order to promote reduced water use and increased drought resistance. 
i.  The architectural review board may approve other species of plants as part of their review process. 
b.  Undesirable species. No proposed landscape material shall appear on the invasive and noxious weeds list for the State of Texas promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture, nor on the Texas Noxious Weed List promulgated by the Texas Department of Agriculture. 
c.  Shrubs used for screening shall be three (3) feet or taller in height, as measured from the surrounding soil line, immediately upon planting. Such shrubs shall be maintained at this minimum height, and shall at no time exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
d.  Planting within city rights-of-way shall meet any applicable standards, to protect underground and overhead utilities, streets and sidewalks, drainage improvements, street lighting, sight distances, and the visibility of traffic control devices. 
e.  Replacement of required landscaping that is dead or otherwise no longer meets the standards of this section shall occur within sixty (60) days of notification by the city. Replacement material shall be of similar character and quality as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace in a timely manner in accordance with this subsection shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
f.  All required landscape areas shall be watered with irrigation systems in order to ensure continuous healthy plant growth and development while conserving water. 
(8)  Property screening requirements. Where the property line of a 2F-C District is adjacent to a single-family zoned district, an opaque wall or fence of six (6) to eight (8) feet in height shall be erected separating the rear and/or side. 
a.  When a screening fence is required by this subsection, but where the property line abuts a single-family residential district and street rights-of-way, excluding alleys, a screening fence shall not be required, unless the required screening is for parking areas. 
(9)  Trash receptacles screening. All trash receptacles shall be stored and visually screened from an abutting public street right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a fence or wall. 
a.  All trash receptacles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from an adjacent lot. 
b.  Enclosure shall extend at least one (1) foot above the container top. 
c.  Dumpsters and garbage bins shall be located behind principal buildings relative to public street frontage whenever practical, and such trash receptacles shall also be accessible from alleys or vehicular access points where available and practical. 
d.  Where site constraints and access make rear yard locations infeasible, containers may be placed in unobtrusive locations in side yards with appropriate screening. 
e.  Openings into enclosures shall be positioned so that view of the containers from the street right-of-way is eliminated. 
f.  Containers shall be located in such a manner that they can be serviced by a refuse hauling vehicle without such vehicle encroaching on or interfering with the public use of streets or sidewalks, and without such vehicle backing out of the property onto public right-of-way. 
g.  Containers shall be placed on a paved surface of either concrete or asphalt. 
( Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, enacted provisions designated as § 3-40. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 3-39.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE VI. - MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (MF-D)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2037 , adopted Nov. 9, 2015, repealed art. VI in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 3-42—3-50 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008; Ord. No. 1774, adopted June 9, 2008; and Ord. No. 1776, adopted July 21, 2008. 
 
Sec. 3-40. - Preamble. 
(a)  Purpose: The multi-family zoning standards provide for a mix of multi-family types and style of development intended to reinforce the neighborhood and small town character desired by Alamo Heights residents. The standards permit multi-family buildings of two (2) to four (4) stories in height, depending on location, and require mixed uses along Broadway south of Albany Street in order to encourage pedestrian traffic and extended visits that are essential to a vibrant mix of retail, service and hospitality businesses. 
(b)  Variety: The standards are intended to allow a variety of desirable multi-family housing types as illustrated in the comprehensive plan adopted on May 26, 2009, including: duplex/triplex/quadplex and larger apartment buildings; attached townhouses; bungalow courts with attached or detached dwellings located around a central garden; courtyard housing with attached dwellings around a central linear walk; and garden walk or lane housing with detached or townhouse dwellings facing a well-landscaped central walk or winding car lane. 
(c)  Character: The multi-family zoning standards envision multi-family dwellings that are compatible with and reinforce the best design characteristics of Alamo Heights. Such characteristics include front doors and main entries that face the street (or common landscaped areas); front facades that mimic surrounding properties in scale, massing and articulation; building setbacks that respect traditional neighborhood or downtown street patterns; and off-street parking that is located to the rear (or underground), in open spaces or carports or garages, and hidden from (or not prominent in) street views. 
(d)  Public realm: The multi-family zoning standards are intended to promote a walkable, safe and pedestrian-friendly community. The standards require ample sidewalks, generous planting strips (or tree wells) located between the curb and the sidewalk, and regularly spaced, native canopy trees in the planting strips or tree grates. The standards are designed to promote water conservation and mitigate the effects of noise, dust, artificial lighting intrusions and "heat islands" in developed areas. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-41. - Land uses. 
(a)  For any multi-family project located on Broadway, south of Albany Street, the 1 st floor adjacent to the public rights-of-way shall only be utilized for "Commercial and Retail" land uses which are permitted in Business District One (B-1) and Office District (O-1), as permitted in article II, section 3-8. 
(b)  One-family dwellings, attached and detached, are prohibited on properties that have their front lot line along Broadway or Austin Hwy. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-42. - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the MF-D shall be in accordance with the following, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  One-family dwelling detached: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(3)  One-family dwelling attached: Three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet. (The required lot area for the initial and final unit of one-family dwelling attached structures is three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet for each unit. Each of the remaining (interior) units shall require a lot area equal to at least two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet per unit. This does not avoid the necessity to meet other requirements of the Zoning Code and other codes and ordinances). 
(4)  Multiple family dwelling up to thirty-five (35) feet: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet for first four (4) units plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each added unit. 
(5)  Multiple family dwelling over thirty-five (35) feet: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet for first ten (10) units plus six hundred (600) square feet for each added unit. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-43. - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the MF-D shall be in accordance with the following, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in width below the minimum requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  One-family dwelling detached: Fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling: Sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  One-family dwelling attached: Twenty-five (25) feet (The required lot width of twenty-five (25) feet is for a one-family dwelling attached unit facing the street from which the address is derived. Units to the rear of the initial unit do not add to the required front yard width. This does not avoid the necessity to meet other requirements of the Zoning Code and other codes and ordinances). 
(4)  Multiple family dwelling: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-44. - Front yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in MF-D so as to have a smaller front yard than twenty (20) feet except as follows: 
(1)  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) street intersections is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire block. 
(2)  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may encroach into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
(3)  Where a lot has double frontage, running through from one (1) street to another, the front yard requirements of this section shall apply to any yard of such double frontage lot that is directly across a street from the front property line of another lot. 
(4)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered within the minimum required portion of a front yard in excess of three (3) feet in height measured from the lower side of the fence, wall or other barrier, or in excess of six (6) feet in height within the remaining portion of a front yard measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the director shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the director's projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(5)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior front wall plane width without a minimum of a two-foot-deep by ten-foot-wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. Modifications to the articulation standards may be modified by recommendations by the architectural review board and city council approval. 
(6)  For properties with frontage along Broadway, south of Albany: 
a.  Minimum/maximum setback of zero (0) feet. 
b.  Seventy-five (75) percent of building façade at maximum setback. 
i.  The remaining area may be set back further to accommodate courtyards, sitting areas, or other public uses. 
ii.  Minor adjustments to the "percent of the building façade at the maximum setback" may be adjusted based on recommendations from the architectural review board and after approval by city council. 
c.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
d.  Canopies and other similar features may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
For one-family dwellings attached, the units to the rear of the initial unit do not add to the required front yard depth. This does not avoid the necessity to meet other requirements of the Zoning Code and other codes and ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-45. - Side yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in MF-D so as to have a smaller side yard than hereinafter specified, except as follows: 
(1)  Minimum side yard for one-family and two-family residences is six (6) feet. 
(2)  For multiple-family dwellings a minimum setback for the structure shall be provided based on the following: 
a.  Fifteen-foot setback and; 
b.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B zoning district a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
(3)  Where multiple structures are arranged on a singular lot and have a height less than thirty (30) feet a minimum building separation between structures shall be twelve (12) feet, provided that all fire and building codes have been met pertaining to constructions types/standards. 
(4)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building. 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the side property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a side setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). 
(5)  Every part of a required side yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices, roofs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed two (2) feet into the required side yard but not less than four (4) feet from the property line. 
a.  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two-foot side setback from the property line. 
(6)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any side yard in excess of eight (8) feet in height measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city engineer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the city engineer's projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(7)  Air-conditioning units and pool units shall not encroach into any required side yard setback. 
(8)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior front wall plane width without a minimum of a two-foot deep by ten-foot wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. Modifications to the articulation standards may be modified by recommendations by the architectural review board and city council approval. 
(9)  For properties with frontage along Broadway or Austin Hwy: 
a.  Minimum side setback of zero (0) feet. 
b.  Maximum side setback of eight (8) feet. 
i.  Exemptions to the maximum side yard setback may be provided to allow access to a rear parking facility if no other rear or alley access is provided and for any interior lot, where access to vehicular parking is required. In no case shall the maximum side yard setback be greater than twenty-six (26) feet. 
c.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B zoning district a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
d.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
e.  Canopies and other similar features may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-46. - Rear yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in MF-D so as to have a smaller rear yard than twenty-five (25) feet, except as follows: 
(1)  Every part of a required rear yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
(2)  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two-foot rear setback from the property line. 
(3)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the rear property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a rear setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). 
(4)  No fence or wall, other than the walls of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any rear yard to exceed a height of eight (8) feet measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other structure. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city engineer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the city engineer's projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(5)  Air-conditioning units and pool units shall not encroach into any required rear yard setback. 
(6)  For properties with frontage along Broadway or Austin Hwy: 
a.  Minimum rear setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B zoning district a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
(7)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior front wall plane width without a minimum of a two-foot deep by ten-foot wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-47. - Impervious cover. 
The maximum percentage of any lot area in the MF-D which may be covered by the main building, all accessory buildings, and impervious cover on the lot or tract shall not exceed eighty-five (85) percent. 
(1)  For properties located on Broadway, south of Albany, and Austin Hwy. there shall be no impervious cover caps. This section does not waive any other landscaping requirements found within the zoning code. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-48. - Height. 
No main building or main structure shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in MF-D to exceed the maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, but not to exceed three (3) stories (see Height definition). Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  For properties with frontage along Broadway, south of Albany, or Austin Hwy. a maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet, from average grade, but not to exceed four (4) stories from the grade of land adjacent to the public rights-of-way frontage shall be permitted. 
 
a.  For properties with frontage along Broadway and Austin Hwy. all main structures shall have a minimum of two (2) stories. 
(2)  No accessory structures shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in MF-D to exceed the maximum height of twenty-five (25) [feet]. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-49. - Required off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall hereafter be provided on each lot or tract upon which a building is erected or upon a contiguous lot or tract, and no building or structure or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged for any permitted use in the district in which it is located unless off-street parking facilities are provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Parking must be located in the rear or side of the property, behind the front face of the building. 
(2)  Parking areas located on the side of a structure or adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be screened via a three-foot fence or screening wall. 
(3)  Properties shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the following: 
a.  For the first one (1) to twenty (20) units, two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling. 
b.  For each additional units, over twenty (20), one and one-half (1.5) spaces shall be provided. 
(4)  Surface parking areas shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  A landscape area shall be provided along all parking area boundaries with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. Breaks in the landscaping areas may be allowed for vehicular, pedestrian, and emergency services access. 
b.  One (1), four-inch caliper tree, per eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided. Parking lot trees shall adhere to the following standards: 
i.  The planting area for each tree, whether located at an edge of the parking areas or designed as an interior island or median between parking modules, shall be no less than six (6) feet across in any horizontal direction. 
ii.  All planting areas shall have permeable surfaces and be planted with locally appropriate species as identified in sections 3-50 and 5-152, which may include shrubs, groundcovers, or grasses. If a planting area is used as part of a biological stormwater treatment system, pursuant to an approved drainage plan, groundcovers shall be selected that are appropriate to that function. 
(5)  Parking structures shall not be considered accessory structures and shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Ground level parking structures. Ground level parking located under an elevated building shall be screened from public street rights-of-way and any abutting residentially zoned property. 
i.  Screening shall consist of vegetative screening, except at points of ingress and egress. Such screening may consist of shrubs, trees, and vines to form a continuous and solid visual screen, within one (1) year of planting. Such screening shall not be required where a parking structure is wrapped with liner buildings that accommodate active uses other than parking. 
b.  Upper level parking structures. Each level of a parking structure above the ground level shall be designed to include screening along any facade that is not visually screened by an intervening building or structure from public view. 
i.  Such screening shall consist of architectural and/or landscape elements that are at least three (3) feet six (6) inches in height, as measured from the floor of the level, to provide a continuous and solid visual screen that blocks headlight glare from vehicles parked within the structure. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
Sec. 3-50. - Landscaping, screening, sidewalks, and lighting. 
Any property within the MF-D is required to conform with section 3-88, landscaping regulations, in addition to the following: 
(1)  An eight-foot wide landscape area must be provided along the rear property line. The landscaping must be contiguous with the entire length of the property line, except where interrupted by a drive to an alley. 
(2)  Corner lots: A minimum eight-foot wide landscape area shall be provided along each side yard property line bordering a street. Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Double frontage lots: The front yards of a double frontage lot shall be landscaped. For these lots both street frontages shall be considered front yards. 
(4)  Lots or tracts of land without buildings and used primarily for parking: The front yard of a lot or tract of land without buildings and used primarily for parking shall have a landscape area located along its entire length with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. Each rear and side yard of such lots or tracts of land shall have a landscape area located along its entire length with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. 
(5)  Canopy street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, within the public street rights-of-way. There shall be at least one (1) tree planted for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof. Minor variations from the twenty five (25) feet spacing requirements are permitted to avoid conflicts with driveway locations and accommodate other design considerations. 
a.  Allowable street trees shall be of the species identified in section 5-152 and must be a minimum size of four-inch caliper at planting. For trees located under overhead utilities, property owners may install tree species identified as allowable trees according to CPS Energy. The spacing requirements between trees shall be in accordance with the recommended spacing based on the type of tree planted. 
b.  Street trees shall be maintained to provide a clear canopy zone free of limbs, from ground level to eight (8) feet above ground level, for visibility and to avoid potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. Additional ground clearance may be required to accommodate emergency response vehicles. 
(6)  Planting strips shall be provided for street trees within the public street right-of-way adjacent to curbs and be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. The minimum width may be adjusted based on existing conditions. 
(7)  Sidewalks of no less than five (5) feet in width shall be installed according to ADA standards, located within the public street right-of-way along all street frontages, and adjacent to property lines. Sidewalks locations (adjacent to property lines) may be modified in order to preserve existing trees or natural terrain. Should the sidewalk encroach onto private property, a public access easement shall be provided. 
(8)  Properties located on Broadway, south of Albany, shall be developed in accordance with the following additional regulations: 
a.  Corner lots: A landscape area shall be provided along each corner side yard property line bordering a street. The width of the landscape area shall be equal to the setback limits of the proposed structure. Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Street trees shall be installed in accordance with section 3-50(5) above and be installed in tree openings with minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by eight (8) feet in the dimension parallel to the curb. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with section 3-50(7) above, except that the minimum width shall be ten (10) feet. 
(9)  Planting standards. All plantings in satisfaction of this section shall comply with the standards of this subsection: 
a.  Native and adaptive species are preferred in order to promote reduced water use and increased drought resistance. 
i.  The architectural review board may approve other species of plants as part of their review process. 
b.  Undesirable species. No proposed landscape material shall appear on the Invasive and Noxious Weeds list for the State of Texas promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture, nor on the Texas Noxious Weed List promulgated by the Texas Department of Agriculture. 
c.  Shrubs used for screening shall be three (3) feet or taller in height, as measured from the surrounding soil line, immediately upon planting. Such shrubs shall be maintained at this minimum height, and shall at no time exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
d.  Planting within city rights-of-way shall meet any applicable standards, to protect underground and overhead utilities, streets and sidewalks, drainage improvements, street lighting, sight distances, and the visibility of traffic control devices. 
e.  Replacement of required landscaping that is dead or otherwise no longer meets the standards of this section shall occur within sixty (60) days of notification by the city. Replacement material shall be of similar character and quality as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace in a timely manner in accordance with this subsection shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
f.  All landscape areas on properties with multi-family buildings*** shall be watered with drip irrigation systems in order to ensure continuous healthy plant growth and development while conserving water. Landscape irrigation systems shall be separately metered from building water uses. 
(10)  Property screening requirements. Where the property line of a multi-family district is adjacent to a single-family zoned district, an opaque wall or fence of eight (8) feet in height shall be erected separating the rear and/or side. 
a.  When a screening fence is required by this subsection, but where the property line abuts a single-family residential district and street rights-of-way, the screening fence shall have a max height of three (3) feet. 
(11)  Trash receptacles screening. All trash receptacles shall be visually screened from an abutting public street right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a fence or wall. 
a.  All trash receptacles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from an adjacent lot in a residentially zoned district. 
b.  Enclosure shall extend at least one (1) foot above the container top. 
c.  Dumpsters and garbage bins shall be located behind principal buildings relative to public street frontage whenever practical, and such trash receptacles shall also be accessible from alleys or vehicular access points where available and practical. 
d.  Where site constraints and access make rear yard locations infeasible, containers may be placed in unobtrusive locations in side yards with appropriate screening. 
e.  Openings into enclosures shall be positioned so that view of the containers from the street right-of-way is eliminated. 
f.  Containers shall be located in such a manner that they can be serviced by a refuse hauling vehicle without such vehicle encroaching on or interfering with the public use of streets or sidewalks, and without such vehicle backing out of the property onto public right-of-way. 
Containers shall be placed on a paved surface of either concrete or asphalt. 
(12)  Outdoor lighting or devices installed on the exterior of structures shall use "full cut-off" fixtures, low-output bulbs, shields, or other methods to reduce light trespass, glare, and light pollution, and to encourage energy conservation. 
( Ord. No. 2037 , 11-9-15)  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING DISTRICT (P) 
 
Secs. 3-51—3-57. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-58. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1776, adopted July 21, 2008, repealed § 3-58, which pertained to height limitations and derived from Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008. See subsection 38-87(19) for similar provisions.  
Sec. 3-59. - Parking (P) District. 
Any property within the P District which is used for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Surface parking areas shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  A landscape area shall be provided along all parking area boundaries with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. Breaks in the landscaping areas may be allowed for vehicular, pedestrian, and emergency services access. 
b.  Parking is prohibited in landscape areas. 
i.  Grass pavers or similar products shall not qualify as a landscape area. 
c.  One (1), four (4) inch caliper tree, per eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided. Parking lot trees shall adhere to the following standards: 
i.  The planting area for each tree, whether located at an edge of the parking areas or designed as an interior island or median between parking modules, shall be no less than six (6) feet across in any horizontal direction. 
ii.  All planting areas shall have permeable surfaces and be planted with locally appropriate species as identified in sections 3-50 and 5-152, which may include shrubs, groundcovers, or grasses. If a planting area is used as part of a biological stormwater treatment system, pursuant to an approved drainage plan, groundcovers shall be selected that are appropriate to that function. 
The area shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or pavers and such surfaces shall be kept in good repair and be neat and clean at all times. The area shall be marked so as to designate the placing of vehicles thereon in a manner and method as shall be approved by the city council, after a recommendation from the architectural review board, as part of the final design review process. 
The area shall be suitably screened from frontage on any street and adjacent residence property by suitable walls, hedges or fences, which shall be not less than three (3) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height and which shall prevent headlights of cars from shining onto said adjacent streets and residences. 
(2)  There shall be no storage of trailers, recreational vehicles, delivery/service vehicles, boats, all-terrain vehicles or any vehicles which are displayed as "For Sale", in such areas. 
(3)  The area shall not be used after 7:00 p.m., for a commercial parking lot or combination thereof unless the area shall be properly and adequately lighted, but the standards to which the lights are affixed shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and lighting shall be shielded and directed downward so as not to affect neighboring properties. 
(4)  No buildings or structures shall be permitted within the boundary lines of the area used for parking, except such as are necessary and customary to house the attendant of said lot and the records ancillary to the operation of said parking lot. 
(5)  The entrance to and exit from such parking areas from and onto the streets of the city shall be approved by the city council, after a recommendation from the architectural review board, as part of the final design review process. 
(6)  Prior to commencing the construction provided herein, a building permit shall be obtained. Plans and specifications showing that all requirements of this section will be complied with shall be furnished with the application for a building permit. 
(7)  Any commercial parking lots operated under the authority of this ordinance shall be subject to such police regulation of the City of Alamo Heights as deemed proper with respect to the routine patrols for the health, safety, welfare, and protection generally of the people and property of the City of Alamo Heights. 
(8)  Parking structures shall not be considered accessory structures and shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Setbacks: 
i.  Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet. 
ii.  Side yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
iii.  Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
iv.  Corner lots: A landscape area shall be provided along each corner side yard property line bordering a street. The width of the landscape area shall be equal to the setback limits of the proposed structure. Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
b.  For properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany): 
i.  Minimum rear setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii.  Minimum side setback of zero (0) feet. 
1.  Maximum side setback of eight (8) feet. 
2.  Exemptions to the maximum side yard setback may be provided to allow access to a rear parking facility if no other rear or alley access is provided and for any interior lot, where access to vehicular parking is required. In no case shall the maximum side yard setback be greater than twenty-six (26) feet. 
3.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. The height looming ratio shall not apply when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
4.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features, above the ground floor, may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
a)  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
5.  Canopies and other similar features, on the ground floor, may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
a)  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
iii.  Min/Maximum front setback of zero (0) feet. 
1.  Seventy-five (75) percent of building facade at maximum front setback. 
a)  The remaining area may be set back further to accommodate courtyards, sitting areas, or other public uses. 
b)  Minor adjustments to the "percent of the building facade at the maximum setback" may be adjusted based on recommendations from the architectural review board and after approval by city council. 
2.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features, above the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
a)  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
3.  Canopies and other similar features, on the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
a)  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
iv.  The first floor adjacent to the public rights-of-way shall only be utilized for "commercial and retail" land uses which are permitted in Business District One (B-1) and Office District (O-1), as permitted in article II, section 3-8. 
c.  Height: 
i.  A maximum of fifty-five (55) feet. 
1.  For properties that are not adjacent to Business or Office Zoning Districts a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet shall be required. 
ii.  A looming ratio of two to one (2:1), height looming, applies to any setback adjacent to SF-A or SF-B Zoning Districts. 
2.  The height looming ratio shall not apply to when adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
d.  Ground level parking structures. Ground level parking located under an elevated building or the ground level of a parking garage shall be screened from public street rights-of-way and any abutting residentially zoned property. 
i.  Screening shall be required, except at points of ingress and egress. Such screening may consist of evergreen shrubs, trees, vines, fences, or walls to form a continuous and solid visual screen. Such screening shall not be required where a parking structure is wrapped with liner buildings that accommodate active uses other than parking. 
e.  Upper level parking structures. Each level of a parking structure above the ground level shall be designed to include screening along any facade that is not visually screened by an intervening building or structure from public view. 
f.  Required screening shall consist of architectural and/or landscape elements that are at least three (3) feet, six (6) inches in height, as measured from the floor of the level, to provide a continuous and solid visual screen that blocks headlight glare from vehicles parked within the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, changed the title of § 3-59 from "Required off-street parking" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 3-60. - Landscaping, sidewalks, screening, and lighting. 
(1)  Any property within the P District is required to conform with section 3-88, landscaping regulations, in addition to the following: 
(2)  An eight (8) foot wide landscape area must be provided along the rear property line. The landscaping must be contiguous with the entire length of the property line, except where interrupted by a drive to an alley. 
(3)  Double frontage lots: The front yards of a double frontage lot shall be landscaped. For these lots both street frontages shall be considered front yards. 
(4)  Canopy street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, within the public street rights-of-way. There shall be at least one (1) tree planted for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof. 
a.  Minor variations from the twenty-five (25) feet spacing requirements are permitted to avoid conflicts with driveway locations and accommodate other design considerations. 
i.  Should insufficient right-of-way be available for the planting of trees, between the property line and the paved street, the ARB may recommend the required trees to be located on the applicant's property adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
b.  Allowable street trees shall be of the species identified in section 5-152 and must be a minimum size of four (4) inch caliper at planting. For trees located under overhead utilities, property owners may install tree species identified as allowable trees according to CPS Energy. The spacing requirements between trees shall be in accordance with the recommended spacing based on the type of tree planted. 
c.  Street trees shall be maintained to provide a clear canopy zone free of limbs, from ground level to eight (8) feet above ground level, for visibility and to avoid potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. Additional ground clearance may be required to accommodate emergency response vehicles. 
(5)  Planting strips shall be provided within the public street right-of-way adjacent to curbs and be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. The minimum width may be adjusted based on existing conditions and available rights-of-way widths. 
(6)  Sidewalks of no less than five (5) feet in width shall be installed according to ADA standards, located within the public street right-of-way, along all street frontages, and adjacent to property lines. 
a.  Sidewalk locations may be modified (located on private property) in order to preserve existing trees, natural terrain, or insufficient right-of-way between the property line and street pavement. 
b.  Should the sidewalk encroach onto private property, a public access easement shall be provided. 
c.  For properties located along Broadway (South of Albany Street) the minimum sidewalk width shall be ten (10) feet. 
(7)  Planting standards. All required landscape areas shall comply with the standards of this subsection: 
a.  Native and adaptive species are preferred in order to promote reduced water use and increased drought resistance. 
i.  The architectural review board may approve other species of plants as part of their review process. 
b.  Undesirable species. No proposed landscape material shall appear on the invasive and noxious weeds list for the State of Texas promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture, nor on the Texas Noxious Weed List promulgated by the Texas Department of Agriculture. 
c.  Shrubs used for screening shall be three (3) feet or taller in height, as measured from the surrounding soil line, immediately upon planting. Such shrubs shall be maintained at this minimum height, and shall at no time exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
d.  Planting within city rights-of-way shall meet any applicable standards, to protect underground and overhead utilities, streets and sidewalks, drainage improvements, street lighting, sight distances, and the visibility of traffic control devices. 
e.  Replacement of required landscaping that is dead or otherwise no longer meets the standards of this section shall occur within sixty (60) days of notification by the city. Replacement material shall be of similar character and quality as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace in a timely manner in accordance with this subsection shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
f.  All required landscape areas shall be watered with irrigation systems in order to ensure continuous healthy plant growth and development while conserving water. Landscape irrigation systems shall be separately metered from building water uses. 
(8)  Property screening requirements. Where the property line of a P District is adjacent to a single-family zoned district, an opaque wall or fence of six (6) to eight (8) feet in height shall be erected separating the rear and/or side. 
a.  When a screening fence is required by this subsection, but where the property line abuts a single-family residential district and street rights-of-way, excluding alleys, a screening fence shall not be required, unless the required screening is for parking areas. 
(9)  Trash receptacles screening. All trash receptacles shall be visually screened from an abutting public street right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a fence or wall. 
a.  All trash receptacles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from an adjacent lot. 
b.  Enclosure shall extend at least one (1) foot above the container top. 
c.  Dumpsters and garbage bins shall be located behind principal buildings relative to public street frontage whenever practical, and such trash receptacles shall also be accessible from alleys or vehicular access points where available and practical. 
d.  Where site constraints and access make rear yard locations infeasible, containers may be placed in unobtrusive locations in side yards with appropriate screening. 
e.  Openings into enclosures shall be positioned so that view of the containers from the street right-of-way is eliminated. 
f.  Containers shall be located in such a manner that they can be serviced by a refuse hauling vehicle without such vehicle encroaching on or interfering with the public use of streets or sidewalks, and without such vehicle backing out of the property onto public right-of-way. Containers shall be placed on a paved surface of either concrete or asphalt. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, changed the title of § 3-60 from "Landscaping" to read as herein set out.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUSINESS (B) AND OFFICE (O-1) DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3-61. - Preamble. 
(1)  Generally. The Business (B-1, B-2, and B-3) Districts and Office (O) Districts zoning standards provide for a mix of commercial land uses, retail land uses, building types and styles, and mixed use developments intended to promote buildings of two (2) to four (4) stories in height, depending on location, and encourages mixed uses along Broadway south of Albany Street in order to encourage pedestrian traffic and extended visits that are essential to sustaining a vibrant mix of retail, service, and hospitality businesses. 
(2)  Variety. The standards are intended to allow a variety of land uses and building types as illustrated in the comprehensive plan adopted on May 26, 2009. These mixed use developments may include, retail, residential, office, commercial, and restaurant land uses. 
(3)  Character. The "B" and "O" District standards envision characteristics that include main entries that face the street; building setbacks that conform to traditional downtown street patterns; and off-street parking that is located to the rear of the building face—i.e., to the rear of the property, set back and discretely hidden or screened from street views, whether in open lots, carports, garages or underground structures. 
(4)  Public realm. The "B" and "O" District standards are intended to promote a walkable, safe, and pedestrian-friendly community. The standards require ample sidewalks, generous planting strips (or tree wells) located between the curb and the sidewalk, and regularly spaced, native canopy trees to provide shade and a well-defined buffer between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The standards are designed to encourage water conservation and mitigate the effects of noise, dust, artificial lighting intrusions on adjacent properties, and "heat islands" in developed areas. 
( Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-62. - Land uses. 
Land uses which are permitted by right shall be developed according to the regulations found in this article. Multi-family developments, permitted by right, shall be developed according to the regulations found in article VI. - Multi-Family Dwelling District (MF-D). 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, changed the title of § 3-62 from "Lot area" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 3-63. - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width for the "B-1", "B-2", "B-3", and "O" Districts shall be in accordance with the following, and no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in width below the minimum requirements set forth herein: 
(1)  Seventy-five (75) feet in width along the frontage. 
(2)  Reductions in the minimum lot widths and zero lot lines (for common wall or attached developments) may be permitted and approved as part of the "final design review process", and as part of plat or replat: 
a.  After a recommendation by the architectural review board and city council approval for the "final design review" of the proposed development; and 
b.  After a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-64. - Front yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the O-1 or B Districts so as to have a smaller front yard than twenty (20) [feet] minimum except as follows: 
(1)  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) street intersections is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire block. Business (B) and Office (O) District - front yard setback changed from twenty (20) feet to eight (8) feet as reviewed by the commercial code committee (CCC). 
(2)  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may encroach into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
(3)  Where a lot has double frontage, running through from one (1) street to another, the front yard requirements of this section shall apply to any yard of such double frontage lot that is directly across a street from the front property line of another lot. 
(4)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered within the minimum required portion of a front yard in excess of three (3) feet in height measured from the lower side of the fence, wall or other barrier, or in excess of six (6) feet in height within the remaining portion of a front yard measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the director's projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(5)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior front wall plane width without a minimum of a two (2) foot deep by ten (10) foot wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. 
a.  Articulation standards may be modified by recommendations by the architectural review board and council approval. 
(6)  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features, above the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
ii.  Canopies and other similar features, on the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
iii.  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
(7)  For properties with frontage along Broadway (North of Albany) and Austin Hwy: 
a.  Minimum setback shall be eight (8) feet. 
b.  A minimum landscape area of eight (8) feet shall be required along all street frontages. 
(8)  For properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany): 
a.  Min/Maximum setback of zero (0) feet. 
b.  Seventy-five (75) percent of building facade at maximum setback. 
i.  The remaining area may be set back further to accommodate courtyards, sitting areas, or other public uses. 
ii.  Minor adjustments to the "percent of the building façade at the maximum setback" may be adjusted based on recommendations from the architectural review board and after approval by city council. 
c.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features, above the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
d.  Canopies and other similar features, on the ground floor, may encroach into the required front yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-65. - Side yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the O-1 or B Districts so as to have a smaller side yard than fifteen (15) feet, except as follows: 
(1)  A minimum setback for structures shall be provided based on the following: 
a.  Fifteen (15) foot setback and; 
b.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. The looming ratio standard shall not apply to the portion of the structure that is adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Where multiple structures are arranged on a singular lot and have a height less than thirty (30) feet a minimum building separation between structures shall be twelve (12) feet, provided that all fire codes have been met pertaining to constructions types/standards. 
(3)  Detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building. 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the side property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Corner side yards shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a side setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). 
(4)  Every part of a required side yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices, roofs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed two (2) feet into the required side yard but not less than four (4) feet from the property line. 
a.  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two (2) feet side setback from the property line. 
(5)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any side yard in excess of eight (8) feet in height measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(6)  Air-conditioning units and pool units shall not encroach into any required side yard setback. 
(7)  Main structure articulation: The maximum exterior side wall plane width without a minimum of a two (2) foot deep by ten (10) foot wide for the full height of the structure, above the first floor, offset is every thirty (30) feet. 
a.  Modifications to the articulation standards may be modified by recommendations from the architectural review board and after council approval. 
(8)  For properties with frontage along Broadway (North of Albany) and Austin Hwy: 
a.  Minimum side setback of eight (8) feet. 
i.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District, the minimum side setback is fifteen (15) feet. 
ii.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
iii.  The looming ratio standard shall not apply to the portion of the structure that is adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(9)  For properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany): 
a.  Minimum side setback of zero (0) feet. 
b.  Maximum side setback of eight (8) feet. 
i.  Exemptions to the maximum side yard setback may be provided to allow access to parking facilities if no other access is provided and for any interior lot, where access to vehicular parking is required. In no case shall the maximum side yard setback be greater than twenty-six (26) feet. 
ii.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. 
1.  The looming ratio standard shall not apply to the portion of the structure that is adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
c.  Eaves, balconies, roof extensions, and other similar features, above the ground floor, may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
d.  Canopies and other similar features, on the ground floor, may encroach into the required corner side yard setback or rights-of-way for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
i.  A minimum of ten (10) feet clearance from the ground shall be provided. 
(10)  Corner lots: A landscape area shall be provided along each corner side yard property line bordering a street. The width of the landscape area shall be equal to the setback limits of the proposed structure. Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-66. - Rear yard setbacks. 
No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered in the O-1 or B Districts so as to have a smaller rear yard than twenty-five (25) feet except as regulations follows: 
(1)  Every part of a required rear yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
(2)  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two (2) foot rear setback from the property line. 
(3)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located as follows: 
a.  Not less than four (4) feet from the main building. 
b.  Not less than three (3) feet from the rear property line for structures with a wall plate not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Structures with a wall plate greater than ten (10) feet shall have a rear setback based on a looming ratio of two to one (2:1). The looming ratio standard shall not apply to the portion of the structure that is adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(4)  No fence or wall, other than the walls of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any rear yard to exceed a height of eight (8) feet measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other structure. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the projection of the natural grade of the land. 
(5)  Air-conditioning units and pool units may encroach into any required rear yard setback, but in no case closer than six (6) feet from the property line. 
(6)  For properties with frontage along Broadway or Austin Hwy: 
a.  Minimum rear setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  For properties adjacent to a SF-A or SF-B Zoning District a looming ratio of two to one (2:1) height looming applies. The looming ratio standard shall not apply to the portion of the structure that is adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-67. - Impervious cover. 
The maximum percentage of any lot area in the O-1 or B Districts which may be covered by the main building, all accessory buildings, and impervious cover on the lot or tract shall not exceed eighty-five (85) percent. 
(1)  For properties located on Broadway and Austin Hwy. there shall be no impervious cover caps. 
a.  This section does not waive any other landscaping or stormwater requirements found within the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, changed the title of § 3-67 from "Lot coverage" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 3-68. - Height. 
No main building or main structure shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in O-1 or B Districts to exceed the maximum height of forty-five (45) feet, but not to exceed three (3) stories (see "height" definition). Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  For properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany Street) and Austin Hwy. a maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet, from average grade, but not to exceed four (4) stories from the grade of land adjacent to the public rights-of-way frontage shall be permitted. (See "height" definition in article I, section 3-2. 
(2)  For properties with frontage along Broadway and Austin Hwy. all main structures shall have a minimum height of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(3)  No accessory structures shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in the O-1 or B Districts to exceed the maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1774, 6-9-08; Ord. No. 1776, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-69. - Required off-street parking. 
In the O-1 and B District, off-street parking shall hereafter be provided on each lot or tract upon which a building is erected or upon a contiguous lot or tract, and no building or structure or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged for any permitted use in the district in which it is located unless off-street parking facilities are provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Parking must be located in the rear or side of the property, behind the front face of the building, for properties with frontage along Broadway (South of Albany Street). 
(2)  Parking areas located on the side of a structure or adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be screened via a three (3) foot fence or screening wall. 
(3)  Surface parking areas shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  A landscape area shall be provided along all parking area boundaries with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. Breaks in the landscaping areas may be allowed for vehicular, pedestrian, and emergency services access. 
b.  One (1), four (4) inch caliper tree, per eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided. Parking lot trees shall adhere to the following standards: 
i.  The planting area for each tree, whether located at an edge of the parking areas or designed as an interior island or median between parking modules, shall be no less than six (6) feet across in any horizontal direction. 
ii.  All planting areas shall have permeable surfaces and be planted with locally appropriate species as identified in sections 3-50 and 5-152, which may include shrubs, groundcovers, or grasses. If a planting area is used as part of a biological stormwater treatment system, pursuant to an approved drainage plan, groundcovers shall be selected that are appropriate to that function. 
(4)  Parking structures shall not be considered accessory structures and shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Ground level parking structures. Ground level parking located under an elevated building shall be screened from public street rights-of-way and any abutting residentially zoned property. 
i.  Screening shall be required, except at points of ingress and egress. Such screening may consist of evergreen shrubs, trees, vines, fences, or walls to form a continuous and solid visual screen. Such screening shall not be required where a parking structure is wrapped with liner buildings that accommodate active uses other than parking. 
b.  Upper level parking structures. Each level of a parking structure above the ground level shall be designed to include screening along any facade that is not visually screened by an intervening building or structure from public view. 
(5)  Such screening shall consist of architectural and/or landscape elements that are at least three (3) feet six (6) inches in height, as measured from the floor of the level, to provide a continuous and solid visual screen that blocks headlight glare from vehicles parked within the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-70. - Landscaping, sidewalks, screening, and lighting. 
Any properties within the O-1 and B Districts are required to conform with section 3-88, landscaping regulations, in addition to the following: 
(1)  An eight (8) foot wide landscape area must be provided along the rear, corner side, and front property lines. The width of the landscape may be adjusted to below the eight (8) foot requirement for front and corner side yards based on the setback of the structure. The landscaping must be contiguous with the entire length of the property line, except where interrupted by a drive to an alley, pedestrian access to the property, or courtyards, sitting areas, or other public uses. 
a.  Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Required landscaping may not be required for areas located in portions of the building setbacks that are utilized for courtyards, sitting areas, or other public uses. 
(2)  Double frontage lots: The front yards of a double frontage lot shall be landscaped. For these lots both street frontages shall be considered front yards. 
(3)  Canopy street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, within the public street rights-of-way. There shall be at least one (1) tree planted for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof. 
a.  Minor variations from the twenty-five (25) feet spacing requirements are permitted to avoid conflicts with driveway locations and accommodate other design considerations. 
b.  Should insufficient right-of-way be available for the planting of trees, between the property line and the paved street, the ARB may recommend the required trees to be located on the applicant's property adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
c.  Allowable street trees shall be of the species identified in section 5-152 and must be a minimum size of four (4) inch caliper at planting. For trees located under overhead utilities, property owners may install tree species identified as allowable trees according to CPS Energy. The spacing requirements between trees shall be in accordance with the recommended spacing based on the type of tree planted. 
d.  Street trees shall be maintained to provide a clear canopy zone free of limbs, from ground level to eight (8) feet above ground level, for visibility and to avoid potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. Additional ground clearance may be required to accommodate emergency response vehicles. 
(4)  Planting strips shall be provided within the public street right-of-way adjacent to curbs and be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. The minimum width may be adjusted based on existing conditions and available rights-of-way widths. 
(5)  Sidewalks of no less than five (5) feet in width shall be installed according to ADA standards, located within the public street right-of-way, along all street frontages, and adjacent to property lines. 
a.  Sidewalk locations may be modified (located on private property) in order to preserve existing trees, natural terrain, or insufficient right-of-way between the property line and street pavement. 
b.  Should the sidewalk encroach onto private property, a public access easement shall be provided. 
c.  For properties located along Broadway (South of Albany Street) the minimum sidewalk width shall be ten (10) feet. 
(6)  Planting standards. All plantings in satisfaction of this section shall comply with the standards of this subsection: 
a.  Native and adaptive species are preferred in order to promote reduced water use and increased drought resistance. 
b.  The architectural review board may approve other species of plants as part of their review process. 
c.  Undesirable species. No proposed landscape material shall appear on the invasive and noxious weeds list for the State of Texas promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture, nor on the Texas Noxious Weed List promulgated by the Texas Department of Agriculture. 
d.  Shrubs used for screening shall be three (3) feet or taller in height, as measured from the surrounding soil line, immediately upon planting. Such shrubs shall be maintained at this minimum height, and shall at no time exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
e.  Planting within city rights-of-way shall meet any applicable standards, to protect underground and overhead utilities, streets and sidewalks, drainage improvements, street lighting, sight distances, and the visibility of traffic control devices. 
f.  Replacement of required landscaping that is dead or otherwise no longer meets the standards of this section shall occur within sixty (60) days of notification by the city. Replacement material shall be of similar character and quality as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace in a timely manner in accordance with this subsection shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
g.  All required landscape areas shall be watered with irrigation systems in order to ensure continuous healthy plant growth and development while conserving water. Landscape irrigation systems shall be separately metered from building water uses. 
(7)  Property screening requirements. Where the property line of a "B" or "O" District is adjacent to a single-family zoned district, an opaque wall or fence of eight (8) feet in height shall be erected separating the rear and/or side. 
a.  When a screening fence is required by this subsection, but where the property line abuts a single-family residential district and street rights-of-way, a screening fence shall not be required, unless the required screening is for parking areas. 
(8)  Trash receptacles screening. All trash receptacles shall be visually screened from an abutting public street right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a fence or wall. 
a.  All trash receptacles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from an adjacent lot. 
b.  Enclosure shall extend at least one (1) foot above the container top. 
c.  Dumpsters and garbage bins shall be located behind principal buildings relative to public street frontage whenever practical, and such trash receptacles shall also be accessible from alleys or vehicular access points where available and practical. 
d.  Where site constraints and access make rear yard locations infeasible, containers may be placed in unobtrusive locations in side yards with appropriate screening. 
e.  Openings into enclosures shall be positioned so that view of the containers from the street right-of-way is eliminated. 
f.  Containers shall be located in such a manner that they can be serviced by a refuse hauling vehicle without such vehicle encroaching on or interfering with the public use of streets or sidewalks, and without such vehicle backing out of the property onto public right-of-way. 
g.  Containers shall be placed on a paved surface of either concrete or asphalt. Properties located on Broadway, south of Albany, shall be developed in accordance with the following additional regulations: 
h.  Corner lots: A landscape area shall be provided along each corner side yard property line bordering a street. The width of the landscape area shall be equal to the setback limits of the proposed structure. Landscaping within a triangular area formed by intersecting street lines shall comply with the requirements of sections 16-71 through 16-77 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(9)  Canopy street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, within the public street rights-of-way. There shall be at least one (1) tree planted for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof. 
a.  Minor variations from the twenty-five (25) feet spacing requirements are permitted to avoid conflicts with driveway locations and accommodate other design considerations. 
b.  Should insufficient right-of-way be available for the planting of trees, between the property line and the paved street, the ARB may recommend the required trees to be located on the applicant's property adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
c.  Allowable street trees shall be of the species identified in section 5-152 and must be a minimum size of four (4) inch caliper at planting. For trees located under overhead utilities, property owners may install tree species identified as allowable trees according to CPS Energy. The spacing requirements between trees shall be in accordance with the recommended spacing based on the type of tree planted. 
d.  Street trees shall be maintained to provide a clear canopy zone free of limbs, from ground level to eight (8) feet above ground level, for visibility and to avoid potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. Additional ground clearance may be required to accommodate emergency response vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1964, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, changed the title of § 3-70 from "Landscaping" to read as herein set out.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 3-71—3-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1920, adopted Jan. 23, 2012, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 3-81—3-89, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008; Ord. No. 1774, adopted June 9, 2008; Ord. No. 1776, adopted July 21, 2008; and Ord. No. 1877, adopted Aug. 23, 2010. 
 
Sec. 3-81. - Special front yard regulations. 
(1)  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) street intersections is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire block. 
(2)  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may encroach into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet beyond the permitted porch or wall plane. 
(3)  Where a lot has double frontage, running through from one (1) street to another, the front yard requirements of this section shall apply to any yard of such double frontage lot that is directly across a street from the front property line of another lot. 
(4)  Schools, churches and other permitted public or semi-public buildings when located in the "MF-D", "P", "B" or "O" Districts may modify the required front yard minimum/maximum setbacks after a recommendation from the architectural review board and council approval as part of the final design review process. 
(5)  Gasoline service station pump islands shall be located not less than eighteen (18) feet from the front property line. 
(6)  Any property hereafter used for business purposes in the B Districts shall face and have its main entrance on Broadway or the Austin Highway according to which street provides the main access to such property. 
(7)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered within the minimum required portion of a front yard in excess of three (3) feet in height measured from the lower side of the fence, wall or other barrier, or in excess of six (6) feet in height within the remaining portion of a front yard measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the director shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the director's projection of the natural grade of the land. Any fence constructed shall have the "finished side" or "non-structural side" facing street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-82. - Special side yard regulations. 
(1)  Schools, churches and other permitted public or semi-public buildings when located in the SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C, Districts, shall provide a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Schools, churches and other permitted public or semi-public buildings when located in the "MF-D", "P", "B" or "O" Districts may modify the required front yard minimum/maximum setbacks after a recommendation from the architectural review board and council approval as part of the final design review process. 
(3)  Detached garages or other detached accessory buildings shall be located not less than four (4) feet from the main building and shall not be less than three (3) feet from the side property line. 
a.  Every part of a required side yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices, roofs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four (4) feet into the required side yard but not less than four (4) feet from the property line. 
b.  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two-foot side setback from the property line. 
(4)  No fence, wall or other manmade, non-living barrier, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any side yard in excess of eight (8) feet in height measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other barrier. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the projection of the natural grade of the land. Any fence constructed shall have the "finished side" or "non-structural side" facing street rights-of-way. 
(5)  Air-conditioning units and pool units are allowed to encroach into any required side yard setback. Such units shall be located as close to the structure as possible, and in no case shall they be located closer than three (3) feet to the property line or fence. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 1963, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 2030 , 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-83. - Special rear yard regulations. 
(1)  Every part of a required rear yard for main structures shall be open and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and ordinary projections of window sills, roof eaves or overhangs, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
a.  Accessory structure roof eaves or overhangs are required to have a minimum two-foot rear setback from the property line. 
(2)  A detached garage or other permitted accessory building shall provide a minimum rear yard of three (3) feet. 
(3)  Schools, churches and other permitted public or semi-public buildings when located in the SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C or MF-D Districts, shall provide a minimum rear yard of twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  No fence or wall, other than the walls of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any rear yard to exceed a height of eight (8) feet measured from the lower side of such fence, wall or other structure. When the grade of the land adjacent to the location of a fence, wall or other barrier has been altered from its natural condition, the city's administrative officer shall determine the permissible height of a fence, wall or other barrier from the projection of the natural grade of the land. Any fence constructed shall have the "finished side" or "non-structural side" facing street rights-of-way. 
(5)  Air-conditioning units and pool units are allowed to encroach into any required rear yard setback. Such units shall be located as close to the structure as possible, and in no case shall they be located closer than three (3) feet to the property line or fence. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 1963, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 2030 , 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-84. - Special parking regulations. 
(1)  Minimum off-street parking requirements for the hereafter specified non-residential uses are as follows: 
(a)  Bowling alley: Six (6) spaces for each lane or alley; 
(b)  Churches, theatres or places of public assembly: One (1) space for each three (3) seats in the main sanctuary; 
(c)  Hospitals: One (1) space for each patient bed provided; 
(d)  Hotel or motel: One (1) space for each room or guest unit; 
(e)  Offices, retail and business uses: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area in the building; 
(f)  Restaurant or cafeteria: One (1) space for every one hundred (100) gross square feet of ar 
(g)  Schools or colleges: Two (2) spaces for each classroom, plus one (1) space for each four (4) seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or other place of assembly. 
(2)  A parking space shall be defined as an all-weather-surfaced area not located in any public rights-of-way, together with an all-weather-surfaced driveway connecting the area with a street or alley and permitting free ingress and egress thereto. All-weather-surfaces includes asphalt, concrete, flagstone, brick pavers, concrete pavers and similar materials. Any parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering is done on the public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking area requirements for any use. Approval of a ratio of compact spaces to be provided in lieu of standard spaces. 
_____ 
(a)  Parking stall dimensions shall be based on the following: 
ANGLE 	DIMENSIONS 	ONE WAY 
TRAFFIC 	TWO WAY 
TRAFFIC 
Parking 
Angle 	Stall 
Width 
(ft) 	Curb 
Length 
(ft) 	Stall 
Depth 
(ft) 	Stripe 
Length 
(ft) 	Aisle 
Width 
(ft) 	Section 
Width 
(ft) 	Aisle 
Width 
(ft) 	Section 
Width 
(ft) 
A 	B 	C 	D 	G 	E 	F 	E 	F 
30° 	9 	17 	16.4 	32.7 	12 	44.7 	24 	56.7 
45° 	9 	12 	18.7 	26.5 	14 	51.4 	24 	61.4 
60° 	9 	9.8 	19.8 	22.9 	16 	55.6 	24 	63.6 
90° 	9 	8.5 	18 	18 	22 	58 	24 	60 
 
 
(b)  Drive aisle dimensions shall be based on the following: 
 
(3)  Whenever any lot is used for off-street parking purposes incidental to any lawful use of property, the parking area and all access drives shall be surfaced with all-weather-surfaces, and the surface shall be maintained in good repair and free of debris, trash or other similar material or dirt. 
(4)  Any light used to illuminate a parking area shall be so arranged as not to be directed into any adjacent residential uses or residential districts. 
(5)  In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in a development. 
(6)  All retail and commercial structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot adjacent or from a public alley or private service drive. Such space may be located in a drive or access isles provided that the flow in and out of the facility are not restricted by its placement and not located in a dedicated or marked fire lane. 
(7)  Areas utilized for storage, mechanical rooms, restrooms, or other non-occupied spaces may be calculated using a ratio of one (1) space per space every seven hundred fifty (750) gross square feet. 
(8)  A reduction in the required number of off-street parking spaces may be authorized by the city council, after a recommendation from the architectural review board, as part of the final design review process. 
(a)  Any reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces shall be subject to a "parking mitigation fee" in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per space. Such fees shall be utilized to construct additional off-street parking, parking garages, or other project, intended to increase the number of parking spaces in the city to off-set the loss of the required spaces. 
(9)  For parking areas located adjacent to Broadway there shall be no storage of trailers, recreational vehicles, delivery/service vehicles, boats, all-terrain vehicles or any vehicles which are displayed as "for sale", in such areas. Company service will be allowed to park in front (along Broadway if no rear parking is available. Vehicles associated with a business located on the property shall be located to the rear of the property, behind the building, as to limit its visibility from Broadway. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2065 , 12-12-16; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-85. - Accessory structures. 
The following standards shall apply to all accessory buildings hereafter constructed or altered in any residential district: 
(1)  Required front yard setback. Attached accessory buildings shall have a required front yard the same as the main building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the main building. 
(2)  Required side yard setback. For any detached accessory building, there shall be a side yard not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line, except at a corner lot where a detached garage is accessed from either a side street or an alley and would then be subject to vision clearance regulations (section 16-71). 
(3)  Required rear yard setback. For any detached accessory building, there shall be a rear yard setback not less than three (3) feet from any lot line, alley line, or easement line. Garages or other detached accessory buildings located within the required rear yard shall not be located closer than four (4) feet to the main building nor nearer than three (3) feet to any side lot line. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-86. - Utilities. 
(1)  Any property in the "B", "O", "MF-D", "2F-C" or "P" Districts with frontage along Broadway shall have all overhead or above ground utilities relocated underground or to the rear of the building or property. 
(a)  Only properties with frontage on Broadway along Broadway are subject to utility relocation. 
(2)  Approval to include additional languagethat relocation of utilities "shall be approved or may be modified by council, after ARB recommendations, as part of the final design review process. 
( Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, adopted April 24, 2017, repealed § 3-86 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 3-86 pertained to special area and building location regulations, and derived from Ord. No. 1920, adopted Jan. 23, 2012.  
Sec. 3-87. - Specific use permits. 
The city council of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, after public hearing with proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the city planning and zoning commission, may authorize for specific areas the issuance of specific use permits for the following types of uses in only those districts specified for such use as follows: 
(1)  College, university or accredited private school in any residential district. 
(2)  Day nursery or kindergarten school in the 2F-C, MF-D, B Districts. 
(3)  Hospital in the 2F-C, MF-D, B Districts. 
(4)  Institutions of a religious or Philanthropic Nature in the 2F-C, MF-D, B Districts. 
(5)  Service center municipal in the 2F-C, MF-D, B Districts. 
(6)  Electrical substation in the SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C, MF-D and P Districts. 
(7)  Local transit station or off-street turn-around in any residential district. 
(8)  Radio, television or microwave tower in any district. 
(9)  Water reservoir, well or water pumping station in the SF-A, SF-B, or 2F-C Districts. 
(10)  Municipal offices or city hall in the SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C or MF-D Districts. 
(11)  Off-street parking for property owned by institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature in SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C or MF-D Districts. 
(12)  Single-family detached homes in multiple-family dwelling (MF-D) districts which do not otherwise satisfy the requirements of this Zoning Code and section 17-27 of chapter 17 of the Code of Ordinances. Each of such projects shall be considered on its individual merits, with special attention to be given to the following features, among others which may be deemed important by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, of proposed project: (a) location and design of ingress and egress to public streets; (b) interior traffic circulation patterns; (c) off-street parking; (d) sidewalks; (e) drainage; (f) lighting; (g) landscaping; (h) fencing and other screening; (i) emergency vehicle access; (j) lighting; (k) landscaping; (l) fencing and other screening; (m) emergency vehicle access; (n) density; (o) lot sizes; (p) setbacks; and (q) compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(13)  Office in MF-D not facing and having its main entrance on Broadway or the Austin Highway, provided such office (1) is compatible and harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood, (2) is to be located in a preexisting structure which contains no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of enclosed area, (3) the property upon which the structure is located is contiguous to a property zoned B-1, B-2 or B-3, (4) some portion of the property across the street from the subject property must be zoned B-1, B-2 or B-3 if the property across the street from the subject property is in Alamo Heights, (5) the office is for a use authorized in the schedule of permitted uses for offices in section 3-8 of this Zoning Code, (6) the structure and property comply with the parking, landscape, setback and other requirements of the Zoning Code applicable to O-1, and (7) the specific use permit requested promotes the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(14)  Wireless communication systems antenna support structures and antennas in the P, O-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts only. 
(a)  Definitions. A monopole antenna support structure is a self-supporting pole type structure with no guy wire support which holds one (1) or more antennas and related equipment for wireless telecommunications transmission. A lattice antenna support structure is a metal lattice structure with or without guy wire support. An independent support structure means buildings or other structures such as water towers. An unmanned equipment building is an accessory building housing electronic communication equipment as an associated and permitted part of a wireless communication system. 
(b)  Antenna locations. Wireless communication system antennas may be attached to monopole antenna structures or independent support structures. Lattice antenna support structures may not be used to support wireless communication system antennas in the city. Monopole antenna support structures and wireless communication antennas must be constructed more than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest right-of-way boundary line of Broadway or Austin Highway and more than one hundred twenty (120) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(c)  Height limitations. A monopole antenna support structure may not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
(d)  Visual impact of antenna support structures and wireless communication antennas. Antennas and their support structures shall be screened, camouflaged and visually pleasing to the fullest extent feasible, consistent with both national industry standards and Alamo Heights' aesthetic goals. 
(e)  Unmanned equipment buildings. An unmanned equipment building shall not have more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area and shall not be more than twelve (12) feet in height. 
(f)  Landscaping. Compliance with the landscape requirements of this Code is required for antenna support structures and antennas. 
(g)  Certification of compliance. Prior to installation of antenna support structures or antennas, the city must be furnished certification by a structural or civil engineer registered by the State of Texas certifying that the proposed installation complies with the structural requirements of the City of Alamo Heights Building Code and with federal and state electromagnetic radiation standards and other requirements. 
(h)  Attachment to water towers. The city council may authorize the attachment of wireless communication antennas to city water towers without special use permits and without compliance with the other requirements of this Code. 
(15)  Permitted institutions such as schools and churches may be erected to a height exceeding the height limitations set out in this chapter in the SF-A, SF-B, 2F-C, MF-D, O-1 and P Districts. Permitted institutions shall mean the institutions categorized as special uses in the table of land uses in section 3-8 of the Zoning Code. 
(16)  Drive-through facilities as reflected in the permitted uses table in section 3-8 of the Zoning Code. 
The following procedure applies to the approval of specific use permits: 
a.  The city planning and zoning commission in considering and determining its recommendation, or the city council in considering any request for a specific use permit, may require from the applicant, plans, information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The city council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with this ordinance establish special conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a specific use permit is authorized. 
b.  In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific use permits, the city council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate [are] important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community. 
c.  Every specific use permit approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as an amendment to the ordinance as applicable to the property involved. The process of giving notice and holding public hearings on specific use permits shall be the same as that provided for amending the ordinance. 
d.  Such conditions, safeguards and standards specified by the city council for compliance relative to any specific use permit shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit. 
(17)  Gun shops in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts subject to recommendation by the police chief as to the safety of the public, security of weapons storage facilities, current licensing by appropriate federal and state authorities, compliance with federal and state laws and licensing requirements and without the sale of explosives. No specific use permit for gun shops shall be transferable or assignable and shall terminate upon any such transfer, assignment or relocation. 
(18)  Multiple-family dwelling with retail/restaurant uses on the first floor in the MF-D District at a location within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the northeast corner of Broadway and Austin Highway on a tract of land containing at least 1.4 acres of land. The main entrance of the retail/restaurant uses shall be on Broadway and the main entrance of the dwelling units shall be on Ellwood Avenue. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) units. There shall be no required setbacks and the maximum lot coverage of the structure shall not exceed eighty (80) percent. There may be a maximum of four (4) occupied stories and the maximum height shall be fifty-six (56) feet, both to be measured in accordance with zoning code standards. The off-street parking ratio for the multi-family dwellings may not be less than 1.5 spaces per unit and the number of retail/restaurant parking spaces shall comply with the zoning code requirements. Parking spaces shall be at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet except that one (1) smaller compact space may be installed for each nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet larger parking space installed. The areas between the structure and the property lines must be fully landscaped along each street, with not more than forty (40) percent of such areas to receive impervious cover. No alley or service easement shall be required. All new utilities shall be buried and existing utilities must be removed and/or relocated. The project must employ "dark sky" lighting fixtures. The developer of the project must pay for the installation of any infrastructure such as water, sewer and stormwater enhancements which are required to support the project. The city may require the project developer to purchase additional, unrestricted, perpetual Edward's Aquifer water rights to provide for the estimated usage of the project. Approval of a SUP which complies with the above requirements shall not set a precedent for any other SUP in the future. 
(19)  Multi-family condominium project consisting of ten (10) single-family detached residences at a location within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the northeast corner of Broadway and Terrell Road on a tract of land containing at least 0.7 acres of land. There shall be a twenty-foot front yard setback rather than twenty-five (25) feet, a ten-foot rear yard setback rather than twenty-five (25) feet, a 7.5 foot side yard setback to property lines rather than fifteen (15) feet, a six-foot setback between buildings rather than ten (10) feet or thirty (30) feet, forty (40) percent lot coverage rather than thirty-five (35) percent, thirty (30) percent of front yard contiguous landscaping rather than fifty (50) percent, a six-foot fence height limitation in the front yard setbacks for units 1, 8, 9 and 10 rather than three (3) feet, access via a private drive and no more than ten (10) single-family detached residences. All new utilities shall be buried and existing utilities must be removed and/or relocated. The developer of the project must pay for the installation of any infrastructure such as water, sewer and stormwater enhancements which are required to support the project. The city may require the project developer to purchase additional, unrestricted, perpetual Edward's Aquifer water rights to provide for the estimated usage of the project. Approval of a SUP which complies with the above requirements shall not set a precedent for any other SUP in the future. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 1953, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2015 , 4-13-15; Ord. No. 2025 , § 2, 7-27-15; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-88. - Landscaping regulations. 
(A)  Application of this section. 
(1)  The landscaping section of this ordinance shall apply to all land located in the City of Alamo Heights, except as otherwise noted below. Such landscaping requirements shall become applicable as to each individual lot or tract of land at such time as an application for building permit on such lot or tract of land is made. 
(2)  A common development which includes more than one (1) lot shall be treated as one (1) lot for the purposes of satisfying the landscaping requirements of this section. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in phases, and/or multiple building permits for a project shall not prevent it from being a common development as referred to above. A project planned in phases must have each phase in compliance with the ordinance. 
(3)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Single-Family Dwelling District A (SF-A). 
(b)  Single-Family Dwelling District B (SF-B). 
(c)  Two-Family Dwelling District C (2F-C). 
(d)  Building permits for the substantial restoration within a period of twelve (12) months of a building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of any kind. 
(e)  Building permits for remodeling as long as the roof and front, side and rear exterior walls of the building remain in the same location. 
(f)  Site development plans approved before July 2, 1984, and granted a building permit by September 1, 1984. 
(B)  Procedures pertaining to this section. 
(1)  When an application is made for a building permit on any land where the landscaping requirements of this section are applicable, such building permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan(s) containing the information listed below: 
(a)  The date, scale, north arrow, title and name of owner. 
(b)  The location of property lines and dimensions of the tract. 
(c)  The location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
(d)  The location, size and type (tree, shrub, ground cover) of proposed landscape plant material, and the location of proposed landscape areas. The use of native plants is encouraged. 
(e)  The location, size and species of existing trees on the site having trunks six (6) inches or larger in diameter and the approximate size of their crowns. 
(f)  The location, size and type of landscape architectural components (drives, walks, curbs, fences, steps, ramps, planters, pools, parking areas, etc.) proposed. 
(g)  A separate grading plan showing proposed topography (at two (2) foot contour interval) may be required at the request of the building official. 
(h)  Indication if a landscape irrigation system is proposed. 
(i)  Sufficient details to clearly describe all features proposed to be located in the city right-of-way. A written statement shall be submitted holding the city harmless from liability and/or damages caused by features placed in the right-of-way. The city retains total jurisdiction over features in the right-of-way as necessary for installation and maintenance of utilities, improvements and protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(j)  Information necessary for verifying whether the required maximum percent of impervious cover has not been exceeded under subsection (d)(1)—(3) of this section. 
(k)  The certification of a landscape architect, registered to practice in the State of Texas, that the plans satisfy applicable sections of the zoning ordinance, building code and appropriate standards for landscape architectural design and construction. 
(1)  A perpetual license, binding the property owner, his heirs, successors and assigns, granting the city authorization to enter upon the land for the purpose of installing required landscaping. 
(2)  Plans shall be subject to approval by the office of community development. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee in accordance with a schedule of fees published by the city. The property owner shall furthermore furnish to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the city for the amount of the landscape construction cost. 
(3)  The planning and development services office shall inspect each site no sooner than three (3) months nor later than twelve (12) months after the building is ready for occupancy. The owner may call for earlier inspection if desired. If the proposed landscape construction is not completed at the time of the twelve-month inspection, the performance bond or letter of credit shall be forfeited and applied toward the implementation of the landscape plan. Any additional costs beyond those covered by the performance bond or letter of credit shall be affixed as a lien on the property. 
(C)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between the street and the access drives and parking aisles near the front yard entries and exits, nor shall any landscaping which creates an obstruction of view be located within the radius of any curb return. 
(2)  All landscaping materials shall be appropriately contained within the property so as to prevent run-off of materials into the right-of-way or adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 2146 , § 2, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 3-89. - Nonconforming uses or structures. 
(1)  Any use of property that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the preceding sections and which shall have been in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance or which was nonconforming under the provisions of the previous ordinance and remains so under this ordinance shall be called a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use of land or buildings or any nonconforming structure may be continued for indefinite periods provided that the board of adjustment may prescribe definite periods of time for the discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or building subject to such restrictions as the board of adjustment may require for the protection and preservation of adjoining property. A nonconforming use of land or building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restrictive classification. If a change of a nonconforming use is made to a use in a more restrictive classification, the use shall not later be changed to a less restrictive classification and the less restrictive use shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
(3)  If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming use not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its reasonable value, reconstruction will be permitted but the size or function of the nonconforming use cannot be expanded. 
(4)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be expanded in any manner or form so as to increase the degree of nonconformity except when such change may be required by law or ordinance for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
a.  Single-family structures, that do not have the required two (2) covered parking spaces, may be expanded without a requirement to add or construct additional covered parking provided that: 
1.  Any addition does not result in the removal of existing required covered parking; and 
2.  That the property has at least two (2) off-street parking spaces available; and 
3.  That the square footage associated with any required covered parking, needed to bring the property into compliance with the zoning code, automatically be included in the property's "floor to area ratio" (F.A.R.) and "Lot Coverage" calculations to allow for future construction of two (2) covered parking spaces. 
i.  No addition may be constructed that would prevent the construction of future covered parking structures. 
ii.  A site plan showing the provision for future covered parking shall be provided, along with the floor to area ratio and lot coverage calculations. 
(5)  A building or structure in Business District One (B-1) used for a nonconforming use as defined in section 3-88 of the Zoning Code may be modified or expanded upon approval of a building permit therefore by the city council; provided that any such modification or expansion is for the same use which existed prior to the time of the request for the building permit. 
(6)  If the final approval of a subdivision plan, plat or replat produces a nonconforming use or structure because of requirements of the Zoning Code, there shall be no necessity to obtain a variance or special exception from the board of adjustment for the condition which produced the nonconforming use or structure unless such condition is not disclosed in the plat specifications or other documents furnished to the city in connection with the application. In order to preserve the applicant's rights under this subsection, the subdivision plan, plat or replat approved by the city council shall include a plat note specifically describing the condition which otherwise would have necessitated a variance or special exception from the board of adjustment. If the approval of the subdivision plan, plat or replat creates a nonconforming structure, future building permits for the alteration, modification or expansion of the nonconforming structure shall be treated the same as building permit applications for other nonconforming structures. 
(Ord. No. 1920, 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 2106 , 8-13-18)  
Sec. 3-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 3-91. - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the public works director or his designee. Where special exceptions are noted, they shall be referred to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-92. - Scope of regulations. 
These regulations shall apply to any proposed project or structure that is submitted for permitting after the effective date of this ordinance, except that any applicant who has submitted an application for a permit protected by Chapter 245 of the Local Government Code shall be governed by the development standards in effect on the date that the original permit application was filed. A permit application expires the forty-five (45) days after the date the application is filed if (a) the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the city's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the permit application, (b) the city provides to the applicant not later than the ten (10) business days after the date the permit application is filed written notice of the failure to provide documents or other information required to comply with the city's technical requirements, which notice specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the permit application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided, and (c) the applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notice. 
Existing structures and site improvements that do not comply with this ordinance are nonconforming structures which can be maintained and repaired as long as the structure footprint, height, envelope or site area are not expanded so as to increase the degree of nonconformity. In addition, existing structures and site improvements that do not comply with this ordinance that are damaged or destroyed by natural acts or by any means not resulting from the direct actions of the property owner can be rebuilt to their previous dimensions. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-93. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or who commits, takes part, directs, or assists in any such violation or who maintains or uses any building or premises or part thereof in which any violation exists shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any such person or corporation upon conviction thereof in the corporation court of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, shall be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. Each day that such violation shall occur, continue or be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Any owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, who participates in, or knowingly and willingly permits a violation of this ordinance, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith who assists in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-94. - Remedies for violation. 
Any person or corporation who shall fail to comply with any provisions of this ordinance, or any of the requirements hereof, or who shall commit any of the acts described in section 3-23, or be guilty of any of the omissions thereof, shall be liable to injunctive action, being subject to being enjoined and mandatorily enjoined in any court of competent jurisdiction, and shall be liable and responsible for any and all expenses that may be incurred by the city in connection with any such action, omission or other violation, including a reasonable attorney's fee. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-95. - Preserving rights in pending litigation. 
By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. 
Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was amended and this zoning ordinance adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such amendment; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeiture may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been amended. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-96. - Preserving other ordinances not in conflict. 
The provisions of this chapter shall take precedent over those of any other existing ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights which may contain provisions which are less restrictive than those herein specified. However, nothing herein contained shall mitigate, interfere with, alter or repeal any provisions of any other ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights not in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 3-97. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part of provisions thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1750-C, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 2075 , Exh. A, 4-24-17)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1754, adopted Feb. 11, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 4, §§ 4-1—4-14, 4-31—4-35, 4-51, and enacted a new Ch. 4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1598, adopted August 8, 2005. 
Cross reference— Restrictions on bringing animals into city parks, § 12-1. 
State Law reference— Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; municipal authority to require restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(a)(1); registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code § 826.031 et seq.; vaccination of dogs and cats required, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.016; dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101 et seq.; subchapter of state law does not preempt municipal regulation or prohibition of dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.116(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal shall mean an animal which has been deserted, relinquished, or forsaken by its owner or which has no apparent owner, including stray or lost animals. 
Animal shall mean any living vertebrate or invertebrate, domestic or wild, not including man. 
Animal care services personnel shall mean the person(s) appointed by the chief of police with the consent of the city manager, to provide animal control and animal care services. 
At large shall mean off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or his employee or his agent by means of a leash, chain, rope, cord or such other personal presence and attention as will reasonably control a dog's actions and conduct. 
Cat shall be intended to mean both male and female. 
Dog shall be intended to mean both male and female. 
Dog and cat license is the printed or written permission issued by the city authorizing the holder to keep a dog and/or cat within the city. Dog and cat license tag is a metal tag on a design prescribed by the city and bearing the corresponding number of the dog and cat license. 
Domesticated cat means a cat that is socialized to humans and is appropriate as a companion to humans. 
Ear-tipping means a straight line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized. 
Feral cat shall mean a cat that exists in a wild or untamed state, either due to birth or reversion to a wild state from domestication. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral cat is extreme fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are completely or substantially unsocialized to humans. 
Feral cat caregiver shall mean a volunteer, uncompensated person who agrees to facilitate the trap-neuter-return program in accordance with this chapter and any rules and regulations established by the chief of police. 
Feral cat colony shall mean a group of cats that congregates, more or less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed a part of it. 
Ferret shall be intended to mean both male and female. 
Owner shall mean any person or persons, business entity or other type of entity owning, keeping, feeding, harboring or otherwise caring for a dog or cat, including keeping, harboring, feeding or otherwise caring for stray dogs or cats. An owner does not include a feral cat caregiver participating in an authorized Trap-Neuter-Return Program. 
Quarantine is to detain or isolate on account of suspected contagion. 
Trap-Neuter-Return Program means a program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are trapped, evaluated, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and returned to the area where they congregate. 
Vicious dog shall be any dog which has bitten or attempted to bite or attacked or attempted to attack any person in a vicious manner. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-2. - Licenses and registration required. 
The owner of any dog, cat or ferret over four (4) months of age shall license and register such owner's dogs, cats and ferrets yearly. Dog, cat and/or ferret licenses shall be issued by the city administrative office upon payment of a one-time license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each dog, cat or ferret. The owner shall state at the time application is made for such license and upon forms provided for such purposes his name and address, and name, breed, color and sex of each dog, cat and/or ferret. Owners of dogs, cats and/or ferrets who show proof that their dog, cat and/or ferret has been spayed or neutered shall be issued a license upon a one-time payment of the license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each dog, cat or ferret. Owners of dogs, cats and/or ferrets who show proof that their dog, cat and/or ferret has a microchip implant can register their animal at no charge. 
Every owner shall be required to provide each dog, cat and/or ferret with a collar and tag that shall be constantly worn. In case a dog, cat and/or ferret tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate receipt shall be issued showing the payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of a three dollars ($3.00) fee for such duplicate. Dog, cat and/or ferret tags shall not be transferable from one (1) dog, cat and/or ferret to another, and no refund shall be made on any dog, cat and/or ferret license fee because of death of the dog, cat and/or ferret or the owner's relocation from the city. 
An owner of a dog, cat and/or ferret can choose to have a RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) implanted under the skin of the animal performed at a veterinary hospital, in lieu of license tags. The microchip implant does not exempt the owner of the animal from registration. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-3. - Rabies protection; vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets. 
An owner of a dog, cat or ferret must have the animal vaccinated against rabies in a manner that satisfies the requirement of state law. Dogs, cats and ferrets must be vaccinated against rabies prior to four (4) months of age and again twelve (12) months after the first rabies vaccination. Subsequent booster rabies vaccinations must be repeated at one (1) or three (3) year intervals depending upon the vaccine used by the veterinarian. 
The licensed veterinarian vaccinating the animal shall furnish the owner a rabies tag made of durable material. A tag issued for a dog, cat and/or ferret must be attached to the collar of the animal and must be worn at all times. Rabies tags are not transferable. 
All dogs and cats within the city limits shall be currently immunized against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-4. - Procedure when animal bites or scratches persons. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having charge of any dog or cat which may have bitten, clawed or scratched a person to have such dog or cat confined by a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days, and if for any reason the dog or cat is not so confined by the owner or other person keeping the same, the police shall impound such pet for observation. If, at the expiration of ten (10) days, the health of the dog or cat is satisfactory, the dog or cat may be released upon the payment by the owner of all expenses incurred by such confinement and compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
In the alternative, at the discretion of the chief of police, any dog or cat subject to the requirements of this section may be confined for the required period of time by the owner or keeper of such dog or cat under the supervision and direction of the chief of police or a licensed veterinarian, provided that the permission hereby granted may be revoked by the chief of police, in which event the dog or cat shall be immediately transferred to a licensed veterinarian. If permitted to be confined by the owner, a licensed veterinarian shall be required to inspect such animal a minimum of two (2) times during the ten-day period, at the expense of the owner or keeper of the animal and the police may inspect the dog or cat at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-5. - Vicious dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any keeper of any vicious dog to permit any such dog to run at large regardless of any other provision contained in this chapter. Prosecution of any such owner of a vicious dog may be instituted in municipal court by any person filing a sworn complaint charging such owner with allowing or permitting a vicious dog to run at large, that such dog has bitten or attempted to bite or attacked or attempted to attack any person in a vicious manner. The person making the complaint must not have been at the time of such attack trespassing inside the home of the owner or within the enclosure of the dog and be not otherwise at fault. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-6. - Dogs and cats running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any dog to permit it to be outside of such owner's premises upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the city, unless the dog shall be at all times under the control of the owner or his employee or agent by means of a leash, chain, rope or cord of sufficient strength to control the actions of said dog . The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated cat shall not permit the domesticated cat to roam unsupervised. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-7. - Impounding. 
It shall be the duty of city animal care service personnel to apprehend any dog and/or cat found roaming at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and to impound such dog and/or cat in a designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility. Any cat deemed to be a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter by any person filing a sworn complaint may be impounded by city animal care services personnel. City animal care services personnel shall make a registry of each dog and/or cat impounded, entering the breed, color and sex and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-8. - Trapping. 
Animal care services personnel may, as an alternative to traditional capture equipment, utilize humane cage style traps as a means of apprehending animals deemed to be a nuisance on public property or city owned property. Animal care services personnel shall not trap any animal on private property unless the property owner or agent of the property owner requests the removal of a nuisance animal. All requests for animal care services personnel to trap on private property shall be in writing on the applicable request form provided by the chief of police for that purpose. Traps will not be set during weekends, city holidays or during times of inclement weather without the authorization of the chief of police. 
If the reported nuisance animal is of any domestic species of dog, cat or ferret, notification will be made to all homeowners within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the trapping location. Notification will be in writing and distributed on a door hanger a minimum of three (3) days prior to the date trapping will begin. All trapped domestic animals shall be impounded under the provisions of section 4-7, non-domestic animals, will be relocated away from residential areas unless the animal is of a species that relocation is disallowed by state law. 
Any person who is a property owner or agent of that property owner may trap nuisance non-domestic animals on their property. The trapping of all species of domestic animals, to include feral cats, stray cats and stray dogs, is the responsibility of animal care services to ensure all the provisions of animal cruelty laws are met. Any person who traps a domestic animal, to include feral cats and stray cats and stray dogs, may be subject to criminal prosecution if it is determined animal cruelty laws are violated. Any person who unintentionally traps a domestic animal, to include feral cats, stray cats and stray dogs, shall immediately release the animal at the site where it was trapped. The relocation and abandonment of any species of domestic animal is prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-9. - Notice to owner and redemption. 
Not later than three (3) days after the impounding of any dog and/or cat, the owner shall be notified. If the owner of the dog and/or cat is unknown, notice shall be posted within twenty-four (24) hours of impoundment for three (3) consecutive days at a conspicuous place in the Alamo Heights City Hall describing the dog and/or cat impounded. Any facility approved by the city council as the designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility shall retain an impounded animal for at least five (5) working days so that the owner of such animal shall have the opportunity to reclaim it. If its owner does not reclaim an impounded animal within five (5) working days from the date of impoundment, the designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility may, with approval of a representative of the city, offer for adoption, sell or dispose of such animal in accordance with standard humane procedures, including euthanasia. 
The owner may reclaim such dog and/or cat upon payment of (1) a license fee (if unregistered), (2) an administrative fee to the city for the impounding of said dog and/or cat, and (3) all boarding charges due the city's designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility. The owner must bring proof of current rabies vaccination when reclaiming the dog and/or cat at the city's designated veterinary hospital. If the animal is not currently vaccinated or the owner cannot find proof of current vaccination, the animal must be vaccinated, at the owner's expense, prior to the animal being released. 
The first time a dog and/or cat is reclaimed by its owner, no administrative fee is charged. The second time a dog and/or cat is reclaimed by its owner an administrative fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) will be charged. The third time a dog and/or cat is reclaimed by its owner an administrative fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be charged, the fourth and all subsequent times a dog and/or cat is reclaimed by its owner an administrative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-10. - Disposition of unclaimed dogs/cats. 
It shall be the duty of the operator of the designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility to keep all unclaimed dogs and/or cats delivered to it by the city animal warden for a minimum of five (5) working days from date of the impound. If after the expiration of five (5) days from the date of the impound, such dog and/or cat has not been redeemed, it may be disposed of by adoption, sale or destruction; provided, however, if the end of the five (5) days period falls on a Saturday or Sunday, or on a national holiday, the operator of the designated veterinary hospital/quarantine facility shall wait until the afternoon of the next business day prior to the adoption, sale, or destruction of such dog and/or cat. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-11. - Abandonment. 
No person, persons, or entity shall abandon any dog and/or cat, which the person or entity has within his or its control either temporarily or permanently within the corporate limits of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas; nor shall any person, person, or entity allow any dog and/or cat within his or its control either temporarily or permanently, to be left without proper shelter, food and water within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-12. - Inhumane treatment. 
No person, persons, firm, association, or corporation shall torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, fail to provide adequate shelter during inclement weather, unnecessarily or cruelly beat nor needlessly mutilate or kill any animal, nor carry any animal in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, in a cruel or inhume manner, nor procure the same to be done, within the corporate limits of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas. As used in this section, the words "torture" and "cruelly" include every act, omission or neglect whereby unnecessary pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-13. - Abandoned, injured, infected or diseased animals. 
The chief of police may order the destruction of abandoned, injured, infected or diseased animals found in the city in order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-14. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise sufficient care of an animal to prevent such animal from becoming a nuisance. It is hereby declared a nuisance for an animal to: 
(1)  Make or create loud and obnoxious noises such as barking, howling, or yelping which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or occupants of adjacent premises; 
(2)  Molest passersby; 
(3)  Chase pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles; 
(4)  Attack other animals; 
(5)  Defecate upon public or private property other than the property of the owner; 
(6)  Trespass upon private property other than the property of the owner in such a manner as to damage or disrupt such property, including digging up gardens or plants and foraging or overturning trash and garbage containers. 
It shall also be unlawful and a nuisance for any animal owner to permit accumulations of animal waste on his premises so as to create noxious odors or a health hazard. 
No culpable mental state shall be required to support conviction under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-15. - Feral cats/trap-neuter-return program. 
In order to effectively and humanely control feral cat populations within its jurisdictional boundaries, the city shall sponsor a trap-neuter-return program in an effort to reduce the feral cat population over time without the necessity of wholesale capture and euthanasia. The city may establish a fund or provide services to off-set the costs of trapping, neutering, and vaccinating captured feral cats that can be returned to an appropriate, controlled, protected, and authorized colony site. Caregivers for colonies, whether one (1) or several feral cats, may be aided by the city in providing traps, transportation to a spay/neuter facility and off-setting costs, to the extent that funding is available. 
Caregivers of feral cat colonies shall implement proper management and sterilization practices and seek the assistance of animal care services personnel and/or the chief of police in order to: 
(1)  Sterilize (spay/neuter) all adult cats that can be captured. Ear-tipping will be used as a means of visually identifying sterilized feral cats. 
(2)  Vaccinate, as required by law, all cats that can be captured against rabies, preferably with a three-year vaccine and against any other infectious disease as may be mandated by law. 
(3)  Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony before eight (8) weeks of age for domestication and placement. 
(4)  Make every attempt to remove sick or injured cats from the colony for immediate veterinarian care or humane euthanasia. 
(5)  Caregivers assuming responsibility for feeding feral cats will be responsible for adhering to the following regulations in order to avoid attracting wildlife and vermin either intentionally or unintentionally: 
(1)  Feral cats and feral cat colonies shall not be fed on city owned or public property, to include, roadways, alleys, easements, and right-of-ways. 
(2)  Feral cats and feral cat colonies shall only be fed on private property with authorization from the property owner or an authorized agent. 
(3)  Feral cats and feral cat colonies shall be fed using bowls, plates, pans, or a similar utensil to contain the food; food shall not be poured on the ground for the purpose of providing food. 
(4)  Food provided for feral cats or feral cat colonies shall not be left out during hours of darkness to avoid attracting wildlife or vermin. 
Animal care services personnel shall maintain all records of their activities relating to the city trap-neuter-return program to include proof of sterilization, vaccination, relocation, adoption, and medical care records. Other responsibilities include: 
(1)  Help to resolve complaints over the conduct of a colony caregiver or of cats within a managed colony. 
(2)  Maintain records and prepare monthly reports on the following: 
(a)  Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to the trap-neuter-return program; and 
(b)  Number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes. 
Enforcement: The city shall retain the following rights: 
(1)  The right to seize or remove cats from a colony that have not been vaccinated against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the disease; 
(2)  The right to seize/remove a cat from a colony that is creating a nuisance as defined in this chapter after the caregiver has been afforded thirty (30) days to remove and relocate the cat and has failed to do so; and 
(3)  The right to seize and remove a colony of cats when a caregiver is unable to provide care and management of the colony and has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute caregiver. 
The provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, animal care services personnel and police officers may investigate any nuisance complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 1880, 9-13-10)  
Secs. 4-16—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOMESTIC ANIMALS, KEEPING OF DOGS, CATS AND OTHERS 
 
Sec. 4-31. - Restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons or entity to maintain or keep, in the aggregate, more than six (6) adult dogs, domestic cats and ferrets on any premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to maintain or keep on any premises within the corporate limits of the city more than the number of adult dogs and/or domestic cats designated by the police chief in a variance granted to such person or persons. 
As used in this section, the words, "adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets" shall mean a dog, domestic cat and/or ferret that is six (6) months or older. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-32. - Keeping of newborn offspring. 
The keeping by any person of newborn offspring of dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets authorized hereby for a period of six (6) months or less shall not constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-33. - Variance; maximum authorized; authority of police chief to revoke. 
The police chief, upon application for variance to section 4-31 as hereinafter provided, may grant or deny, in whole or in part, an application for variance to section 4-31 of this Code. The police chief, upon granting a variance to section 4-31 of this Code, shall designate the number of adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets authorized to be maintained or kept by the variance granted, but in no event shall the number of adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets authorized by the granting of the variance to section 4-31 of this Code exceed, in the aggregate, eight (8) adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-34. - Application for variance: Procedure. 
Any person who desires to maintain or keep as a temporary care-giver or foster agent in the aggregate more than six (6) adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets within the corporate limits of the city, may file a written application with the police department requesting the police chief to grant a variance. 
The written application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person making such application for variance. 
(2)  The applicant's reason(s) for requesting the variance. 
(3)  The number of adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets the applicant desires to maintain or keep in excess of the basic number of adult dogs, domestic cats and/or ferrets allowed by section 4-31. 
(4)  The length of time requested for the variance. 
The application must be signed and dated by the applicant. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) must accompany each application to cover the expense of processing the application. 
The police department, upon receipt of the application and the application fee, shall: 
(1)  Notify the applicant of the date the application will be considered. 
(2)  Notify by mail all homeowners within a two hundred (200) foot radius of applicant's property of the application for variance to section 4-31 and the date that the police chief will consider the application for variance. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-35. - Other domestic animals: Restrictions. 
Bovines, sheep, goats, equines, swine, poultry and pigeons. It shall be unlawful to keep bovines, sheep, goats, equines, swine, poultry and pigeons in, on, or near any premises in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 1989, 3-24-14)  
Secs. 4-36—4-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS, KEEPING OR HARBORING 
 
Sec. 4-51. - Restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the corporate limits of the city any warm-blooded carnivorous animal or a species such as, but not limited to, ape, baboon, bear, or lion which ordinarily live in a state of nature without the aid or care of humans, or to keep or harbor any cold-blooded carnivorous animal of a species such as, but not limited to, rattlesnake, constricting snakes, alligator, or crocodile, which ordinarily live in a state of nature without the aid or care of humans. 
It shall be unlawful for any person on public or private property to attract or feed any wild animal or bird considered to be a predatory species to include, but not limited to, raccoons, opossums, skunks, coyotes, fox, hawks, and owls which ordinarily live in a state of nature without the aid or care of humans. 
Nothing in this provision shall prevent the keeping of fish, spiders, insects, frogs, toads, lizards, snakes of a non-poisonous species, turtles, or non-constricting snakes, subject, however, to all other applicable provisions of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Secs. 4-52—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the Alamo Heights Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1, section 1-5. Each day that a violation of this Code continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Sec. 4-62. - Injunctive relief. 
The City of Alamo Heights may invoke civil remedies to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter, and the same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the misdemeanor proceedings prescribed for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1754, 2-11-08)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 5, §§ 5-1—5-412, and enacted a new chapter 5 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate and require permits for construction of buildings, Art. VII, § 4; building regulation generally, Art. XVII, § 1. 
Cross reference— Hours for construction limited by noise nuisances, § 10-8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; sign regulations, Ch. 15; subdivisions, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; time for issuance of municipal building permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.904. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, repealed art. I in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. I, §§ 5-1—5-13 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010; and Ord. No. 2008, adopted Oct. 27, 2014. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the director, the directors' authorized designee, or the fire chief where applicable. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-2. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person or entity who 1) violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply therewith, 2) commits any act in violation of any code adopted by reference, 3) constructs, alters, repairs, excavates, demolishes, or demolishes by neglect in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, or 4) commits, takes part, directs, or assists in any such violation or who maintains or uses any structure or premises or part thereof in which any violation exists, from which no appeal is taken, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any owner or owners of any buildings, premises, or any part thereof, who participates in or knowingly or willingly permits any violation of this chapter, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, tenant or agent of any person or corporation employed in connection therewith who assists in the commission of any such violations, shall be guilty of a separate offense punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-3. - Injunctive relief. 
Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who shall commit any of the acts described by this chapter, or be guilty of any of the omissions thereof, shall be liable to injunctive action prohibiting the violation of this chapter and shall be subject to being mandatorily enjoined and shall be liable and responsible for any and all expenses that may be incurred by the city in connection with any such action, omission or other violation, including reasonable attorneys' fees. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-4. - Notice of violation. 
The director may give notice to any person or entity who violates this chapter, and such person or entity who receives such notice shall correct all violations alleged in the notice. Failure to correct any such alleged violations shall be subject to penalties under section 5-2 and injunctive relief under section 5-3. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-5. - Stop work orders, revocation, suspension, or denial of permit. 
Notwithstanding other sanctions set forth in this chapter, if any of the provisions of this chapter are not complied with, a stop work order in accordance with the adopted codes may be placed on the property and the permit may be revoked or suspended by the director. If a person has not followed the terms, conditions or specifications of this chapter in work done pursuant to a prior permit and such work has not been corrected, new permits may be denied or additional requirements may be imposed. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-6. - Authorized hours of construction. 
(a)  Work activity including, but not limited to, erection, excavation, demolition, construction, alterations or repairs on any building or other structure, is restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. for work preparation activities, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. for actual work activities and 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for work cleanup activities and vacation of the site, Monday through Friday. 
Exceptions: This subsection shall not apply to the following: (1) Any work performed by the homeowner or business owner without contracted labor or contracted assistance; (2) interior painting and exterior painting performed by a contractor that does not generate noise audible to neighbors; (3) work of any kind performed in an enclosed building by a contractor that does not generate noise audible to neighbors; (4) the servicing of restaurant grease traps and (5) landscaping related activities (excluding earthmoving and structural improvements) performed by a contractor are not subject to this provision, except as section 10-8(e) of the Code of Ordinances may apply to such activities. 
(b)  Limitation on weekend and holiday work activity: 
(1)  There shall be no work activity on weekends or city holidays (see section 2-1 [Official holidays—Listed] or as modified by the city council), save and except for those types of work activity specifically exempted in subsection (a) above. 
(2)  Work activity exempted in subsection (a) above shall not take place on the city holidays of the Fourth of July, Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's Day. 
(3)  Hours of work activity set out in subsection (a) above shall apply to said exempted work activity when such work is performed on weekends and permitted holidays. 
(4)  Work that is permissible on weekends and holidays may otherwise be limited by the inability to secure inspections from the city on such days. 
(c)  Unless work activities are specifically exempted in subsections (a) and (b) above, there shall be no work prior to or after the hours listed in subsections (a) or on prohibited days without written permission issued by the director. Permission may be given for work that cannot be performed during the allowed hours and days of construction due to extenuating circumstances that might be detrimental to the property, or for work that would, if delayed, be or create a hazard to public health and safety. Requests for exemption to the authorized hours of construction beyond what is already permitted must be submitted in writing at least three (3) days prior to proposed work request. Requests shall include 1) reason for requested exemption, 2) specific hours/days being requested, 3) number of workers proposed, 4) number of vehicles proposed, and 5) complete scope of the proposed exempted work and tools to be utilized. If granted, a copy of the approved notice must be posted on the property next to the approved building permit and be clearly visible from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  This section of the Code of Ordinances in no way limits or overrides the prohibitions against other violations noted elsewhere in said Code, such as the prohibition against the creation of noise nuisances [section 10-8]. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-7. - Non-transferability of permits. 
Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable from the person or entity receiving the permit to another person or entity without the written approval of the director. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  The adopted 2015 International Code Series and the 2014 International Electrical Code Series, provides the minimum standards to safeguard the public safety, health and general welfare by detailing specific code requirements for building, fire, gas, sewer, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems alteration or construction. Any person directly affected by a decision or interpretation of the adopted codes by an inspector, the building official or the fire marshal or a notice or order issued under any adopted codes shall have the right to appeal per section 113 of the International Building Code, section R112 of the International Residential Code, section 108 of the International Fire Code, section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, section 109 of the International Mechanical Code, section 109 of the International Plumbing Code, section 109 of the International Energy Conservation Code, section 109 of the International Fuel Gas Code, and section 112 of the International Existing Building Code. This section is intended to inform the general public of the formal appeals process included within each adopted code when an agreement cannot be reached through administrative appeal. 
(b)  Administrative appeal shall be to the director or fire chief as applicable, and then if agreement cannot be reached the appeal shall be forwarded by the director or fire chief to the city manager for review. 
(c)  If agreement cannot be reached through the administrative appeal process, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals as described in such codes or equivalent in any code adopted by this chapter. The city manager or city manager's designee in consultation with the mayor shall appoint the board of appeals, consisting of members within the appropriate expertise(s). The board of appeals, as appointed, shall perform the functions required of the board of appeals in such codes or equivalent in any code adopted by this chapter. 
(d)  If the applicant disagrees with the ruling of the board of appeals, the applicant may appeal to the city council for final ruling. 
(e)  Requests for appeal to the board of appeals or thereafter to the city council, requires a written application for appeal be submitted to the director's or fire chief's office within twenty (20) days after the day the previous ruling, decision, notice or order was served or provided. An application for appeal must state and shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply, or the requirements of the code are adequately satisfied by other means. Any application for appeal shall include code specific related discussion points which provide rebutting information to the original code application, or interpretation. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-9. - Effect on city's liability. 
Any permit or certificate of inspection that the work therein referred to has been installed in conformity with the requirements of the city's codes may not be the basis of any claim against the city because the owner of the premises, the contractor and all other persons concerned shall be obligated to see that all matters, things and acts to which this chapter and such permit or certificate relates shall conform to the regulations of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-10. - Preservation of ordinances. 
The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over those of any other code provision, except chapter 3 zoning, which may contain provisions that are less restrictive than those specified in this chapter. However, nothing contained in this chapter shall mitigate, interfere with, alter or repeal any provisions of any other ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-11. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any other provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-12. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for the processing and issuance of plan reviews, permits, inspections, registrations, licenses or certificates shall be reviewed and adopted as needed by city council and listed in the schedule of development fees. A copy of the schedule of development fees shall be kept on file in the director's office. 
(b)  All plan review fees and administrative fees shall be due upon receipt of applications. 
(c)  All remaining balances, if applicable, shall be due upon issuance of any permits, inspections, registrations, licenses, or certificates. 
(d)  In the event that the work for which a permit has been issued as authorized in this chapter has not been started, the director may, upon written request from the applicant to cancel the permit, refund the permit fee, less an administrative charge equivalent to fifteen (15) percent of the permit fee but not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(e)  The director shall have the authority to waive or reduce any fees provided for in the adopted schedule of development fees for public agencies, licensees, franchisees, certificated telecommunications providers and contractors which provide the city with construction or other permitted services. 
Specifically, the development fees for public school district projects valued at more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) shall be reduced by sixty-six (66) percent from the city published total building permit fee and plan review fees. The public-school district costs for outside plan and engineering reviews shall be the actual costs of such reviews plus an administrative fee of three (3) percent. In no case shall trade permit fees and stormwater permit fees be reduced below the city published fee schedule. 
(f)  Certain substantial or complex commercial and multi-family projects may require outside review of plans by engineers, architects, surveyors, attorneys and other professional experts. If the director determines that such outside review is necessary or appropriate, the applicant for a project shall reimburse the city for such outside review prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, license, registration or certificate. Examples of a substantial or complex project would be an apartment project, a shopping center or a multi-story building in which architectural review, engineering review, FEMA review and/or the sale of public property are components of the project. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17; Ord. No. 2118 , 12-10-18; Ord. No. 2131 , § 1, 6-10-19)  
Sec. 5-13. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Accessory building or structure(s) shall mean a structure which is built, constructed, or placed and which is detached from a principal structure on the same tract of land, and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or use and which does not contain a postal address. Accessory structures include but are not limited to arbors, detached garages, garden utility sheds, decks, detached gazebos, temporary storage facilities, and swimming pools. 
Administrative review is the formal process of reviewing proposed projects through city staff to ensure compliance with all applicable adopted city codes and ordinances. 
Authority having jurisdiction as referenced within the adopted National or International Codes shall refer to the City of Alamo Heights. 
Block shall mean a length of street right-of-way along one (1) side of the street from one (1) intersection to the next adjoining intersection. 
Building. See structure. 
Building official shall refer to the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration, interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Building shell means the architecture of the exterior enclosure of a building, including the framework, the perimeter/exterior walls, the building core and columns, and other structural, load-bearing elements of the building but does not include installation of typical finish out materials such as interior wiring, interior plumbing, mechanical equipment, sheetrock, paint, drop-ceilings, other finish materials not listed. 
Certified arborist means an individual certified by the certified arborist program of the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
City shall refer to the City of Alamo Heights. 
City inspector shall refer to the city's building official, fire inspector, or their designee. 
Compatibility shall mean harmony with the existing neighborhood, site configurations, development patterns, and the character of the development envelope found within the adjacent and immediate block area, as demonstrated in the demolition review application, including roof pitch, scale, massing, garage and driveway location and setbacks. Adjacent and immediate block area shall include but not be limited to all properties along: 
(1)  The specific block where the project is proposed; 
(2)  The block to the each side of the project's block; and 
(3)  The blocks directly across the street of the three (3) blocks identified above. 
Contractor, whether general or tradesman, means any person who sells, constructs, or supervises or manages the construction of, or contracts for the construction of or the supervision or management of the construction of any work as regulated by this chapter. 
Critical root zone means the area measured as one (1) foot of radial distance outward from the trunk for every inch of tree diameter at DBH. 
Demolition shall mean any intentional or unintentional act of dismantling, pulling down, destroying, removing, razing or moving a structure or any structural portion thereof, or commencing the work of moving or of total or substantial destruction of a structure or portion thereof. For the purposes of demolition review as described in article IX, demolition is defined quantitatively as: 
(1)  Removal or encapsulation of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the framed structure of exterior walls facing public streets, or a street-facing elevation if the tract of land is landlocked; or, 
(2)  Removal or encapsulation of more than fifty (50) percent of the framed structure of all exterior walls and/or roofs. 
Exception: Minor repair and routine maintenance. 
Those activities which constitute ordinary repair and maintenance include but are not restricted to: 
a.  Repair using the same material and design as the original; 
b.  Repainting, using the same color; and 
c.  Reroofing, using the same type and color of material. 
Demolition review shall mean the public process of presenting proposed demolition and/or replacement projects to the architectural review board and/or city council. (See also definitions for demolition, significance, and compatibility). 
Department of community development shall refer to the department which administers 1) permits, 2) plan reviews, 3) building, trade, and health inspections, 4) applications and processes for boards and commissions review, and 5) special events. This department shall act as the department of building safety as described in the adopted building codes. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means diameter (diameter = circumference divided by pi or approximately 3.142) at breast height of a tree trunk measured at a height of four (4) feet and six (6) inches above natural grade. 
Director shall refer to any director, chief, or their designee as assigned by the city manager. 
Drainage type shall mean the following: 
Type A means all drainage flow for a property is designed to flow towards the front property line and to a point of discharge at the street or right-of-way. 
Type B means all drainage flow for a property is designed to split and flow both to the front property line and the rear property line and to points of discharge at the street, alley, or right-of-way. 
Type C means all drainage flow for a property is design to flow towards the rear property line and to a point of discharge at the street, alley, or right-of-way. 
Earth fill shall mean raising grade by means of filling in excess of three (3) feet above natural ground level at any point. Maximum slope for earth fills shall not exceed a ratio of three (3) to one (1), a rise of one (1) foot height to three (3) foot horizontally. 
Encapsulation shall mean to enclose, cover up, or build over the top of an existing structure whether the existing structure to be covered is removed or not. 
General contractor shall refer to any person who shall oversee, supervise, manages, or aids in construction as regulated by this chapter and who is responsible for multiple tradesman. 
Heritage tree shall mean any tree or shrub which meets the minimum trunk size requirements as defined in section 5-152 of this chapter. 
Improvement shall mean any of those things which require a permit, such as buildings (either permanent or temporary), land development, concrete or asphalt paving, swimming pools, fences, retaining walls, earth fill, or excavation and landscaping. 
Main building or structure(s) shall mean a principal structure(s) which contains the primary occupancy or use and includes a postal mailing address. 
Material improvement shall mean a modification to an existing building that either increases or decreases the building's total square footage or modifies a buildings foundation, exterior walls, or structural roof components. 
Minor repairs shall include but not be limited to improvements which do not pose a potential hazard to the general public, or occupants of a structure and which do not require verification through inspection for compliance with any adopted code or this chapter. 
Municipality as referenced within the adopted National or International Codes shall refer to the City of Alamo Heights. 
Oak wilt means a fungus that attacks oak trees by plugging water-conducting vessels, reducing flow of water up the stem of the tree, often causing leaves to wilt and fall prematurely and can travel up to seventy-five (75) feet in every direction to affect other oak trees. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm, trust, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Permanent foundation shall refer to any underlying or substructure for a framed structure above which support the exterior walls. 
Person shall include any contractor, business, corporation, partnership, owner, or other entity as well as an individual. 
Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon. 
Reactive complaint investigation shall mean an investigation in which the city conducts in reaction to a complaint. 
Registered tree service vendors means private businesses that provide tree services to property owners and are registered with the City of Alamo Heights. 
Routine maintenance shall mean simple, small-scale activities associated with regular (daily, weekly, monthly, etc.) maintenance and general upkeep of a building (reference section 5-50(c)). 
Significant structure shall mean any structure or portion thereof that in whole or in part meets one (1) or more criteria in section 5-134(h), and has been so determined by the city council. 
Stormwater and drainage plan (SDP) means the drainage and stormwater management plan which provides all necessary plan sheets, profiles, hydraulic calculations, culvert pipe size and locations, detention basin, and all other necessary information which has been prepared, sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer for a particular residential, commercial, or industrial development. 
Structure, main or accessory, shall mean anything built or constructed, whether above or below grade, which is occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Tradesman shall refer to any person who shall oversee, supervise, manage, or aid in construction, as regulated by this chapter, but who shall act under a single function such as mechanical, electrical, plumbing, landscaping, roofing, and general maintenance work but does not include individual laborers. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Secs. 5-14—5-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, repealed art. II in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 5-25—5-33 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010; and Ord. No. 2035 , adopted Oct. 26, 2015. 
 
Sec. 5-25. - Resolution of conflicts. 
Whenever any conflict shall occur between the international codes and the national code, the most restrictive shall apply. When a conflict exists between any adopted code and this Code, this Code shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-26. - International Building Code, International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, International Existing Building Code, and International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by reference the International Building Code (I.B.C.), 2015 edition, inclusive of ANSI A117.1 current edition as indicated in Chapter 11 Accessibility, the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (I.R.C.), 2015 edition, inclusive of Appendix G Swimming Pools, Appendix H Patio Covers, and Appendix K Sound Transmission, the International Existing Building Code (I.E.B.C.), 2015 edition, and the International Energy Conservation Code (I.E.C.C.), 2015 edition, all as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such codes as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17) 
State Law reference— International Building Code applicable statewide as municipal commercial building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.216, International Residential Code as statewide municipal residential building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212; residential and building codes not applicable to electrical wiring and components, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.213.  
Sec. 5-27. - Same—Purpose. 
The purpose of the codes, as adopted by reference in section 5-26, 5-28, 5-29, 5-30, 5-31, and 5-32, shall be to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, height, area and maintenance of buildings, or other structures, including, but not limited to, signs, within the city, and provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and establish fire districts. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-28. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Property Maintenance Code (I.P.M.C.), 2015 edition inclusive of Appendix A Boarding Standard, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such code as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17) 
State Law reference— Property rehabilitation code applicable statewide as municipal commercial building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.215.  
Sec. 5-29. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by reference the International Mechanical Code (I.M.C.), 2015 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code (I.F.G.C.), 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such code as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-30. - National Electrical Code and the International Code Council Electrical Code, administrative provisions adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by reference the National Electrical Code (N.E.C.), 2014 edition, as recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and the International Code Council Electrical Code - Administrative Provisions, 2014 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such codes as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17) 
State Law reference— National electrical code applicable statewide for construction in municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214.  
Sec. 5-31. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by reference the International Plumbing Code (I.P.C.), 2015 edition, and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such codes as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning plumbing and house draining, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.012.  
Sec. 5-32. - International Fire Code adopted. 
There are hereby adopted by reference the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, inclusive of Appendix B Fire Flow for Buildings, Appendix C Fire Hydrant Location and Distribution, Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads, and Appendix E Hazard Categories, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions of such codes as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, or inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or any statute of the State of Texas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim herein. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-33. - References and terms. 
(a)  Wherever the term "administrative authority" is used in the adopted codes, it shall be construed to mean the city's building official, fire chief, or their designee. 
(b)  Whenever the term "assistants" is used in the adopted codes, it shall be construed to mean the city inspectors such as but not limited to the city's building official, fire inspector, or any private third party inspector. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Secs. 5-34—5-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, repealed art. III in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 5-40—5-46 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010; Ord. No. 2001, adopted Sept. 8, 2014; and Ord. No. 2035 , adopted Oct. 26, 2015. 
 
Sec. 5-40. - Amendments to the International Building Code, International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(a)  International Building Code. 
(1)  Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency shall be amended to read as follows: 
The Department of Community Development is hereby created and the official in charge of code administration, interpretation and enforcement shall be known as the building official. 
(2)  Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit is hereby deleted but deletion does not include sections 105.2.1 Emergency Repairs, 105.2.2 Repairs, or 105.2.3 Public service agencies. 
(3)  Section 1507.8 Wood Shingles shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with section 1507.8 Wood Shingles Prohibited to read as follows: 
Wood shingles and wood shakes shall not be used for the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling and renovation of the roofs of structures in the City of Alamo Heights, except that wood shingles and wood shakes may be used for the repair and replacement of existing wood shingle roofs and wood shake roofs. 
(4)  Section 1507.9 Wood Shakes shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with section 1507.9 Wood Shakes Prohibited to read as follows: 
Wood shingles and wood shakes shall not be used for the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling and renovation of the roofs of structures in the City of Alamo Heights, except that wood shingles and wood shakes may be used for the repair and replacement of existing wood shingle roofs and wood shake roofs. 
(5)  Chapter 11 
Accessibility. All buildings or portions of buildings must comply with the accessibility standards adopted by the State. Projects over $50,000 shall be submitted to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for review, inspection, and approval in accordance with State Law. 
(6)  Section 1009. 
Accessible means of egress. 
All buildings or portions of buildings must comply with the accessibility standards adopted by the State. Projects over $50,000 shall be submitted to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for review, inspection, and approval in accordance with State Law. 
(b)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(1)  Section R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency shall be amended to read as follows: 
The Department of Community Development is hereby created and the official in charge of code administration, interpretation and enforcement shall be known as the building official. 
(2)  Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is hereby deleted but does not include sections R105.2.1 Emergency Repairs, R105.2.2 Repairs, or R105.2.3 Public service agencies, 
(3)  Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code is deleted and replaced with the following: 
GROUND 
SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN TEMP 	ICE 
BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED 	FLOOD HAZARDS 	AIR 
FREEZING INDEX 	MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP 
	Speed 
(mph) 	Topographic 
effects 		Weathering 	Frostline 
Depth 	Termite 					
5 	115 	No 	A 	Negligible 	0 	Moderate to Heavy 	30;deg; 	No 	See Ch. 7 	16 	68.7;deg; 
 
(4)  Section R905.7 Wood Shingles shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with section 905.7 Wood Shingles Prohibited to read as follows: 
Wood shingles and wood shakes shall not be used for the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling and renovation of the roofs of structures in the City of Alamo Heights, except that wood shingles and wood shakes may be used for the repair and replacement of existing wood shingle roofs and wood shake roofs. 
(5)  Section R905.8 Wood Shakes shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with section 905.7 Wood Shakes Prohibited to read as follows: 
Wood shingles and wood shakes shall not be used for the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling and renovation of the roofs of structures in the City of Alamo Heights, except that wood shingles and wood shakes may be used for the repair and replacement of existing wood shingle roofs and wood shake roofs. 
(6)  Chapters 35—43 "electrical provisions" are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(7)  Section R313.2 One and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. Shall be deleted in its entirety in compliance with Texas State Senate bill 1410 Sec. 12 Sec. 1301.551. 
(8)  Section R903.4 Roof Drainage is amended by adding Section R903.4.2 Gutters and downspouts to read as follows: R903.4.2 Gutters and downspouts. Any Group R or Group U occupancy with roof edges less than three feet to any property line shall be provided with gutters and downspouts to direct roof water away from adjacent property. 
(9)  Section M1305.1.3 is amended by adding Subsection M1305.1.2.2, Access for cooling or heating appliance, to read as follows: M1305.1.3.2 Access for cooling or heating appliance. For new residential applications, or substantial remodel, where the location of the cooling or heating appliance is installed or moved to the attic space, access shall be provided with a permanent ladder or fold-away ladder or a direct access door opening from the house on the same floor level. 
(10)  Section M2005.2 Prohibited locations, is amended as follows: M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. Storage type water heaters shall not be installed in an attic unless accessible from a door opening from the house on the same floor level. Exemption: replacement of existing storage type water heaters in attics shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17; Ord. No. 2146 , § 3, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 5-41. - Amendments to the International Existing Building Code, and International Energy Conservation Code. 
(a)  International Existing Building Code. 
(b)  International Energy Conservation Code. R403.3.1 Insulation (Prescriptive), is amended by adding a second exception as follows: Supply and return ducts in attics shall be insulated to a minimum of R-6 where 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter and greater, where the seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) of the installed cooling equipment is higher than the minimum required by federal law for climate zone 2. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17; Ord. No. 2146 , § 3, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 5-42. - Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  Section 108.2 Closing of vacant structures shall be amended to include section 108.2.2 Standards for securing buildings to read as follows: 
To protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public, structures which are open and unsecured allowing for unauthorized access to the structure shall be secured according to this section. The boarding of the doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
1)  Securing by boarding. Windows and similar openings shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch nominal or its equivalent. Vent holes may be required, as deemed necessary by the city. The plywood shall be secured in place by 2 × 4 or 4 × 4 cross members, secured to the plywood by three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch plated carriage bolts with large washers at each end and with the cross member turned so that the carriage bolt goes through the larger dimension. Bolts used to secure the cross member shall be threaded to the correct length. A minimum of two (2) cross members shall be used on each window and, depending on the size of the opening, additional cross members may be required. Each cross member shall be a continuous piece of lumber, and each must extend at least one (1) foot past the window opening in each direction. Bolts and nuts used to secure the cross members to the plywood must be tightened enough to slightly deflect the wood. Bolt heads must fit tightly against the wood and not give a surface for pliers or pry bars. 
2)  Exterior doors. Exterior doors shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch nominal or its equivalent, fitted to the entry doorjamb with maximum one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch clearance for each edge. The existing door should be removed and stored inside the building. The plywood shall be attached to three (3) horizontal 2 × 4 wooden crossbars each with two (2) three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch carriage bolts and matching hardware. The plywood shall be attached to the door entry with three case hardened strap hinges of the types specified by the building official and the plywood shall be secured by a case hardened steel hasp and minimum two-inch case hardened padlock also of the type specified by the city. 
3)  Painting of boarded openings. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of one (1) coat of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
4)  Alternative methods of securing a building. Upon written request submitted to the city, the building official may approve alternative methods of securing a vacant and unoccupied building or structure. In making the determination to approve any alternative method, the city shall consider the aesthetic and other impacts of such method on the immediate neighborhood and the extent to which such method provides adequate and long-term security against the unauthorized entry to the property. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-43. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  Section 306.3.2 Access for cooling or heating appliance, as follows: Access for cooling or heating appliance. For new residential applications, or substantial remodel, where the location of the cooling or heating appliance is installed or moved to the attic space, access shall be provided with a permanent ladder or fold-away ladder or a direct access door opening from the house on the same floor level. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-44. - Amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
(a)  Section 210.24 Branch-Circuit Requirements - Summary inclusive of Table 210.24 is hereby amended to require the minimum size of conductors for branch circuits and feeder wiring to be minimum No. 12 AWG copper for 15 amp circuits. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-45. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
(a)  Section 502.3 Water Heaters installed in attics. Amended as follows: Storage type water heaters shall not be installed in an attic unless accessible from a door opening from the house on the same floor level. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided with an opening an unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the water heater. The passageway shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length when measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the water heater. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space at least 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm) where such dimensions are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. Exemption: replacement of existing storage type water heaters in attics shall be permitted. 
(b)  International Fuel Gas Code. No amendments adopted 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Sec. 5-46. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
(a)  Section 5601.1 Explosives & Fireworks shall be amended to delete all listed exceptions, except for the following: 
(1)  The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard or National Guard. 
(2)  Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia. 
(3)  The possession, storage and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging requirements. 
(4)  The possession, storage and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg) of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal consumption. 
(5)  The use of explosive materials by federal, state and local regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities. 
(6)  Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than 50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials. 
(7)  The possession, storage and use of blank industrial-power load cartridges when packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging regulations. 
(8)  Transportation in accordance with DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-185. 
(9)  Items preempted by federal regulations. 
(b)  Section 5704.2 Tank Storage shall be amended to read as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no flammable or combustible liquids stored in above ground or below ground tanks within the City of Alamo Heights with the following exception(s): 
a.  For road construction projects, containers must be approved, in a secure location, and approved by the fire marshal. Each project shall be reviewed on a case by case basis but in no case shall the liquids stored exceed 500 gallons of capacity. 
b.  In the event of a large scale natural or man-made disaster with approval by the fire chief or his/her designee. 
c.  At an approved commercial fuel dispensing/filling station. 
(c)  Section 6106.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no dispensing/filling of LPG containers within the City of Alamo Heights with the following exception(s): 
a.  From an approved location (Service Station) by the city and only by a qualified attendant, 
b.  Local deliveries can be made via truck to fill approved tanks. 
c.  At an approved commercial Gasoline service station, as defined in the City's adopted zoning code. 
(d)  Chapters 20 Aviation Facilities, 25 Fruit and Crop Ripening, 27 Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities, 29 Manufacture of Organic Coatings, and 36 Marinas shall be deleted in their entirety and all such uses are hereby prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2090 , Exh. A, 10-9-17)  
Secs. 5-47—5-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMIT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5-50. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any person, owner or authorized agent who, within city limits, intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or demolish any building, structure, or barrier or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any smoke, fire, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, which are regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the city and obtain the required registration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or authorized agent to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any fence, wall, building, sign, pavement or structure in the City of Alamo Heights, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such work from the director. Without a valid permit, no new construction of any type shall be undertaken, nor shall any improvement, alteration or change be made to any property or structure within the city limits for any of the following (for exceptions see subsection (c) below): 
(1)  Framing, foundation or envelope [including exterior and interior finishes] of any building, fence or any structure, [including demolition], 
(2)  Fire protection or prevention systems, 
(3)  Landscaping on any property, other than single family or duplex residential units, 
(4)  Electrical wiring of any building, nor shall any building within the limits of the city be wired for the placing therein of electric lights, motors, heating devices or other electrical apparatus, except telephones, 
(5)  Mechanical, plumbing, sewer and gas systems of any property or structure, 
(6)  The city's right-of-way {reference chapter 16}, 
(7)  Grade alteration which creates an earth fill in excess of three (3) feet above natural ground level at any point; 
(c)  No permit shall be required for routine maintenance. Routine maintenance shall be defined as in section 5-13 of this chapter and may include work such as: 
(1)  Refinishing wood floors, interior painting, wall papering, tiling, carpeting, or installing cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work; 
(2)  The replacement of missing, fallen, rotten, or broken shingles, siding, fascia trim, decking, exterior doors with the same material and finished color; 
(3)  Installing swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling; 
(4)  Minor landscaping, including the replacement of or the planting of small bushes, trees, shrubs in quantities less than twelve (12) pieces, and which do not require excavation to a depth greater than twenty-four (24) inches; 
(5)  Replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles; 
(6)  Replacement of fuses and bulbs, light globes, fluorescent or neon tubes, damaged motors, defective receptacles, switches, cords or minor parts of existing equipment already installed under a previous permit; 
(7)  Replacing filters, portable household appliances, or plumbing fixtures such as toilets, faucets and hose bibs; 
(8)  Repair of leaks in drains or pipes; provided, however, that if any concealed trap or pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code; and 
(9)  Repair of leaks or removal of stoppages in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(d)  Where code violations were noted during routine inspections or reactive complaint investigations, a permit shall be required for the repair or correction of the violation and must be requested and approved prior to repair regardless of the scope of work. Inspections shall be required as per article V of this chapter. 
(e)  In an emergency or in the case of emergency repairs, the extent of which cannot be determined beforehand, it will be permissible for the permit to be taken out by the next city business day after completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-51. - Work without permit and expired permit procedures. 
(a)  If work requiring a permit was started without a valid permit, and all plans and application have been reviewed for compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, an applicant may obtain a permit by paying double the regular permit fee. 
(b)  Work shall begin within such period of time following issuance of the permit as may be limited in such permit and shall be completed within such further time as may be therein provided. Unless formal activity, such as specific inspections required within this chapter, are requested, completed and approved by the director's office within the prescribed time, the permit shall become inoperative and void as authority for any further work. Formal activity as described above shall act as an automatic renewal regarding the permits expiration date. Automatic renewal shall reset the expiration date to six (6) months from date of said formal activity. 
(c)  In the event that an active permit is due to or already has expired, and work remains to be accomplished under the original scope of the permit, the director may issue an extension of the permit upon written application for such action and payment of all required fee(s). Such application may be in the form of a letter to the director explaining the request and providing the same information, updated, as the original permit application. 
(d)  In the event that a permit is allowed to expire without an extension requested and granted, and a request for extension is submitted beyond thirty (30) days from the expiration date, the director may issue a new permit and require the applicant to pay any administrative fee and penalty fee(s). 
(e)  The director may deny any renewal request, or suspend or revoke any permit with cause. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-52. - Persons authorized to request and receive permits. 
(a)  In the absence of different guidance from a state statute or from the city council, the director shall issue permits only to those individuals noted herein. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued only to the property owner, or on behalf of the property owner to a registered general contractor, a registered tradesman, or a licensed/registered design professional, pursuant to this chapter. The property owner's signature is required on all submitted permits. Should the property owner desire, the owner may limit or specify others to whom he wishes to delegate authority to request and receive permits. 
(c)  The possession of an electrician or plumber master certification/license, with photographic identification, is required in order to obtain a permit for said tradesman. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-53. - Contractor's registration requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building, sign or structure in the City of Alamo Heights, or cause the same to be done, unless such person, firm or corporation is the holder of a valid registration with said city to perform such work. Such person, firm or corporation shall be herein termed registrant. In extending the rights and privileges of such registration, said city makes no statement of the technical competency of those so registered, and no manner of license is proffered. 
(b)  No person shall render any general construction, repair, alteration, or improvements to any structures or property as described in subsection 5-50(a) or (b) or commence or continue construction in the public right-of-way within the limits of the City of Alamo Heights unless said person or entity complies with the requirement of this chapter and chapter 16 streets and sidewalks. All contractors requesting to do work that requires the issuance of a permit in subsection 5-50(a) or (b) shall be registered by the City of Alamo Heights and said registration shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. Contractors shall be registered as either a general contractor or a tradesman. 
(c)  An applicant for general contractor registration under this article shall provide to the director the following information: 
(1)  The complete name, complete mailing address and telephone number of the firm or corporation, 
(2)  The name and private mailing address of a principal of the firm or corporation who is a person authorized to bind the firm or corporation in legal agreements, 
(3)  If the registration is to be as an individual only, the name, mailing address and telephone number of the individual. 
(d)  Tradesmen working under the scope of a general contractor are required to register with the city. 
(e)  An application for registration as a tradesman shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number(s) of the contractor(s) who will perform actual construction, including the name, address, and telephone number of an individual representative of the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. 
(2)  Mechanical, electrical and plumbing-related permits shall be issued only to State of Texas licensed and registered tradesman or their specifically designated representative even when working under the scope of a general contractor registration. Said tradesmen shall be master level or higher. 
(f)  Fees for contractor's registration shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. 
(g)  Every registrant shall contact the office of the director to ensure the accurate revision of registration information, including any change of address or telephone number, within ten (10) days from the date that the previous information supplied in the application becomes invalid for any reason. Failure to revise inaccurate information, or providing false, misleading or inaccurate information when applying for registration, shall constitute an offense. 
(h)  The director may, at any time and for any valid reason, suspend or revoke a contractor's registration. The contractor shall be notified in writing, by return receipt U.S. Mail, sent to the last known address of the contractor as shown on the registration, of the contractor's right to appeal the director's decision to the city manager, and to present testimony to the city manager as to why the contractor's registration should not be suspended or revoked. 
(i)  The decision of the city manager shall be final. The city manager's decision for suspension or revocation of the contractor's registration shall include a time frame for the beginning date and duration of the suspension, and the beginning date of the revocation. 
(j)  If the registration is suspended or revoked, the contractor shall not perform any work in the City of Alamo Heights during the suspension or after the revocation which requires registration. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-54. - Permits issued by director. 
(a)  Permits may be issued by the director for: 
(1)  Interior alterations of any structure; 
(2)  Exterior alterations or additions to any existing single-family or duplex residence for which: 
a.  The scope of work does not meet the regulations as defined in section 5-13 definition for demolition, and when the scope of work involves any structure or project specifically exempted in subsection 5-134(c); 
(3)  Exterior additions or alterations to all other structures which: 
a.  Are not single-family or duplex residences, and 
b.  The scope of work does not meet the regulations as defined in section 5-13 definition for demolition, and 
c.  The scope of work involves any structure or project specifically exempted in subsection 5-134(c), and 
d.  The total cost of construction does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), or 
e.  Alteration or replacement of existing exterior finish materials that similarly match the existing finish materials in color, material, and visual impact regardless of the total cost of construction limitation. 
(4)  Proposed demolitions in which the scope of work does not meet the regulations as defined in section 5-13 definition for demolition, or when the scope of work involves any structure or project specifically exempted in subsection 5-134(c), 
(5)  New one- and two-family dwelling construction which is not proposed for the replacement of a structure which was subject to demolition review as regulated by article X demolition review, 
(6)  Street lane and sidewalk closure permits (reference chapter 16), 
(7)  Projects that do not present a potential negative impact to neighboring properties or the community, and 
(8)  Miscellaneous permits not governed by demolition review or additional boards or commission's reviews. 
(b)  If the application packet is complete, and after administrative review of the project is complete and the project conforms to the city's adopted codes and ordinances, the director shall issue the permit if satisfied that the application is accurate, true and made in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-55. - Permits subject to review by architectural review board. 
(a)  Building permits for all other new construction, demolitions, additions or alterations to structures that are not exempted in items (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8) of section 5-54 shall be referred to the architectural review board for review. Building permits or projects subject to review by the architectural review board shall be placed on the next available city council agenda and forwarded along with the architectural review board's recommendation for final review. If disapproved by the city council, the submitted permit request shall be denied pending submittal of the requested revisions. Any disapproval by the city council shall require all revisions to be re-submitted for city council review unless specifically noted by the city council. The applicant shall supply such information concerning the proposed project as may be required by the director, architectural review board and the city council. 
(b)  For the responsibilities and additional processes regarding the architectural review board reference chapter 2 administration section 2-48. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-56. - Submission of permit for review. 
(a)  Plans shall be submitted along with the permit application to the department of community development office for administrative review and shall contain all of the information required in the city's application forms. All plans submitted for review must be submitted in accordance with the Texas Architectural Barriers and Texas Engineering Practice Acts. 
(b)  New foundations for any conditioned structures must be designed by a licensed professional engineer. 
(c)  Foundation repairs where a substantial amount of piers are either replaced or added to an existing foundation must be designed by a licensed professional engineer. 
(d)  All applications for permit with a proposed cost of construction greater than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall pay the applicable plan review fee. Fees for plan review shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All plan review fees are non-refundable and due upon receipt of application. 
Exceptions: Fire, Trade, and Sign permits shall not be required to submit plan review fees. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to utilize outside consultants for third-party plan review if necessary to ensure compliance with all adopted codes and ordinances. The city shall notify the applicant prior to submission of any plans to an outside consultant. Fees for plan review by an outside consultant shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in accordance with the adopted schedule of development fees. 
(f)  Once all reviews of plans are made by the city, the city shall notify the applicant that all comments, plan modifications, letters, etc., shall be incorporated onto the plans and specifications, and thereafter at least two corrected sets of plans shall be submitted to the city for final review and verification. One (1) final set of plans shall be marked "City Approved Plans—City Copy" and one (1) set of plans shall be marked "City Approved Plans—Contractor Copy". The city copy shall remain in the department of community development for the duration of time required by state law and all adopted codes. 
(g)  An applicant may schedule, upon written request by application, a preliminary project review and meeting. Fees for preliminary project review and meetings shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All fees are non-refundable and due upon receipt of application. Staff reserves the right to require a preliminary project review and meeting depending on the proposed scope of work. 
(h)  Even though the city's review of plans and specifications is designed to discover potential code violations, failure to discover all such violations does not relieve the property owner, designer, or contractor from the responsibility of producing an end product that is in total compliance with all requirements of the codes and ordinances as adopted by the City of Alamo Heights. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-57. - Display of permit and plans required. 
(a)  Each permit is required to be displayed at the job site in a location that is easily visible to the city inspector and the general public at all times. 
(b)  The contractor shall maintain an original copy of the stamped approved plans at the job site and failure to have the plans at the job site shall be cause for a failure of any inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-58. - Unauthorized construction. 
During construction projects, certain aspects of the process may not be visible, or exposed for evaluation during the permit process. If, for any reason, the described scope of work within a permit regarding any specific code requirement is changed, altered, or revised the applicant and/or property owner shall be responsible for submitting revised plans to the director's office for review prior to proceeding with construction. Failure to submit revised plans as required herein shall be subject to penalties under section 5-2 and injunctive relief under section 5-3. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-59—5-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 5-70. - City inspector. 
The city inspector shall function under the general supervision of, and shall comply with all reasonable instructions consistent with this chapter given by, the director or chief. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-71. - Authority to conduct tests. 
The city inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to require tests as provided for in the adopted codes. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-72. - Authority to enter. 
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the City of Alamo Heights Code of Ordinances, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this Code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-73. - Duty to enforce chapter provisions. 
The applicant shall be required to notify the city inspector that such work is ready for inspection. All inspection requests must be received one (1) business day prior to the requested inspection date. It shall be the duty of the applicant requesting any inspections required by this Code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. It shall be the duty of the city inspector to inspect during the progress of the inside, outside, overhead and underground work, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance now in force or which hereafter may be adopted, and to notify the person interested or concerned, of any and all violations of this chapter, and to examine and pass upon all applications for permits, and to inspect all inside and outside installations included under this chapter, and to issue certificates of inspection. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the city inspector. The city inspector upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify in writing the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-74. - Required inspections. 
Inspections required are to ensure that the actual construction on-site reflects the proposed project as approved by permit. Required inspections include, but are not limited to, the following, but the absence of a particular inspection in no way relieves the contractor from securing for or providing such inspections or appropriate supervision. 
(a)  Building permit: 
(1)  Drive approaches within city right-of-way; 
(2)  Footing or foundation; 
(3)  Concrete slab or under-floor; 
(4)  Framing; 
(5)  Fire-resistance; 
(6)  Roofing; 
(7)  Fencing; 
(8)  Shell completion certificate (if applicable); 
(9)  Final: 
a.  General code violation repair or correction; 
b.  Site cleaned-up; 
c.  Provided and approved plans were followed including landscaping; 
d.  Appliances and fixtures correctly placed and connected; 
e.  Construction complies with board of adjustment issued variances; 
f.  Verify overall compliance with the appropriate codes as adopted by the city and as in force at the time of the building permit; 
g.  For one- and two-family structures only, the building final inspection shall act as the certificate of occupancy for the structure; 
(b)  Demolition: 
(1)  Partial demolitions; 
(2)  Final (prior to issuance of building permit for renovation, addition or replacement structure). 
(c)  Electrical: 
(1)  TML (temporary meter loop); 
(2)  Underground; 
(3)  Rough-in; 
(4)  Final; 
(5)  T.O.P.S.—Temporary to permanent service. 
(d)  Gas: 
(1)  Underground; 
(2)  Rough-in; 
(3)  T.O.P. Out—Temporary to permanent service; 
(4)  Final; 
(5)  Test: 
a.  New installations; 
b.  Parts of existing installation which have been altered, extended, renovated or repaired shall be tested. 
(e)  Mechanical: 
(1)  Underground; 
(2)  Rough-in; 
(3)  Final. 
(f)  Plumbing: 
(1)  Underground; 
(2)  Rough-in; 
(3)  T.O.P. Out—Temporary to permanent service; 
(4)  Final; 
(5)  Backflow prevention assembly; 
(6)  Test: 
a.  New installations; 
b.  Parts of existing installation which have been altered, extended, renovated or repaired shall be tested. 
(g)  Fire sprinkler inspections: 
(1)  Fire flow; 
(2)  Rough-in; 
(3)  Hydro test; 
(4)  Final. 
(h)  Fire alarm inspection; 
(1)  Rough-in; 
(2)  Final. 
(i)  Ansul Systems: 
(1)  Rough-in; 
(2)  Final. 
(j)  Energy Conservation Code: 
(1)  Insulation installation and correct R-values; 
(2)  Proper SGHC and U-values for glazing; 
(3)  Designed SEER for HVAC; 
(4)  Compliance with IECC and submitted DOE RES Check or COM Check report. 
(k)  Fire-walls. 
(1)  Fire-wall inspections must be requested and approved prior to scheduling for framing inspection. 
(2)  Wood framed walls with fire-rated gypsum board application: 
a.  Upon installation of the first side of the proposed fire-rated gypsum board with the inside labels exposed, 
b.  Upon installation of the second side of the proposed fire-rated gypsum board with all joints/seams/penetrations sealed with fire caulking. 
(l)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Final. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-75. - Required final inspections. 
Upon completion of a construction project, an inspection must be requested and approved to verify full compliance with the permit and all adopted codes and ordinances. Such review shall furthermore require satisfaction of all landscape requirements of the zoning code. Occupancy for structures shall not be permitted until the final inspection is approved. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-76. - Failure to obtain or pass necessary inspections. 
(a)  In the event a permit holder fails to obtain all necessary inspections, and to pass all said inspections, they shall be in violation of this section. Violation of this section may be addressed by any combination of the following: 
(1)  Denial of utilities and occupancy; and/or 
(2)  Refusal of the director to issue future permits to the violator until the inspections are successfully obtained; and/or 
(3)  Such actions as are permitted under the provisions of section 5-2, penalty, and section 5-3, injunctive relief, of this Code; and/or 
(4)  Other such appropriate procedures and measures as might be in place in this Code at the time of the violation(s). 
(b)  Failure to request an inspection shall be considered a failed inspection and shall incur a re-inspection fee. 
(c)  If work was covered up, or is inaccessible and required inspections have not been approved, the building official shall require the applicant of the permit to expose all work not approved under inspections so that an inspection may be completed to verify compliance with all adopted codes. The building official may accept a letter from a licensed third-party inspector, professional engineer, or licensed architect as appropriate; who was present during construction, visually inspected all work prior to cover up, and states that all covered work is in compliance with the adopted codes at the time of permit approval. Inspection letters provided in this fashion do not waive any failed inspection, administrative, or penalty fees which may be due. 
(1)  The letter shall bear the signature and the license of the third-party inspector or the professional seal of the architect or engineer, and shall state the basis of the inspection, date of inspection, and the results of the inspection. 
(2)  The director has the discretion to disallow such a letter inspection report and may require an inspection be conducted by the city's inspector or other qualified person(s). 
(d)  At any point in the construction process when, in the opinion of the city inspector, work is not being done in conformance with, or within the scope of, the approved plans, the city inspector shall, with the consent of the director, place a STOP WORK ORDER on the property if the issues cannot be resolved on-site. The STOP WORK ORDER shall remain in place until all issues have been corrected or resolved and may not be removed except by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-77. - Partial inspections. 
Partial (phased) inspections may be granted for each type (i.e. framing, electrical rough-in, etc.) of required inspection. The fee for the first inspection within each type of inspection as required herein is covered within the original permit fee. Phasing of inspection types for any reason will require partial inspection fees be paid before the second phase (partial) is requested. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-78. - Foundation inspections. 
(a)  Foundation repairs where a professional engineer's design was required per this chapter shall be inspected by the design engineer. Engineer inspection reports shall be required to be submitted to the director's office to be filed with the approved permit for repairs. 
(b)  For new foundations, after the foundation forms or perimeter piers are set for any new structures, including forms for any accessory buildings, or for the expansion of existing foundations, and prior to the plumbing rough-in inspection (where required) and pouring of any concrete or setting of any beams, a certified foundation survey shall be required to be submitted to the director's office or left at the job site for inspection. The purpose of the survey is to ensure that the placement of any structures shown on the approved plans is in keeping with the approved plans and that all setbacks and lot coverage percentages are correct, and that the form dimensions or pier layouts are consistent with the dimensions shown on the approved plans. Incidental uses such as driveways, swimming pools, gazebos, etc., that can readily be determined to be in conformance with the approved plans, by referencing them to the main and accessory buildings, will not require a certified foundation survey. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-79. - Framing inspections. 
The framing inspection shall include a check of the plate height upon completion of all framing. The city's inspector shall inspect the framing for the roof to see that it is in general conformance with the approved plans to ensure that the maximum building height is not exceeded. If there is any question as to the finished maximum height of the structure exceeding the maximum height allowed on the approved plans, the city may require the contractor to provide a certified height survey to ensure conformance with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-80. - Fence inspections. 
A fence inspection by the city inspector shall consist of a cursory check of location, configuration and height, and shall ensure that no materials disallowed by city codes are being used in the construction of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-81. - Persons authorized to conduct foundation and other structural-related inspections. 
(a)  A Texas licensed professional engineer with an appropriate specialty may, at the option of the owner, inspect foundation and other structural-related construction. In addition, foundation and framing components must be requested of and approved through inspection by the city inspector prior to placing of concrete or proceeding with construction. 
(b)  The inspection shall be reported to the director in the form of a letter bearing the signature and professional seal of the engineer, stating the basis of the inspection and the results of the inspection. 
(c)  The director has the discretion to disallow such a letter inspection report and may require an inspection be conducted by the city inspector or other qualified person(s). 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-82. - Refusal to correct; disconnection. 
Where any structure or property which has failed an inspection or been condemned by the city inspector, shall fail to have the same put in such condition as to comply with all the requirements hereof within a reasonable time after receiving notice from the city inspector that the same has failed or been condemned, the city inspector may cause utilities to be disconnected or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-83. - Same—Unlawful to reconnect until certificate has been issued. 
Where any structure or property which has failed an inspection or been condemned by the city inspector and any utility service has been removed, it shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to reconnect the same or cause the same to be reconnected until they have been put into such a condition as will comply with the requirements of this chapter, and a certificate of inspection has been issued by the city inspector. The city inspector shall cause or request utility service to be reconnected within seventy-two (72) hours of approval. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-84. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  Fees for inspections shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All inspection fees are non-refundable and due upon request for inspection. 
(b)  Permit fees include the cost for the initial inspection of completed work within each type of inspection required herein. 
(c)  When the work has been reported to the director's office as completed and requested for inspection, and when upon such inspection the work is found to be incomplete or defective, the inspection shall be noted as failed or disapproved and a non-refundable fee shall be paid prior to scheduling for re-inspection. 
(d)  Unless waived by the director, inspections shall not be conducted until any and all outstanding fees owed to the city are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-85—5-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 5-90. - Certificates of occupancy required. 
(a)  Except for residential uses and accessory structures thereof, all structures used for any purpose or occupied by any person or entity as indicated below require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure and each individual tenant space. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for the following categories: 
(1)  Structure/property ownership: 
a.  Commercial structures: 
1.  Single-tenant structures, 
2.  Multi-tenant structures, 
3.  Building shell construction. 
b.  Multi-family structures with an on-site management office or semi-public pools. 
c.  A certificate of occupancy by structure/property owners shall be required only once and does not have to be resubmitted unless the structure/property changes ownership, or at which time there is any enlargement of structure. 
d.  Change of ownership does not include tenant change or individual tenant business ownership change. 
(2)  Tenants. 
a.  Commercial structures only: 
1.  Includes but not limited to new businesses, re-located existing businesses, change of business ownership, change of business name, 
2.  Existing tenants where a certificate has not been previously issued, 
3.  Temporary occupation or use of any property, or tenant space. 
(b)  Property owners, business managers and/or business owners shall be required to submit the application for certificate of occupancy, and receive approval from the director's office prior to occupancy. 
(c)  Certificates of occupancy issued for building shell construction shall be permitted only when the originally approved scope of work for construction meets the definition of building shell as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-91. - Application for certificates of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for on a form to be provided by the director. The forms shall include all information deemed necessary by the director to protect the health and life safety of each occupant, and to verify compliance with all adopted codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-92. - Fees for certificates of occupancy. 
Fees for certificates of occupancy shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All application fees are non-refundable and due upon receipt of application. 
Exception: Fees shall not be charged for any certificates of occupancy for ownership of structure/property which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or for tenants which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-93. - Issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
After completion of inspections and remediation of any deficiencies and payment of the applicable fees, the director shall issue a certificate of occupancy. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy does not provide waiver of any requirements which may be listed in the city's adopted codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-94. - Expiration, termination, and renewal of certificates of occupancy. 
If any person, owner, or occupant ceases to own or occupy the structure or space, or when there is a change in name or use of the structure, the certificate of occupancy shall automatically terminate and a new application for certificate of occupancy shall be submitted for review and inspection according to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-95. - Penalty for operating without a valid certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided for in section 5-2 and the injunctive relief provided in section 5-3 of this chapter, operation of a business or office without a valid certificate of occupancy issued in accordance with section 5-90 or 5-96 may result in temporary closure of the event, structure or space until the required certificate is obtained. 
(b)  Should the director's office determine an event, structure or space is open to occupancy and that said event, structure or space does not have a valid certificate of occupancy, a notice, in writing and signed by the director or designated representative, shall be hand delivered to the responsible party, property owner or senior occupant of the operating premises by a city employee notifying them of the violation. 
(c)  The occupant, owner, or owner-occupant shall respond to the notification within five (5) working days by either presenting a valid certificate of occupancy or presenting just cause why the facility should not be closed until such a certificate is obtained. 
(d)  In the event of closure, a placard shall be placed at the facility noting the facility is closed to the public pending a valid certificate of occupancy. The placard shall not be removed until a valid certificate of occupancy is obtained and shall only be removed by the director. Removal of the placard shall be deemed a violation of the Code of Ordinances, subject to the penalties noted in section 5-2. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-96. - Temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  The director may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the following situations: 
(1)  Approved commercial "shell" construction projects, 
(2)  Construction projects under an active permit where extenuating circumstances prevent a project from being completed and final inspection approved prior to requesting final occupancy, or 
(3)  Vacant lots proposed for a temporary use which is permitted within chapter 3 zoning ordinance, or 
(4)  Events listed below such as qualified neighborhood events, special events, or miscellaneous events. 
(b)  A temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a period exceeding ninety (90) days per issuance. Request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be submitted to the director's office for review. 
(c)  The director may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for other instances such as qualified neighborhood events, special events, and miscellaneous events. 
(d)  No event, occupancy, or use shall occupy any property or structure which has not been reviewed for the specific event, occupancy, or use. Events, occupancies, or uses outside the normal functions of the property shall be required to apply for a temporary certificate of occupancy in the following categories: 
(1)  Qualified neighborhood events. 
a.  Qualified neighborhood event shall refer to any event which meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  Occurs within any residential neighborhood, 
2.  Is not for profit, 
3.  Does not include sale of food, drink or alcohol, and 
4.  Does not include use of amplified sounds. 
(2)  Special events. 
a.  Special event shall refer to any event which meets any of the following conditions: 
1.  Includes the sale of food, drink or alcohol, or 
2.  Includes use of amplified sounds, or 
3.  Includes use of the city's right-of-way(s), 
Exception: Residential block parties and National Night Out shall be considered qualified neighborhood events. 
4.  Includes non-typical or non-established uses within a property or portion of a property. 
Exception: Qualified neighborhood events. 
b.  Temporary food establishment permits and alcohol licenses shall be required for each vendor as required. 
c.  Additional permits may be required depending on the proposed event. 
(3)  Miscellaneous events. Miscellaneous events shall refer to any event which is not considered a qualified neighborhood event or a special event. 
(e)  Any person or entity who sponsors or organizes an event for which a permit is required, but for which no permit has been obtained, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. The failure of a person or entity to obtain a permit as required herein, or the failure of the holder of a permit to comply with the terms of a permit, shall be considered by the city in the issuance of future permits. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the city shall be entitled to injunctive relief against any person or entity which sponsors or organizes a public event for which a permit is required but for which no permit has been issued. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name or owned or operated by him or her or in his or her possession or under his or her control to be or remain in any space or area on a public right-of-way during an event at which parking is temporarily prohibited. All vehicles that are parked on any space or area on a public right-of-way in the city during an event in violation of temporary parking restrictions shall be removed by the police department and stored until claimed by the rightful owner or person who has the right to such property as provided in division 2 of article V of chapter 18 of the Code. 
(g)  The application for temporary certificate of occupancy shall be submitted as required in the event permit procedures bulletin. Application and procedures bulletin shall be located in the director's office. 
(h)  After review of the submitted application, the City of Alamo Heights shall require portable water closets be provided as required below unless permanent facilities in the appropriate amount are provided: 
People 
Attending 	1 hr 	2 hrs 	3 hrs 	4 hrs 	5 hrs 	6 hrs 	7 hrs 	8 hrs 	9 hrs 	10 hrs 
1—50 	1 	1 	1 	1 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 
50—100 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 
100—250 	3 	3 	3 	3 	4 	4 	4 	6 	6 	6 
250—500 	4 	4 	4 	4 	6 	6 	8 	8 	8 	8 
500—1,000 	4 	5 	6 	7 	7 	8 	8 	8 	9 	9 
2,000 	6 	10 	12 	13 	14 	14 	14 	15 	15 	15 
3,000 	9 	14 	17 	19 	20 	21 	21 	21 	21 	22 
4,000 	12 	19 	23 	25 	28 	28 	28 	30 	30 	30 
5,000 	15 	23 	32 	32 	34 	36 	36 	36 	36 	36 
 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-97. - Fees for temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Fees for temporary certificates of occupancy and associated permits and licenses shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All application fees are non-refundable and due upon receipt of application. 
(b)  For event type certificates of occupancy, a refundable deposit shall be provided along with the submitted application for the event. The director shall determine the minimum amount of deposit required to ensure that all trash and/or debris from the proposed event is removed and the area cleaned. The applicant shall have eighteen (18) hours from the close of the event to remove all trash and/or debris from the area or the applicant shall forfeit the clean-up deposit. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-98—5-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 5-110. - Construction security fences. 
(a)  If construction security fencing is proposed, it shall be categorized as a temporary structure, but such installation shall require a building permit separate and independent from any other required permit if not previously included within the master building permit plans. Fees for construction security fencing shall be the same as for other related building permits unless previously included within the master building permit plans (see section 5-12). The fencing may be no higher than eight (8) feet in height from lowest adjacent grade, and shall be either chain-link or other similarly transparent material. Construction security fencing may be located within the city's non-paved right-of-way (outside of any vision clearance areas for intersections visibility) and shall be reviewed by the director's office on a case by case basis. Construction security fencing shall not be equipped with any form of barbed-wire, to include concertina or razor wire. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-111. - Portable water closets at construction sites. 
(a)  Construction sites that do not provide permanent restroom facilities shall provide a portable water closet at all times during periods of active construction and while any permits are active. Portable water closets shall be located in the rear of the property if accessible. When the rear of the property is not accessible by alley or street, portable water closets are permitted to be located within the front yard but shall be placed a minimum twenty (20) feet from the front property line. At no time shall any portable water closet be located within the required side setbacks or within any city right-of-way. All portable water closets located at construction sites, whether active or not, must be cleaned on a weekly basis or more to prevent unsanitary conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-112. - Control of trash, dust and noxious matter at construction sites. 
(a)  All contractors and subcontractors shall prevent the dispersal of trash and debris from a project site by providing appropriate waste containers on-site and by daily clean-ups of such debris on the project site and off the project site when such debris has migrated from the site. Other construction debris created by the project shall be cleaned up daily and deposited in appropriate waste containers or otherwise removed from the site. Construction debris from other project sites controlled by a contractor or a property owner shall not be brought to another project site or owned property under the control of the contractor or property owner for the purposes of disposal in any type of waste container that may be located on the latter site. Any waste container set out on a project site shall be removed from the site within five (5) working days of the completion of the project for which the waste container was placed on such site. Each project that may occur on a construction site is considered to be a separate project for the purposes of this subsection. Construction dumpsters and/or trash receptacles shall be placed at a construction site only during active periods of permitted construction and shall be placed in a location on the property that is outside the city's paved right-of-way, obscured from the public view where practical, and shall not obstruct visibility from any street, alley, or driveway intersections. 
(b)  All contractors and subcontractors shall control the potential dispersal of particulate material and noxious or nuisance fumes occurring on a project site, and to minimize their effects on persons outside of the limits of the project site. 
(c)  All contractors and subcontractors, before creating a potential dispersal of particulate material or noxious or nuisance fumes, shall endeavor to familiarize themselves with potential concerns of the surrounding neighborhood and advise those with respiratory and other medical problems that might be adversely affected by particulate material and noxious or nuisance fumes of the approximate time that such potential dispersal will be occurring so that they might remove themselves from the affected area, stay indoors or take other appropriate steps to reduce the impact of such dispersal on themselves. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-113. - Temporary facilities. 
(a)  Portable storage units shall not be constructed or placed on any property without first obtaining a permit prior to delivery. 
(1)  Portable storage units shall be limited to thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(2)  Portable storage units associated with an approved building construction project shall be permitted to remain on-site until the approval of the projects building final inspection or the expiration of the master building permits' expiration date if less. 
(3)  All portable storage units must be located: 
a.  On a paved all-weather surface except for approved construction sites, 
b.  Within all setbacks, and 
c.  As far from the front property line as possible. 
(b)  Temporary construction offices shall not be constructed or placed on any property without first obtaining a permit prior to delivery. 
(1)  Temporary construction offices associated with an approved building construction project shall be permitted to remain on-site until the approval of the project's building final inspection or the expiration of the master building permit expiration date if less. 
(2)  All temporary construction offices must be located: 
a.  Within all setbacks, and 
b.  As far from the front property line as possible. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-114. - Best management practices (BMP). 
(a)  All responsible parties for projects or permits issued under this chapter shall be required to follow or utilize all BMPs and other good house-keeping protocols synonymous with federal standards directly associated with EPA's general permit for other construction sites regulated under federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-115. - Construction materials. 
(a)  Construction materials shall be stored or located within the property lines of the lot where construction has been approved by permit. No materials shall be stored outside the property lines or within the city's right-of-way without specific written permission from the director. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-116—5-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 5-120. - Drainage and control of runoff water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or entity to do work or cause work to be accomplished that diverts, impounds, or otherwise alters the natural flow of surface water drainage in such a manner that prevents natural drainage across an existing property, increases runoff to adjacent properties, causes damage to property, creates an attractive nuisance, or causes an unreasonable risk to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(b)  Any proposed project which may affect the adopted floodplain or floodway must meet all requirements as identified in chapter 7 flood damage, prevention and control. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-121. - Drainage requirements. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall do, cause or permit to be done, the alteration of property to prevent existing drainage run-off, or patterns from entering the property in the natural course of drainage. 
(b)  No person, firm, or corporation shall do, cause or permit to be done, the installation, modification, or relocation of any construction improvement where the improvement, when completed, will impact other property. The other property may be either upstream or downstream from the property on which the improvement is to be made. The impact is primarily related to flooding of a building structure. No permit shall be issued where engineering data from a qualified professional engineer or the opinion of the city reveals that such improvement would worsen any known drainage or flooding problem. 
(c)  Any person or entity applying for a permit which alters natural grade through coverage, fill, or excavation shall be required to meet the requirements within this section. In order to provide adequate drainage away from foundations as well as minimize run-off rate to adjacent properties, the following standards shall apply to all properties which propose alteration of grade whether by an increase to structural footprint or roof cover, an increase in impervious surface coverage, or any work which alters existing grade conditions. No increase of rate flow shall be permitted onto adjacent properties. 
(1)  The slope of any altered final grading of soils around the foundation of any structure or improvement shall not be less than five (5) percent when measured from grade to any point ten (10) feet from grade elevation at the foundation wall of the structure. 
a.  Exception: Existing natural grades less than five (5) percent may be maintained. 
(2)  Diversion of surface water shall be contained within the limits of the owner's contiguous property, shall be conveyed by a free, positive, and uninterrupted means, and shall be designated as the following: 
a.  Type A drainage, or 
b.  Type B drainage, or 
c.  Type C drainage. 
(3)  All site plans submitted for projects where natural grade is altered, or covered must indicate the following: 
a.  Drainage type as listed above, 
b.  Drainage flow arrows indicating direction of proposed runoff, and 
c.  All proposed berms, swales, or drains. 
(4)  A storm water management and drainage plan (SDP) shall be required for the following projects: 
a.  New single-family residential, commercial, multi-family residential, industrial, institutional, utility developments, or any new developments including additions when the proposed property being developed exceeds five (5) percent slope from property line to property line, and 
b.  Propose an increase in lot coverage greater than twenty-five (25) percent above existing lot coverage, and 
c.  Propose an increase in the total impervious surface on a property by twenty-five (25) percent of the existing impervious surface coverage. 
(5)  The director shall require a storm water management and drainage plan (SDP), designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer, which demonstrates that a proposed construction plan or recently permitted construction meets all of the provisions of this article and does not increase the rate or direction of flow of run-off from an existing property and does not prevent natural drainage from entering an existing property. 
(6)  The director's office shall review each SDP to verify whether an increase in the rate or direction of flow of run-off from an existing property is created by the proposed project or whether the proposed project prevents natural drainage. In cases where prevention or an increase is determined, the city reserves the right to submit the SDP to the city's engineer for additional review. Any outside review is subject to fees according to the adopted schedule of development fees. 
(7)  If irregular site topography, use of landscaping, or architectural features such as raised planting beds, retaining walls, fences, or sidewalks prevent compliance with provisions of this section, the designer shall provide alternate methods and means as may be approved by the director to assure that the requirements of this Code are met. The drainage plan must be submitted, reviewed, and approved prior to issuance of a permit and the work must be approved prior to final inspection and occupancy of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-122—5-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEMOLITION 
 
Sec. 5-130. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to: 
(a)  Provide notice of proposed demolition of structures to the Alamo Heights community; 
(b)  Encourage property owners and Alamo Heights residents to seek out persons or agencies who might be willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such structures rather than demolish them; 
(c)  Promote conservation of significant structures and limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the traditional architectural resources of residential and commercial neighborhoods; and 
(d)  Encourage compatible design solutions that reinforce and enhance the existing character of the Alamo Heights residential and commercial neighborhoods. 
This article is not intended to permanently prevent demolition, but rather to provide an opportunity to develop compatible design concepts for properties where demolition is deemed necessary, for which design concepts are available for community review and comment. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-131. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all proposed building, demolition, construction, additions or alterations located within the jurisdiction of the City of Alamo Heights. 
(b)  This article shall regulate all activities that result or may result in the demolition of an existing structure, except where such demolition is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-132. - Demolition permit required. 
(a)  No demolition of any structure or any portion of a structure shall be permitted except as set forth in this article. 
(b)  All demolitions shall require a permit application be submitted to the director's office and permit issued prior to actual demolition. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-133. - Permit process for demolition. 
(a)  Proposed demolitions in which the scope of work does not meet the regulations as defined in section 5-13 definition for demolition, or when the scope of work involves any structure or project specifically exempted in subsection 5-134(c) shall meet the permit regulations as listed in this section, section 5-132 and as well as article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  The person or entity submitting an application for a demolition permit for any structure must be the owner of record or the authorized agent of the owner(s) as evidenced by a power of attorney. 
(c)  Once the plan review is completed for a proposed demolition permit regulated by this article, the director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of additional requirements for demolition review as described in section 5-134 if applicable. 
(d)  A demolition permit shall be valid for a time period of six (6) months from the date of issue by the director, and shall not be transferable. Where no demolition activity has occurred within a six (6) month time period, the demolition permit shall be null and void, unless extended at the discretion of the director upon written request by the property owner or authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-134. - Demolition review procedures. 
(a)  The goal of the demolition review process is to allow public review and comment regarding the impact that the proposed demolition, and any replacement structures, may have on the surrounding neighborhood and the city. 
(b)  The demolition review process is intended to complete both the determination of significance of existing structures proposed for demolition and the compatibility review of any replacement structures within the same process. However, the significance and compatibility process may be completed in separate processes if requested in writing by the property owner. 
(c)  Proposed demolitions in which the scope of work meets the regulations as defined in section 5-13 definition for demolition, or when the scope of work involves any structure or project not specifically exempted below shall meet the permit regulations for demolition review as listed in this article as well as requirements listed in article IV of this chapter. 
Exceptions from the demolition review process regarding significance of an existing structure to allow for administrative review: 
(1)  Existing structures not supported by a permanent foundation, 
(2)  Existing structures which have an exterior grade footprint of two hundred (200) square feet or less, 
(3)  Existing one- and two-story detached accessory structures, 
(4)  Replacement or alteration of existing exterior finish materials on roofs or walls with new exterior finish materials which match the existing in color and design, 
(5)  Replacement or alteration of roof decking and finish materials only, 
(6)  Exterior alterations that do not substantially alter, modify, cover, or encapsulate existing framing components, and 
(7)  Ordinary repair and maintenance as referenced in section 5-13 definition for demolition. 
Exceptions from the demolition review process regarding compatibility of any proposed structures to allow for administrative review: 
(1)  New structures for projects not governed previously under demolition ordinances, 
(2)  Replacement or alteration of existing exterior finish materials on roofs or walls with new exterior finish materials which match the existing in color and design, 
(3)  Replacement or alteration of roof decking and finish materials only, 
(4)  Exterior alterations that do not substantially alter, modify, cover, or encapsulate existing framing components, and 
(5)  Minor repair and routine maintenance as referenced in section 5-13 definition for demolition, 
(6)  One-story replacement accessory structures. 
(d)  The following proposed structure(s) or project(s) shall be governed by demolition review regarding compatibility regardless of whether any significance determination was reviewed: 
(1)  Two-story detached accessory structures intended to replace previously permitted demolitions of exempt accessory structures. 
(e)  Plans for demolition review submitted under this article shall be submitted along with the demolition review application to the director's office for review and must contain all of the information required in the city's application forms to be considered complete. 
(f)  If no plans are submitted for a replacement structure at the time of the request for demolition review the director shall forward any future development plans for replacement structures to the architectural review board for review of the replacement structure's compatibility, as defined in this chapter before issuing a building permit. 
(g)  When all demolition review application packets have been submitted, along with a non-refundable application fee, the city shall place the proposed project request on the agenda for the next available architectural review board meeting. 
(1)  The city shall post on the property, and on the city's website, a public notice announcing the application submittal and all postings shall be for a minimum of fifteen (15) days from the date of the scheduled architectural review board meeting. 
(2)  The director shall send, by United States mail, a notice of the request for a demolition permit to all persons who are the owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed demolition not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for the public hearing(s) of the architectural review. 
(h)  The architectural review board shall consider the following criteria when determining the significance, as defined in this chapter, of existing structures: 
(1)  Was the structure designed by a noted architect? 
(2)  Has the structure been listed as having historic significance by any local, regional, state or historic agency or society? 
(3)  Does the structure exhibit characteristics of a distinct architectural style? 
(4)  Does the structure belong to a distinctive set of buildings, such as a single structure belonging to a row of similar structures? 
(5)  Is the structure a significant part of the fabric of the community due to its age, unique architecture, historical significance or physical placement? 
(i)  The architectural review board shall also consider the following issues: 
(1)  The existing condition of the structure, as presented by the applicant and as reviewed by the director; and 
(2)  The potential for reuse or rehabilitation of the structure. 
(j)  The architectural review board shall consider the following criteria when determining the compatibility, as defined in this chapter, of replacement structures: 
(1)  Architectural design, 
(2)  Scale relative to height, form, and massing, 
(3)  Lot coverage, 
(4)  Setbacks, 
(5)  Materials, 
(6)  Roof pitch, and 
(7)  Landscaping, 
(k)  The architectural review board shall take one (1) of the following actions after the close of the public hearing: 
(1)  Determine that the structure is not a significant structure and that the replacement structure is compatible with other structures in the adjacent and immediate block area, and recommend approval of demolition, or 
(2)  Determine that the structure is a significant structure, and make a recommendation to the city council for demolition delay to allow collaboration with the property owner to explore alternatives to demolition; or, 
(3)  Determine that the proposed replacement structure is incompatible with other structures in the adjacent and immediate block area, and: 
a.  Continue the public hearing to a subsequent architectural review board meeting if sufficient information has not been presented to allow the architectural review board to make a determination or to allow the applicant to resubmit a revised design to address the compatibility issues identified by the architectural review board, or 
b.  Make a recommendation to the city council for demolition delay to allow the applicant to resubmit a revised design to address the compatibility issues identified by the architectural review board. 
(l)  Where the architectural review board recommends approval for either the demolition of an existing structure and/or for the construction of a replacement structure, the director shall place the proposed project on the agenda for the next available city council meeting. 
(m)  If approved by city council the director shall issue a demolition permit upon application by the property owner or authorized agent per section 5-132 and upon payment of the required demolition permit fee. The application and fee must be submitted within six (6) months of the date of the final city council action. If the request is not submitted within this time, approval of the demolition review shall become null and void. 
(n)  Any projects that present a potential negative impact to neighboring properties or the community may be forwarded to the architectural review board for compatibility review. 
(o)  No demolition of any structure or any portion of a structure shall be permitted where such structure has determined to be a significant structure by the architectural review board and final action given by the city council, except as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-135. - Demolition delay. 
(a)  Where a demolition delay is determined necessary, the city council may delay the issuance of the demolition permit for a maximum of ninety (90) days from the date of the action designating the existing structure as significant. This delay may be extended by the city council for an additional ninety (90) days at any time prior to expiration of the original delay, but such extension shall occur only once, for a maximum delay not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of action designating the structure as significant. If the city and property owner have not reached a mutual agreement on the future of the structure, within said one hundred eighty (180) days, the demolition review shall be approved. 
(b)  Where a demolition delay has been determined necessary, the community has the opportunity to seek out persons who might be willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such structure rather than demolish the structure, and to limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the historical architectural resources of the city. Likewise, the owner has the opportunity to resubmit a revised application to the city for review and comment. 
(c)  Where a demolition delay has been determined necessary, the city shall post on the property, and on the city's website, a public notice announcing the demolition delay. Such notice shall be posted within three (3) business days of the city council action, and shall remain in place for the entire period of the demolition delay. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the designation of a structure as a significant structure, the director may issue a demolition permit at any time after receipt of written advice from the city council to the effect that the city is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some other person is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such structure, or when additional information warrants a termination of the demolition delay. 
(e)  In a case where the property owner or authorized agent desires only to have the architectural review board make a determination of a structure's significance, the property owner or authorized agent shall submit a request for such action along with a non-refundable fee. The city and the property owner or authorized agent shall then follow in similar manner the requirements set out in section 5-134. The city shall establish a date after the end of the public comment period for the architectural review board to hear the request for a determination from the property owner or authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-136. - Demolition review approval. 
(a)  Demolition review approval shall be granted for the following conditions: 
(1)  When a demolition delay has been established and the maximum delay period of one hundred eighty (180) days has expired, or 
(2)  The existing structure proposed for demolition is not determined significant, as defined in this chapter, and 
(3)  The replacement structure for any structure previously approved under demolition review is determined to be compatible, as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Once demolition review approval is granted by city council, the director shall have the authority to issue a demolition permit per article IV of this chapter upon request by the property owner or authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-137. - Moving structures. 
(a)  Proposals to relocate or move existing structure(s) from any location within the city limits is considered a demolition per this chapter for purposes of permit review and approval. 
(b)  Moving of an existing structure to any vacant lot(s) where demolition review was not required for any previously demolished structure(s) shall be required to be submitted for compatibility review per section 5-134. 
(c)  If demolition (move) review has been previously approved as provided for in this article, no person shall move any building or structure over, across, or along any street, public way, or public place within the city without first obtaining a permit for the proposed move. 
(d)  All scheduled routes, and move times shall be determined during the move permit review. 
(e)  No building or structure under any condition shall be allowed to remain in or on the streets, public ways or public places for more than four (4) hours. Any building or structure which occupies or moves along or across any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights and flares continually burning for the protection of the public. 
(f)  No person shall move a building or structure across or along any street, public way or public place within the city unless accompanied or escorted by at least one (1) City of Alamo Heights police officer that has been retained by the person for such service. 
(g)  Before a house mover's license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), saving and protecting the city harmless from any and all damages and to pay for any and all damages to public property, that may arise from the use of any of the streets, alleys, boulevards or other public places in the moving of any building or structure. Such bond shall contain a provision for a ten-day written notice to the city of cancellation by the surety. 
(h)  Before a moving permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the director a public liability property damage insurance policy certificate naming the applicant as the insured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by the law upon such applicant to the extent of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person for bodily injury, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury liability for each accident, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability for each accident. 
(i)  Upon issuance of the permit, the applicant shall request inspection by the city inspector, or cause to be inspected, the equipment and facilities to be used by the moving contractor and shall determine that the size, design and safety factors of any vehicle and other equipment used in the moving of any building or structure, are such that their operation on public property shall not cause damage to the pavement or other public improvements. 
(j)  Nothing contained in this article shall require a license or bond for the movement of oversized equipment, or buildings or structures of a temporary nature, when such equipment, building, or structures are within the legal road limit as required by the state statutes; nor shall bond and license be required of one passing through the city enroute between two (2) other incorporated cities, except those cities in the county. 
(k)  No person shall move any building or structure over, across, or along any street, public way or public place within the city until a permit for such work has been issued as provided herein. 
(l)  A mover shall in each case before moving or preparing to move any building or structure, apply to the director by written application for a permit to do so, in which application the building or structure to be moved shall be described with the extreme dimensions of its width, length and height, present location, the place to which it is proposed to be moved, and the location, on the lot at the destination. 
(m)  Before application for permit is made, the mover shall notify the public utilities, railroads, and other persons or municipalities whose facilities are involved in such movement. 
(n)  Application for moving permit shall include: 
(1)  Moving permit application sign by both a registered general contractor and the property owner, 
(2)  Written indication from CPS that both electrical and/or gas service connections has been removed from the structure, 
(3)  Written indication from public works - water utilities that the water and sewer connections have been removed from the structure, 
(4)  Specify the day of the week and hour of the day the moving is proposed to take place, 
(5)  The proposed route to be taken, 
(6)  Copy of the demolition approval letter which is issued after city council approval for demolitions/moves per this chapter, 
(7)  All additional information as required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-138. - Responsibility of the owner. 
(a)  Once a demolition delay has been established, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the structure, if vacant, to the satisfaction of the director. Should the owner fail to so secure the structure, a subsequent destruction of the structure at any time during the demolition delay period, which destruction could have been prevented by the required security measures, shall be considered a demolition in violation of this article. Penalties and remedies are identified in section 5-2 and section 5-3. 
(b)  If demolition of a structure is authorized by the city council and a permit is issued by the director, the permittee shall, during and after demolition of the structure, ensure all of the following conditions are met and maintained: 
(1)  The demolition contractor shall have a total of thirty (30) calendar days from the date that work begins to complete the job and request a final inspection, unless an extension has been granted by the director, 
(2)  All utilities shall be disconnected and the sewer line shall be effectively plugged with concrete or as may be required by the director, at or near the property line, 
(3)  Public sidewalks shall not be removed; however, all public sidewalks damaged during demolition or in need of replacement and/or abandonment shall be repaired and/or replaced in conformance with all applicable ordinances, 
(4)  All debris, including all concrete structural members below grade, shall be removed from the lot, 
(5)  The lot shall be completely cleaned, filled, and graded to prevent any retention of water and to promote proper drainage, 
(6)  When the lot is cleared, all utilities disconnected and/or capped, all repairs made and approaches removed, the deposit shall be refunded. Costs incurred by the City of Alamo Heights as a result of demolishing the building or performing any work deemed necessary by the director shall be deducted from the clean-up deposit and costs exceeding the amount of the deposit will be billed to the owner. 
(7)  Silt fences shall be provided for all projects approved under demolition review and shall be provided prior to beginning the proposed demolition of the structure. Silt fences shall be maintained in good condition until permanent soil stabilization is established. 
(8)  Permanent and/or temporary soil stabilization methods sufficient to restrain or prevent erosion shall to be provided within twenty-one (21) calendar days after completion of the demolition, grading of the lot, or determined inactivity on the lot. 
a.  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two (2)weeks, be of a type which can survive without an irrigation systems use. The site may be required to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed if soil stabilization has not been established within thirty (30) days from the date of installation. 
b.  Vegetative ground cover. The person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall plant or otherwise provide a permanent vegetative ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion. 
c.  Innovative measures. Erosion and sedimentation measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if they are sufficient to prevent adverse secondary consequences. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used following approval by the director if it can be demonstrated that such techniques and ideas are likely to produce successful results. 
(c)  The director shall have the authority to waive any of these requirements under special circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-139. - Emergency demolitions. 
Notwithstanding the previous provisions, the director may issue a demolition permit in the event of imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of the public due to deteriorating conditions, but only after consultation with the city manager, building official, and fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Secs. 5-140—5-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TREE PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 5-150. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to promote and preserve healthy and desirable tree species as an important public resource, serving to enhance air quality, mitigate flooding and storm water runoff, reduce energy costs, store and sequester carbon dioxide, and enhance quality of life. Tree preservation further assists in protecting the city's unique character and aesthetically-pleasing environment. The purpose shall be accomplished through the protection of trees of certain species and size, regulation of the proper pruning, protection of trees during construction activity, and establishment of procedures for requesting removal of such trees. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-151. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article shall only apply to the specific tree(s) and property identified in the permit. 
(b)  For work requiring a building permit, the buildings, renovations, additions and site improvements shall be oriented in a manner that allows for preservation of the maximum number of trees to the greatest extent reasonably feasible. 
(c)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the critical root zone of any heritage tree shall be covered with impervious cover and no closer than three (3) feet from the trunk of the tree. 
(d)  No more than thirty (30) percent of the critical root zone of any heritage tree shall be trenched, excavated, damaged or removed and no closer than three (3) feet from the trunk of the tree. 
(e)  All tree pruning shall follow ANSI A300 standards. 
(f)  The property owner is responsible for maintaining all trees or tree canopy on the property by providing irrigation, fertilization, pruning, and other maintenance as required to preserve the health of all trees. 
(g)  The property owner is responsible for trimming, pruning, or maintaining all trees and branches within any portion of their property and the contiguous portion of the property between the front property line and the paved city right-of-way to provide the visibility and vehicular clearances as required within Chapter 16 Streets and Sidewalks of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-152. - Heritage trees. 
(a)  The designation of Heritage Tree species is shown in Table 1. Heritage Tree designations establish a threshold trunk size, measured in diameter at breast height (DBH) for purposes of applying the requirements of this article. 
Table 1: Designation of Heritage Trees 
Tree Species 	Botanical Name 	Heritage Tree (DBH) 
Anaqua 	Ehretia annacua 	24" 
Black Cherry, Escarpment 	Prunus serotina var. eximia 	24" 
Black Walnut 	Juglans nigra 	24" 
Cedar, Deodora 	Cedrus deodara 	12" 
Crepe Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica 	24" 
Cypress, Arizona 	Cupressus arizonica 	24" 
Cypress, Montezuma 	Taxodium mucronatum 	24" 
Elm, Cedar 	Ulmus crassifolia 	24" 
Maple, Uvalde Bigtooth 	Acer grandidendentatum 	24" 
Mesquite 	Prosopis glandulosa 	24" 
Oak, Blackjack 	Quercus marilandica 	24" 
Oak, Bur 	Quercus macropcarpa 	24" 
Oak, Chinkapin 	Quercus muhlenbergii 	24" 
Oak, Lacy 	Quercus laceyi 	24" 
Oak, Live 	Quercus spp. 	24" 
Oak, Mexican White 	Quercus polymorhpa 	24" 
Oak, Texas Red 	Quercus buckleyi 	24" 
Oak, Shumard Red 	Quercus shumardii 	24" 
Olive, Mexican 	Cordia boissieri 	8" 
Palm, Sabinal 	Sabal texana 	12" 
Pecan 	Carya illnoensis 	24" 
Persimmon, Texas 	Diospyros texana 	8" 
Redbud, Texas 	Cercis canadensis 	8" 
Magnolia, Southern 	Magnolia grandiflora 	24" 
Sycamore, Mexican 	Platanus mexicana 	24" 
Texas Mountain Laurel 	Sophora secundiflora 	8" 
 
(b)  For the purposes of determining heritage tree designation and for applying the requirements of this article, multi-trunk trees shall be the sum total DBH as measured for each trunk. Multi-trunk trees shall be considered a heritage tree if the sum total DBH of all trunks equal or exceeds the threshold trunk size as listed for the tree species in Table 1 Designation of Heritage Trees. 
(c)  For the purposes of determining heritage tree designation and for applying the requirements of this article, cluster trees shall be the sum total DBH of all trunks of a cluster of three (3) or more heritage tree type species where one tree is measured less than or equal to five (5) feet from another. Cluster trees shall be considered a heritage tree if the sum total DBH of all trunks equal or exceeds the threshold trunk size as listed for the tree species in Table 1 Designation of Heritage Trees. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-153. - Registration of tree service vendors. 
(a)  Any business or contractor providing tree services related to installation, pruning or removal of trees within the city must register with the city to become a Registered Tree Service Vendor. 
Exception: Lawn maintenance professionals hired to provide general landscaping activities on a scheduled basis such as mowing, lawn trimming, planting, tree trimming, pruning, or removal shall not be required to register with the city. 
(b)  The following items shall be required for application for tree service vendor registration: 
(1)  Application for a registered tree service vendor, and 
(2)  Valid tree pruning license from any municipality or recognized agency or organization within Bexar County, or 
(3)  Verification of ISA Certified Arborist on staff. 
(c)  Limbs, branches and other cuttings from tree services performed by registered tree service vendors shall be removed from the city by the registered tree service vendor by the end of each business day the work was performed. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-154. - Permit required. 
(a)  A tree pruning permit is required for the pruning of any trees. 
Exception: A pruning permit shall not be required when the pruning is completed by the property owner, or any personnel regularly employed by the owner for the purposes of routine maintenance, or landscaping. 
(b)  A tree removal permit is required for the removal of any tree(s) larger than eight (8) inches DBH within the boundaries of the City of Alamo Heights. 
(c)  The director shall consider requests for a tree removal permit, except as specified by this article, based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Is the proposed tree to be removed determined to be a heritage tree(s) according to section 5-152. 
Note: Removal of a determined heritage tree shall not be approved without evidence submission of sufficient cause or hardship as determined by the director, board or commission. 
(2)  The topography of the site; 
(3)  Whether the removal of the tree would provide more light and airspace for adjacent trees; 
(4)  Whether the existing tree is in a location on the lot that is neither visible by the public or does not contribute to the tree canopy along the street; and 
(5)  Whether exceptional architectural design performed by a registered architect may be achieved by a reduction in trees. 
(d)  Requests for a tree removal permit shall include the specific reason(s) for removing the tree(s), as well as: 
(1)  A site plan that identifies the exact locations, the tree species, and the DBH of all trees within the subject property and specifically identifies each tree proposed to be removed; and 
(2)  Photographs that sufficiently illustrate the character and location of each tree proposed to be removed. 
(e)  If the tree removal permit is being requested in conjunction with a building permit, the request may also be required to include existing and proposed topographical information, easements, rights-of-way, setbacks, and property lines, the location of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, paved areas, and sidewalks, to the extent such information is available. 
(f)  Permits for the removal of trees that fall or the removal of limbs which have fallen due to acts of nature such as windstorm, flood, freeze or other disasters, may be waived by the city manager or other designated official if requested within thirty (30) days of the weather event and removed within sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2146 , § 3, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 5-155. - Fees for tree pruning permits, tree removal permits and tree service vendor registrations. 
(a)  Fees for tree pruning permits, tree removal permits and tree service vendor registration shall be listed in the adopted schedule of development fees as maintained in the director's office. All application fees are non-refundable and due upon receipt of application. 
(b)  The director shall issue a tree removal permit with no fee required if a heritage tree is: 
(1)  Determined by a certified arborist to be diseased or dying and is considered a hazard due to such condition, or is considered a hazard due to natural events, including, but not limited to, tornados, floods, storms, or other acts of God or by other events. Determination must be submitted in writing to the director's office prior to removal of the tree. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-156. - Heritage tree removal mitigation. 
(a)  A property owner or authorized agent requesting removal of a designated heritage tree which is not certified to be diseased or dying is required to provide these mitigation requirements if removal is approved by the director: 
(1)  Planting additional types of trees as listed in table 1 of this article (excluding palms, mountain laurels and crepe myrtles unless the heritage tree being removed is one of these types) with a replacement ratio (measured in inches DBH) which meets the following criteria: 
a.  Minimum 1:1 ratio (one (1) to one (1) replacement trunk DBH to removed trunk DBH) for individual heritage or multi-trunk heritage trees, 
b.  Minimum ½:1 ratio (one-half (½) to one (1) replacement trunk DBH to removed trunk DBH) for cluster type heritage trees. 
(2)  Minimum DBH for mitigation purposes is a four-inch caliper. 
(3)  Proposed planting shall be permitted on the following properties: 
a.  The same lot as such heritage tree(s) was removed, 
(4)  Fees in lieu of mitigation. A property owner or authorized agent required to provide mitigation shall plant additional trees on the property for which mitigation is required in accordance with section 5-156(a), or shall pay a fee in lieu of planting additional trees in accordance with the following: 
a.  A fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid per inch of required mitigation for each heritage tree removed. 
b.  For residentially zoned properties located in the SF-A, SF-B, and 2F-C districts, and for properties with existing or proposed single-family structures in the MFD district, the cap for mitigation fees shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.000) per tree. 
(b)  The director shall have discretion to modify mitigating requirements due to special circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2036 , 10-26-15; Ord. No. 2039 , 12-14-15)  
Sec. 5-157. - Prevention and control of the spread of oak wilt. 
(a)  All pruned limbs or wounds to the trunk, limbs and root system of oak trees in the city that expose sapwood shall be painted within thirty (30) minutes of the wound with asphaltic or exterior oil or latex based paint. 
(b)  Firewood from Oak wilt infected trees shall not be brought into the city at anytime. 
(c)  When Oak wilt infection is suspected or found, the director shall be contacted within forty-eight (48) hours to obtain aid from the Texas Forest Service to confirm the diagnosis of Oak wilt. When Oak wilt is confirmed the measures for control recommended by the service shall be undertaken to control spread of the infection. The cost of such measures will be the responsibility of the owner of the tree(s), provided that the owner of the tree(s) shall have the option of undertaking the least expensive measures approved by the Texas Forest Service. 
(d)  It is recommended that any firewood cut from any trees in the city and purchased firewood not be stacked under or close to oak trees and should be burned within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-158. - Tree protection during construction. 
To avoid damage or destruction of heritage trees and to enhance the chance of survival of other desirable trees after construction or demolition activities, the owner and contractor shall take and maintain the following measures throughout the course of demolition and construction: 
(1)  Erect and maintain a temporary protective barrier that equals the diameter of the tree canopy for each tree to be preserved. The barrier shall be in place before any site work is initiated and maintained throughout the construction process to avoid impact injuries to the tree and the tree's root system during demolition and construction. During demolition and construction, no excess soil, additional fill, construction equipment, liquids or construction debris shall be placed inside the protective barrier nor shall any soil be removed from within the barrier. 
(2)  To allow for vehicular access at times required during construction, the protective barrier on one side of the tree may be erected a minimum distance of sixty (60) inches from the trunk of a tree or group of trees only temporarily as such access is required. Other adjustments to the location of this barrier shall be approved by the director where site constraints are such that reasonable access for construction would otherwise not be available and where protection of the tree is still assured. 
(3)  Protective barriers may be comprised of chain link fencing, plywood and where appropriate "snow" temporary fencing such as vinyl construction fencing, geo-textile material or other material approved by the director. 
(4)  Trenching within a heritage tree's critical root zone shall have minimal intrusion and require the approval of the director during the building permit review process. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 5-159. - Right-of-way clearance. 
(a)  In the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of all residents by providing transit space for fire trucks, ambulances and other emergency vehicles, it is a violation of this article for any person to fail to prune trees and other vegetation to the face of the curb edge of the pavement adjacent to any traversable public right-of-way to a minimum height of thirteen and one-half (13.5) feet from the surface of the pavement after receiving written thirty (30) days' notice from the director or his designee. 
Exception: The clearance above the traversable public right-of-way along La Jara Blvd. shall not be lower than eleven and one-half (11.5) feet from the surface of the pavement. 
(b)  No provision of this article shall be construed to in any way limit or restrict any and all rights that the city may have to remove any part of a tree or vegetation that is permitted to grow over the public right-of-way and measures at a height above pavement less than permitted in subsection (a) above, or to maintain any civil suit for injunctive relief to require the removal or the prohibition of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1860, 4-12-10)  
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of the city to adopt fire prevention regulations generally, Art. VII, § 2; authority of city to establish fire department consisting of paid firemen and/or volunteer firemen, Art. VIII, § 4. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Smoke detectors in residential dwelling units. 
All residential dwelling units within the city shall have installed at least one (1) operable smoke detector. Such smoke detector shall be designed to detect both visible and invisible products of combustion, have an alarm audible to the bedrooms it serves, be powered by battery, alternating current or other power source, and be tested and listed for use as a smoke detector by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Such smoke detector shall be located in accordance with applicable building codes. The term "residential dwelling unit" shall mean a home, duplex unit, apartment unit, condominium unit or any dwelling in a multi-unit residential structure. Any occupant of a residential dwelling unit who fails to comply with this requirement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 9-56)  
Sec. 6-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1924, adopted March 12, 2012, repealed § 6-2, which pertained to annual certification by unit owners and derived from Ord. No. 1858, adopted March 8, 2010.  
Sec. 6-3. - Arson reward. 
The city offers to pay and will pay a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to any person who secures the arrest and indictment of anyone who commits within the corporate limits of the city the crime of arson as defined by the Penal Code. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1; Ord. No. 1858, 3-8-10) 
State Law reference— Elements of arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1858 adopted March 8, 2010, renumbered § 6-2 as § 6-3.  
Sec. 6-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1622, adopted Jan. 23, 2006, repealed § 6-3, which pertained to use and storage of liquefied petroleum gases and derived from Ord. No. 1589, adopted July 25, 2005. Ord. No. 1858 adopted March 8, 2010, renumbered § 6-3 as § 6-4.  
Secs. 6-5—6-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 6-26—6-34, which pertained to fire codes and derived from Code 1965, §§ 9-16—9-23; Ord. No. 1261, adopted Sept. 9, 1991; Ord. No. 1938, adopted Sept. 22, 1998; Ord. No. 1502, adopted June 24, 2002; Ord. No. 1589, adopted July 25, 2005; Ord. No. 1614, adopted Dec. 12, 2005; Ord. No. 1618, adopted Jan. 9, 2006; Ord. No. 1622, adopted Jan. 23, 2006. See §§ 5-32 and 5-46 for provisions pertaining to fire codes. 
 
Secs. 6-26—6-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011. 
 
Sec. 6-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1810, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2009, repealed § 6-51, which pertained to composition of the fire department and derived from Code 1965, § 9-45; and Ord. No. 1482, adopted May 21, 2001.  
Sec. 6-52. - Interlocal and reciprocal assistance in furnishing of firemen and firefighting equipment during emergencies. 
(a)  Authorization. In consideration of the promises and in consideration of the mutual agreements and understandings of the cities that the fire department of the city is herewith and hereby authorized to furnish to the cities with which mutual aid agreements have been approved by the mayor, such firefighting equipment as is available in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge of the city fire department whenever firefighting equipment or personnel is requested by the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge of the fire departments of such cities. Such fire chief or other officer in charge shall certify that there is an emergency and that equipment or personnel is needed, specifying such equipment and personnel as is needed. The fire chief of the city or such officer in charge is authorized to furnish such equipment and personnel as is available, in his opinion, at that immediate time, but he shall take into consideration as a first requisite that he shall withhold in his city such equipment and personnel as would be necessary to fulfill his primary function of protecting the health, property, and lives of the city. He shall maintain within the city its minimum requirement of equipment and men, but he is hereby authorized to lend on an emergency basis such other equipment and personnel as he can spare under the circumstances as they exist at that time. The fire chief of the city is herewith directed and authorized to keep the fire chiefs of cities with which mutual aid agreements have been approved by the mayor informed as to his equipment and his personnel, and to advise the chiefs of the fire departments of such cities as to the inventory of his firefighting equipment. 
(b)  Compensation of firefighting official performing duties outside of territorial limits of city. When any firefighting official of the city is ordered by proper authority to perform firefighting duties outside the territorial limits of the city he shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other compensations and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of the city; and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses which he may incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment. 
(c)  Powers and duties of official assigned to assist in the city. Whenever any firefighting official is assigned to the city under authority of an order adopted by the governing body of cities with which mutual aid agreements have been approved by the mayor, to assist under circumstances as described above which may exist in the city that such officer shall be a fire prevention agent of the city and shall be under the command of the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge for the city while so assigned, and he shall have all the powers and duties of a regular firefighting official of this city as fully as though he were within the city or municipality where regularly employed and his qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly employed shall constitute his qualifications for office in the city and no other oath, bond or compensation shall be made. 
(d)  Damage to city equipment. When any city firefighting equipment is damaged while being used in cities with which mutual aid agreements have been approved by the mayor, or if any damage to equipment should occur while traveling to or from such fire in such cities, the city will bear the costs of such damage. 
(Code 1965, § 9-6)  
Sec. 6-53. - Inspection of premises; removal or repair of dangerous conditions. 
The fire chief or his representatives, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger persons or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to persons or property, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. In addition to such penalty, the city shall be entitled to obtain injunctive relief consistent with the orders of the fire chief and shall be entitled to collect the city's reasonable attorney's fees from the owner or occupant who failed to comply with the fire chief's orders. 
(Code 1965, § 9-54)  
Sec. 6-54. - Right of entry. 
The fire chief or his representative shall have the authority, at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1965, § 9-55)  
Sec. 6-55. - Records kept. 
The fire chief shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-59)  
Sec. 6-56. - Qualifications of fire marshal. 
The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office. 
(Code 1965, § 9-46) 
Charter reference— Duties of fire marshal, Art. V, § 9. 
Cross reference— Duty of fire marshal to enforce fire prevention code, § 6-28.  
Sec. 6-57. - Duty to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. 
(Code 1965, § 9-48)  
Sec. 6-58. - Taking of testimony. 
(a)  The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(b)  The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1965, § 9-49)  
Sec. 6-59. - Authority to summon witnesses and require production of documents. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 9-50)  
Sec. 6-60. - Investigations may be private; sequestering witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1965, § 9-51)  
Sec. 6-61. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1965, § 9-52)  
Sec. 6-62. - Misconduct of witnesses. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of an investigation or inquiry authorized by this article, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1965, § 9-53)  
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 17; water and sewers, Ch. 19; zoning, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivision to comply with Federal requirements, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315; flood mitigation assistance program, 31 Tex. Admin. Code § 368.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-30, VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before the date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Flood-protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor useable for the following purposes: which include working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor." 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood-protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the prop erty of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started or, (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. II)  
Sec. 7-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. I, § B)  
Sec. 7-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public harm and private losses in special flood hazard areas with provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and property exposed to the hazards of flooding; 
(2)  To ensure that potential property owners are notified if property is in a special flood hazard area; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas; 
(6)  To minimize expenditure of future public money for costly flood-control projects; 
(7)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. I, § C)  
Sec. 7-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restricts and prohibits uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requires that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controls, in the sense of providing authoritative guidance, the alteration of natural floodplains, their protective barriers and stream channels; 
(4)  Prevents the construction of barriers which will divert floodwaters and subject other lands to greater flood hazards; 
(5)  Controls, in the sense of providing authoritative guidance, development which would cause greater erosion or potential flood damage, such as grading, dredging and excavation. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. I, § D)  
Sec. 7-5. - Lands to which chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § A)  
Sec. 7-6. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Bexar County, Texas & Incorporated Areas" dated September 29, 2010 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. These reports and maps are available for inspection by the public at city hall. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § B; Ord. No. 1367, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 1881, 9-27-10)  
Sec. 7-7. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § E)  
Sec. 7-8. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § F)  
Sec. 7-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply the land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § G)  
Secs. 7-10—7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Administrator—Designated. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. IV, § A)  
Sec. 7-32. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
Duties and responsibilities of the city floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maintaining and holding open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Reviewing, approving or denying all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter; 
(3)  Reviewing permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(4)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(5)  Notifying adjacent communities and the state water commission, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(6)  Assuring that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished, where appropriate easements are provided; 
(7)  When base flood elevation data for various flood-prone areas have not been provided in accordance with section 7-6, the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III; 
(8)  No new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including cut and/or fill) shall be permitted within Zone A1-30 on the community's FIRM, unless it is first demonstrated, by engineering data submitted by the applicant in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this chapter, that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. IV, § B)  
Sec. 7-33. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. Variance requests shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  For cut and/or fill, building or building permits, the applicant shall present the disapproved permit to the council, together with information as to why the variances should be granted. The council will then hear the request as soon as practical. 
(2)  For subdivision plats, the applicant may submit the disapproved permit and the request for variance, prior to plat submission or in conjunction with other data required for the platting process. This request shall be handled similar to paragraph (a) above. If the applicant chooses to submit the disapproved permit as part of the plat submission process, then the variance request shall be handled similar to other variances requested under the subdivision regulations, except that criteria for the floodplain variance shall be governed by this section. 
(3)  The city engineer shall reply in writing as to his evaluation of the applicant's request and make a recommendation as to approval or denial of the variance request. 
(4)  If the council approves the request, the permit will be issued with variances or any special conditions that are attached to the variance. 
(b)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the council may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city engineer shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(d)  Variances, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Sites and Places or the state historic survey list. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated flood-way if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall be granted only upon (1) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(h)  Any applicant to whom a variance or variances are granted shall be given written notice of the specific parts of the floodplain chapter for which variances were granted and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the granting of the variance or variances. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that (i) the criteria outlined in section 7-33 are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. IV, § D)  
Secs. 7-34—7-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
 
Sec. 7-51. - Establishment. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required for all development in any area of special flood hazard as defined in this chapter to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § C)  
Sec. 7-52. - Permit required. 
No structure or land in an area of special flood hazard shall hereinafter be located, altered, have its use changed or otherwise be developed unless a floodplain development permit has been issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
Requests for floodplain development permits for proposed development in the Flood Zone AE areas of the city shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  For new structures for which no footprint existed prior to the effective date of this section, or for the expansion of the footprint of structures existing prior to the effective date of this section, an application for a floodplain development permit shall comply with section 7-4, section 7-32, section 7-53, section 7-71, section 7-72, section 7-74, section 7-75, section 7-111, section 7-113 and section 7-114 as such sections may apply. 
(2)  For (i) interior remodeling of an existing structure; (ii) exterior remodeling of an existing structure that does not change the existing footprint, first floor elevation or elevation of the land; (iii) removal and replacement of an existing structure with a new structure of the same footprint, first floor elevation and location, or in an improved location, and no change in the elevation of the land; (iv) replacement of multiple existing structures with one structure up to the aggregate footprint of the multiple structures and in keeping with (iii) above; or (v) replacement of an existing structure or structures such that they are elevated on columns or pilings such that the lowest horizontal structural elements are at or above the base flood elevation and the elevation of the land is not changed, and in keeping with (iii) above, an application for a floodplain development permit shall comply with section 7-4, section 7-71, section 7-72, section 7-74, section 7-75, section 7-113 and section 7-114 as such sections may apply. Further, work allowed under subsection (2) must present the least possible resistance to the flow of the base flood, which can be accomplished by orientation of the structure, minimal structural elements, and other design features. 
Work permitted hereunder must be started within six (6) months of the date of approval of the required floodplain development permit, otherwise the permit shall become null and void. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. III, § D; Ord. No. 1637, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 7-53. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the city engineer, on forms furnished by him, prior to any proposed cut and/or fill or building. Application for a floodplain development permit for a proposed subdivision may be presented prior to or in conjunction with other data required for the platting process. For platting purposes, a floodplain development permit shall serve only as an approval of the floodplain chapter requirements. No cut and/or fill, building or other site alterations shall proceed until the permit is approved. The permit application shall be accompanied by supporting hydrology and hydraulic data prepared by a registered professional civil engineer, in accordance with the forms article of this chapter. It may also include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the locations, dimensions and elevations of proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. See section 7-114 for supplementary application floodplain development permit for building or structure in the flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification from a registered professional civil engineer or registered architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 7-72(2); 
(4)  Certification of the fair market value of an existing structure, prepared by a certified real estate appraiser, and a cost estimate of proposed improvements to such structure, prepared by a registered architect or registered professional engineer, shall be submitted to verify whether or not the proposed improvements exceed fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the existing structure. In the case of a structure that has suffered damage, the data will verify the fair market value of the structure before the damage occurred; 
(5)  Description by a registered professional civil engineer of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(6)  Permit review fee in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) to cover the cost for the city to secure from its floodplain consultant a review of the applicant's permit application, and for the cost of processing the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the city engineer shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors outlined below. A permit shall be denied if any factor is not satisfactorily addressed. 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; velocities in excess of six (6) fps shall be considered erosive, and the product of the velocity times the depth of flow in excess of that shown as within the "safe range" by section 7-112 shall be considered dangerous. Mitigating measures shall be addressed; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; materials to be stored in special flood hazard areas shall be properly restrained by anchorage or restraints so that flotation and displacement will not occur during the inundation period; 
(4)  Access to the property elevated to or above the elevation of the flood of record for ordinary and emergency vehicles must be provided for new construction and proposed subdivisions; 
(5)  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flooding conditions; 
(6)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the sites, shall be analyzed as delineated in section 7-111; 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area with respect to the dedication of additional drainage easement, in accordance with the existing subdivision regulations. 
(c)  All proposed drainage improvements to be made within the limits of the areas of special flood hazard as set forth in section 7-6 shall require a performance bond which shall be filed with the city engineer after the approval of the floodplain development permit. For improvements being made in a subdivision under the requirements: 
(1)  A performance bond will be executed by a surety company, licensed to do business in the state in an amount equal to the cost estimate, such cost estimate to include an inflation factor based upon a locally recognized construction cost index, as approved by the city engineer, of all uncompleted and unaccepted improvements required by this chapter; with the condition that the developer shall complete such improvements and have them approved by the city engineer within three (3) years from the date of approval of the floodplain development permit; 
(2)  The performance bond shall be substantially in the same form as the bond instrument set out in section 7-113 of this chapter. The city engineer is authorized to sign the bond instrument on behalf of the city and the city attorney shall approve the same as to form. 
(d)  If a floodplain development permit application is disapproved, the city engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of the section and specific requirement of the floodplain chapter within which the proposed development does not comply and the nature of such noncompliance. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. IV, § C; Ord. No. 1563, 9-13-04)  
Sec. 7-54. - Continuing obligations. 
It shall be unlawful to develop any property within an area of special flood hazard, except in accordance with the terms of a floodplain development permit. Drawings and other material or criteria, submitted to the city engineer in applying for such permit, shall, upon approval and issuance of such a permit, be a part of a condition and term of such permit. In addition, all standards and requirements of this chapter and all factors listed herein as relevant in approving or denying such permit shall be a part of such a permit and a condition and term of such a permit. In addition to named materials required to be submitted in applying for such a permit, the city engineer may require additional submission in order to verify whether such a permit should be issued. The conditions and terms shall constitute a continuing obligation upon all future occupants or users of the land, to the extent the same are applicable after development has been completed. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. VI, § C)  
Secs. 7-55—7-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 7-71. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(8)  Filling or the disposal of any materials, which will diminish the water flow capacity of any waterway or floodplain defined by this chapter, must be compensated for with remedial action by additional excavation or otherwise so as not to diminish water capacity; and 
(9)  Floodplain engineering and procedures requirements within FEMA or the U.S. Corps of Engineers official flood-prone areas shall conform to the engineering criteria as set out in section 7-111. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. V, § A)  
Sec. 7-72. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section 7-6, section 7-32(7) or section 7-73(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional civil engineer, registered architect or registered public surveyor shall submit a certification to the city engineer that the standard of this section is satisfied. Floodproofing will not be allowed as a substitute for the lowest floor, including basement, being elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction: New construction or substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings, having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided; 
b.  The bottoms of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes: 
a.  In accordance with the zoning chapter, modular and manufactured housing is not permitted to be constructed in the city. 
b.  If, in the future, construction of manufactured housing should be permitted, then the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with this section. 
3.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM be elevated on a permanent foundation, such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system, in accordance with the provision of paragraph (4) of this section. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. V, § B)  
Sec. 7-73. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with sections 7-2, 7-3, and 7-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet the development permit requirements of section 7-51, section 7-53, and the provisions of this article. No floodproofing of an existing or proposed building in a new subdivision will be allowed as a substitute for providing the proper finished fill elevation above the base flood or twenty-five-year ultimate development flood elevation, whichever is higher. Buildings in a proposed subdivision shall be on land that is above the controlling flood elevation. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, if not otherwise provided, pursuant to section 7-6 or section 7-32(7) of this chapter and shall conform to section 7-114. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and in accordance with the city subdivision regulations. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed so that they will not affect the existing water surface elevations of the base flood or twenty-five-year ultimate development flood whichever is greater in the area of special flood hazard. 
(f)  All proposed subdivisions must be contiguous to high ground that is not subject to flooding (the base flood or the twenty-five-year ultimate development flood, whichever is higher), i.e., no "island" will be considered for platting, unless adequate connecting structures, capable of passing the base flood or twenty-five-year ultimate development flood whichever is higher, are provided to high ground (not subject to the controlling flood of the same floodplain), and an additional one (1) foot of freeboard is provided to all minimum floor slab elevations. 
(g)  All proposed subdivisions traversed by an area of special flood hazard, as defined in section 7-6, where the "buildable" portion of the subdivision is severed by the floodplain, shall be provided with adequate access. Adequate access shall be a structure that will pass the control flood (base flood or twenty-five-year ultimate development) without overtopping the structure or affecting the upstream property by backwater, and shall not be designed with excessive velocities. 
(h)  Proposed subdivisions that involve the platting of streets shall have at least one (1) access to an unflooded portion of existing dedicated street or roadway. 
(i)  Proposed subdivisions that involve the platting of streets shall have access to an existing dedicated street that is above the base flood or twenty-five-year ultimate development, whichever is greater. 
(j)  Existing channels shall not be increased or decreased from their natural state, until engineering data as described in section 7-111 have been approved by the city engineer. Floodplain engineering and procedures requirements for subdivisions within FEMA or U.S. Corps of Engineers official flood-prone areas shall conform to the engineering criteria as set out in section 7-111. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. V, § C)  
Sec. 7-74. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
There are no specific areas within the city designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, should any areas ever be so designated, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor including basement elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor including basement elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or, 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of section 7-53 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. V, § D)  
Sec. 7-75. - Floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-6 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potentials, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If the preceding paragraph is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. V, § E)  
Secs. 7-76—7-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-91. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Wherever, by the provisions of this chapter, the performance of any act is required or the performance of any act is prohibited, or wherever any regulation or limitation are imposed on the use or change of use of or upon any land or on the erection or alteration of any structure or the use or change of use of such structure, a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and separate offense. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and separate offense. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. VI, § A)  
Sec. 7-92. - Notification; creation of lien. 
(a)  Whenever the floodplain administrator receives information of the existence of a floodplain violation, which, in the opinion of the city's health officer, results in the creation of a health hazard in accordance with section 4436 of the Revised Civil Statutes, the floodplain administrator shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice, informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance within fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the city limits, but, if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his post office, but, if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, notice may be served by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the city. In the case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(c)  If the owner is a corporation, service may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation if such office, place of business or officer can be located within the city limits, but, if such office, place of business or officer cannot be so located after reasonable effort, service may be made by certified letter addressed to its corporate headquarters post office address, but, if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the city. 
(d)  Whether delivered personally, by mail or by publication, the notice provided for above shall be addressed to the owner (but if the owner not be known, service may be had by publication addressed "To the owner of (legal description of the property involved")). The notice shall give the legal description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a violation hereof, and shall state that upon failure of the owner to rectify the situation within fifteen (15) days from date the notice is delivered (or within fifteen (15) days from date of the second publication, if notice is to be served by publication), a criminal complaint may be filed in the municipal court of the city for violation of this chapter, stating the penalties for violation. 
(e)  The city may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance herewith to be done, if the owner has failed to either do such work or cause work to be done within fifteen (15) days from the date notice has been received (or published), and to charge the owner for the costs incurred by the city. A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address is known, and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt (or publication). 
(f)  In the event that such statement has not been paid within such period, the floodplain administrator and the city's health officer may cause a statement to be filed with the county clerk of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises, to be filed in the deed records, and such statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvement, together with ten (10) percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(g)  Although large trees are not covered hereby and are not felt to be a nuisance or a hazard, it may be necessary at times to remove trees or parts thereof in order for the city crews or city contractors to effect entry of mowing or clearing equipment to property or portions of property not meeting standards established in this chapter. In such case, the removal of such trees or parts thereof as is found necessary shall be done and is hereby authorized, and the cost of this work shall be included in the cost charged to the owner. 
(h)  Violation of these regulations shall be reported by the city floodplain administrator as set out herein. Any person who fails to comply with these regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to the other remedies provided by law, the city council may institute appropriate action to abate violations of these regulations as a public nuisance by injunction proceedings at the cost, including attorney's fees, of the violator. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Art. VI, § B)  
Secs. 7-93—7-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FORMS 
 
Sec. 7-111. - Floodplain engineering and procedures requirements within FEMA or U.S. Corps of Engineers official flood-prone areas. 
(a)  For proposed subdivision plat. 
(1)  Run the 25-year ultimate development runoff discharge through area with existing "n" values of drain. 
(2)  Compare the 25-year water surface elevation profile against the federal agency 100-year profile; whichever is higher controls. 
(3)  If a federal agency 100-year profile is not available, use the U.S. Geological Survey Chart (100-year frequency discharge vs. drainage area, existing conditions) to establish the runoff for the local area and compare with the 25-year values; if 100-year values are greater, use for hydraulic calculations. 
(4)  With the existing floodplain established for water surface elevations, run frictional depths in the channel opposite the proposed subdivision for existing conditions, using Qs available. 
(5)  If floodplain water surface profiles are available for 100-year Qs, superimpose the 100-year water surface elevation in the existing section and calculate existing AR 2/3 value furnished. 
(6)  Any fill encroachment proposed in this section must furnish the same AR 2/3 value as the existing section and be solved for a depth delta hv below the original (existing) frictional depth line. 
(7)  Run a backwater curve on proposed finished fill contours to verify that the water surface elevation did not rise due to fill encroachment. 
(b)  For proposed building in existing officially designated FEMA or U.S. Corps of Engineers flood-prone areas. 
(1)  If a federal agency water surface profile is available for the 100-year frequency discharge, superimpose the 100-year water elevation in the existing section and calculate existing AR 2/3 value furnished. 
(2)  Superimpose the proposed building into the floodplain section to see if the remaining AR 2/3 value will be equal to the existing value furnished at a depth delta hv below the existing water surface elevation. If so, OK; if not, additional AR 2/3 value will have to be furnished or building cannot be approved for construction. 
(3)  If a federal agency 100-year frequency water surface profile is not available, use U.S. Geological Survey Chart (100-year frequency discharge vs. drainage area, existing conditions) to calculate runoff and run backwater profile and frictional depths through the proposed building site. 
(4)  Make frictional depth checks with the proposed building superimposed into the existing section and furnish the same AR 2/3 value as the existing section a depth delta hv down from the original water surface elevation. 
(5)  If the water surface profile had to be established, run a backwater curve through the proposed section with the building to verify that there is not rise in the existing water surface elevations. 
(c)  For subdivisions. Proposed plats will be checked for the 25-year water surface elevations plus freeboard, and the 100-year water surface elevations without freeboard, whichever is higher will control. Land to be built on will be filled to these controlling elevations. 
(d)  For building permits only. 
(1)  Residential finished floor slabs will be one (1) foot above the 100-year water surface elevation. 
(2)  Business, industrial or commercial. Builder will have the option to place uninhabited basements below 100-year water surface elevation, but building must be floodproofed, in accordance with section 7-72. 
(Code 1965, App. B, Attach. A) 
_____ 
Sec. 7-112. - Dangerous conditions on crossing during floods. 
 
(Code 1965, App. B, Attach. B)  
Sec. 7-113. - Performance bond. 
PERFORMANCE BOND 
STATE OF TEXAS 	( ) 
	( ) 
COUNTY OF ________ 	( ) 
 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS; 
That we, ___________, the undersigned developer as principal, and ___________, as surety, do hereby acknowledge ourselves to be held and firmly bound unto the City of Alamo Heights, a municipal corporation of the County of Bexar and State of Texas, in the full and just sum of $_____, for the payment of which will and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves and our respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
WHEREAS, the principal had petitioned the Floodplain Administrator of the City of Alamo Heights for permission to _______ within the jurisdiction of the City of Alamo Heights which is shown on plans entitled ___________, and which is more particularly described as follows, TO WIT: 
WHEREAS, said plans and a Floodplain Development Permit for said development were approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and 
WHEREAS, the Floodplain Ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights requires that the site improvements set out below be completed by the principal in conformance with the standards established by said ordinance within three (3) years from the date on which the Floodplain Development Permit was approved: 
_____              
_____              
_____ ; and          
WHEREAS, the aforesaid ordinance requires a Guarantee of Performance that such site improvements will have been completed and will have been accepted by the City within three (3) years of the date on which the Floodplain Development Permit was approved; and 
WHEREAS, the undersigned Developer has elected to provide to the City of Alamo Heights such a Guarantee of Performance; 
NOW THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the principal shall, on or before the ________ day of ________, 19___, construct or cause to be constructed the above-mentioned improvements in accordance with the requirement of the City of Alamo Heights Floodplain Ordinance, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, the obligations under this bond shall remain in full force and effect. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HAND AND SEAL this ________ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
	DEVELOPER AND PRINCIPAL 
	BY: _____ 
	TITLE: _____ 
	BY: _____ 
	    ATTORNEY-IN-FACT 
 
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	CITY OF ALAMO HEIGHTS 
	BY: _____ 
	TITLE: _____ 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: _____ 
CITY ATTORNEY      
(Code 1965, App. B, Attach. C)  
Sec. 7-114. - Supplementary application. 
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN FLOOD HAZARD AREA 
(To Accompany Application for Building Permit) 
City or Town _____ County _____ 
Location____________________________________________ 
Intended Use _____ Value Of Improvement $_____ 
Type of Construction _____ No. of Stories_____ 
Owner _____ Address _____ 
Exist. Ground Elev. ___ MSL; Fin. Ground Elev. ___ MSL; Reg. Flood Datum Elev. at Site ___ MSL; RFD Velocity ___ Ft./Sec. 
_____ Floor Elev. _____ MSL: Proposed Use _____ ; _____ Floor Elev. _____ MSL; Proposed Use _____ 
_____ Floor Elev. _____ MSL: Proposed Use _____ ; _____ Floor Elev. _____ MSL; Proposed Use _____ 
Maximum Loading on Walls: 	Hydrostatic (Uplift) Pressure on Floor Slabs (Maximum)________PSF 
Non-Flood Load _____ PSF 	Foundation Type(s) _____ 
Hydrostatic Load _____ PSF 	Lowest Footer Elev. (Bottom) _____ MSL 
Hydrodynamic Load _____ PSF 	Sewage Disposal: ___ Septic Tank. ___ Pub. Syst., ___ Other (Explain) 
Impact Load _____ PSF 	Potable Water: ___ Individual Well ___ Pub. Syst., ___ Other (Explain) 
Total Flood Load _____ PSF 	
Exterior Wall Construction Type(s): 	Floor Construction Type(s): 
 
Above _____ Floor _____ _____ Floor _____ 
Above _____ Floor _____ _____ Floor _____ 
Above _____ Floor _____ _____ Floor _____ 
Above _____ Floor _____ _____ Floor _____ 
Types of Waterproofing _____
Type(s) of Joints: Walls _____ Floors _____ ; Waterstops/Seals (Types): Walls _____ Floor _____ 
Sump Location _____ Sump Type _____ 
All Tanks and/or Buoyant Equipment Are _____ Are Not _____ Anchored to Prevent Flotation 
Alternate Power Source Is _____ Is Not _____ Provided For Emergency Operation of Sump Pump 
Sanitary, Drainage & Water Supply Facilities Are _____ Are Not _____ Protected From Contamination & Back Flow by Flood Water 
Retaining Wall(s) Are _____ Are Not _____ Used to Protect Building/Structure 
Intentional Flooding Is _____ Is Not _____ Planned For This Building/Structure 
Temporary And/Or Emergency Flood Proofing Is _____ Is Not _____ Planned For This Building/Structure 
Building Structure Is _____ Is Not _____ Protected Against Erosion By Flood Flows 
Site Is _____ Is Not _____ Protected Against Erosion By Flood Flows 
Classification Of Building/Structure: FP _____ , Primary _____ Secondary _____ Flood Hazard Area. 
SPACES: List below all spaces of the building or structure below the Regulatory Flood Datum including their name, room number, and proposed flood-proofing classification (i.e. W1, W2, etc.). List all contents of each space (see Chapter 10 of the Flood-Proofing Regulations). Mark all items which are to be either protected contingently or removed to safe refuge upon receipt of flood warning with an asterisk (*); all such items must be mentioned in the Owner's Contingency Plan. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
The applicant hereby certifies that the above information is correct and that the plans submitted herewith conform to those submitted for occupancy permit application. The applicant agrees to comply with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Building Code and all other laws and ordinances affecting the construction and occupancy of this proposed building. 
Signature Of Architect/Engineer _____ 	Address _____ 
	The undersigned will supervise the construction of the work above. 
	Signature _____ 
SEAL 	Title _____ 
Date _____ 	Address _____ 
_____
_____
	(Signature) _____ 
Clerk _____ 	APPROVED FOR COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE 
	Date _____ 
 
(Code 1965, App. B, Attach. D) 
_____ 
Secs. 7-115—7-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1519, §§ 1—10, adopted Feb. 24, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion as art. VI, §§ 7-121—7-130 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 7-121. - Organization. 
There is created the office of Emergency Management Director of the City of Alamo Heights, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for execution of emergency management duties, but responsibility for emergency management shall remain with the director; 
(3)  The Operational Emergency Management Organization of the City of Alamo Heights shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-122. - Emergency management director—Powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Alamo Heights, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city administrator. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purpose of this ordinance. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city administrator. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the City of Alamo Heights Emergency Management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies for any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 2, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-123. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 3, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-124. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of the County of Bexar and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Bexar, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Alamo Heights. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 4, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-125. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 5, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-126. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the City of Alamo Heights, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owing or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Alamo Heights a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster, together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 6, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-127. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this ordinance without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 7, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-128. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the Emergency Management Organization of the City of Alamo Heights, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable by fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 8, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-129. - Severability. 
If any portion of this article shall, for any reason, be declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 9, 2-24-03)  
Sec. 7-130. - Limitations. 
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statue or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1519, § 01, 2-24-03)  
Secs. 7-131—7-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1513, §§ I—IX, adopted Oct. 14, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion as art. VII, §§ 7-151—7-159 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 7-151. - Purpose. 
The Emergency Alert System (EAS) is the replacement of the Emergency Broadcast System. EAS can rapidly disseminate emergency information to the general public at the request of local, state, and federal officials. The local EAS may be activated in response to emergency situations such as severe weather, floods, civil disorders, industrial accidents, or any occurrence that poses a danger to life or property. The purpose of this plan is to explain the system and provide procedures for broadcasters, cable operators, and emergency managers in the San Antonio Operational Area. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § I, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-152. - Authority. 
(a)  This plan is developed under the authority of Title 47 U.S.C. 151, 154 (i) and (o), 303 (r), 524 (g) and 606; 47 C.F.R. Part 11, FCC Rules and Regulations; Part 73, Subpart G, of the Federal Communication Commission Rules and Regulations as it pertains to local operational use of the Emergency Alert System. 
(b)  Effective December 31, 1998, EAS rules and regulations applied to all AM and FM radio stations, Class D FM radio stations, television stations, low power television (LPTV) stations, and wired cable systems with 10,000 or more subscribers. 
(c)  Effective October 1, 2002, EAS rules and regulations will also apply to wired or wireless cable systems with 5,000 or more subscribers. Effective October 1, 2002, cable systems with less than 5,000 subscribers may transmit EAS messages on only one channel, provided the cable system transmits a video interruption and audio alert message on all channels stating which one channel will carry the complete EAS message. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § V-III, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-153. - Explanation of EAS equipment. 
(a)  EAS encoder/decoders. All broadcast stations and cable systems (with 10,000 or more subscribers) are required to have an FCC-approved EAS encoder/decoder. The encoder/decoder is capable of transmitting and receiving digitally coded emergency messages. Each encoder/decoder is assigned to monitor at least two different sources for incoming emergency messages. 
(b)  EAS header codes. 
(1)  All EAS messages must be preceded by a Header Code of high-speed digital data identifying the following: 
a.  The originator of the message (National Weather Service, Civil Authorities, National Level Authorities). 
b.  The event code identifying the type of emergency (Examples: Tornado Warnings, Flood Warnings, Civil Emergencies, and Amber Alerts). 
c.  The area affected by the emergency. 
d.  The valid time period of the message. 
e.  Date and time the message was issued. 
(2)  Individual EAS decoders can be configured to filter the header code data and activate only for specific emergencies in designated geographical areas. Detailed information about the format of EAS messages is covered in Appendix A. 
(c)  Modes of operation. 
(1)  EAS decoders must be capable of at least manual and automatic modes of operation. Some manufacturers also offer a semi-automatic mode. Here is a brief explanation of each mode. 
a.  Manual mode: The EAS decoder will only notify the operator on duty of any incoming EAS alert that it is programmed to receive. The operator must push a button to transmit the alert on a broadcast station or cable system. 
b.  Automatic mode: The EAS decoder will automatically interrupt program audio and/or video with any incoming EAS alerts the decoder is programmed to receive. Emergency information will be disseminated even if the station or system is not staffed full time. 
c.  Semi-automatic mode: When the EAS decoder receives an EAS alert that it is programmed to respond to, it will begin a preset countdown to automatically interrupt. If the alert does not air by the time the countdown expires, the EAS decoder will automatically interrupt the audio and/or video with the incoming message. 
(2)  EAS decoders can be programmed to respond to different alerts in different modes. Some examples: the decoder could respond to all weather watches in manual mode and all weather warnings in automatic mode. The decoder could be programmed to respond to the required monthly test (RMT) in semi-automatic mode. Since the RMT must be retransmitted within fifteen (15) minutes of receipt, the decoder would automatically run the RMT if an operator does not manually respond within the required time limit. 
(3)  Broadcasters using "unattended operation" are required to operate their EAS decoder in automatic mode. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § III, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-154. - EAS participation and priorities. 
(a)  Summary of national EAS plan. 
(1)  The primary purpose of EAS is to enable the President of the United States to speak directly to the country in times of national disaster through automatic access to the nation's broadcast outlets and cable systems. A presidential activation is called an emergency action notification (EAN). The communication path from the White House to the local broadcast and cable outlets is accomplished through a web of communication links. 
(2)  The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maintains dedicated phone lines from the White House to primary entry point (PEP) stations distributed across the country. National activations in Texas are disseminated from two PEP stations, KTRH-AM 740 in Houston and WBAP-AM 820 in Fort Worth. 
(3)  The PEP stations broadcast the message to their own operational areas in addition to three other state relay (SR) entities - WOAI-AM 1200 in San Antonio, the Texas State Networks in Dallas, and the National Weather Service office in New Braunfels. 
(4)  The local primary (LP) stations across the state would receive the national emergency message from a state relay (SR) and/or a National Weather Service station. All other broadcast stations and cable operators are assigned to monitor a local primary station and/or one of the National Weather Service offices and/or other state relay entities. 
(5)  Upon receipt of a national level EAN message, all participating national (PN) radio and television stations and cable systems are required to interrupt programming and transmit the national emergency message. 
(6)  Any station with a non-participating national (NN) authorization must sign-off the air for the duration of the emergency action notification message. 
(7)  During a national-level EAS, the EAS local plan may also be activated if a local emergency arises. 
(8)  Additional EAS information is available from the EAS Coordinator, Federal Communications Commission, Room 7-C753, 445-12th Street Southwest, Washington, DC 20554. National EAS information is available by telephone (888-CALL-FCC), fax (202-418-2817), on-line (www.fcc.gov/eb/eas), or by e-mail (eas@fcc.gov). 
(b)  Summary of Texas EAS plan. 
(1)  The Texas Department of Public Safety's Division of Emergency Management (DPS/DEM) will disseminate state emergency messages upon request of the governor or other authorized state officials by phone or fax to state relay (SR) points. 
(2)  The five state relay points in Texas are KTRH-AM 740 in Houston, WBAP-AM 820 in Fort Worth, WOAI-AM 1200 in San Antonio, the Texas State Network, and the Austin/San Antonio Office of the National Weather Service located in New Braunfels, (which will relay state emergency messages to all National Weather Service offices serving any Texas counties). 
(3)  All broadcast stations and cable systems in Texas are required to monitor their closest state relay station. It is requested that state EAS messages are rebroadcast within five (5) minutes of receipt. 
(4)  A current copy of the Texas EAS plan is available from the Chair of the Texas State Emergency Communications Committee (SECC), c/o Texas Association of Broadcasters, 502 East 11th Street, Suite 200, Austin, TX 78701. Texas EAS information is available by telephone (512-322-9944), fax (512-322-0522), on-line (www.tab.org), or e-mail (ann@tab.org). 
(c)  EAS priorities. 
(1)  EAS priorities as set forth in Section 11.44(b) of the FCC Rules are as follows: 
a.  National EAS messages. 
b.  Local Area EAS messages. 
c.  State EAS messages. 
d.  Messages from the National Information Center (NIC). 
(2)  NIC messages will typically follow a national EAS activation with additional information. Any NIC messages received from national networks that are not broadcast at the time of original transmission must be recorded locally by LP sources for transmission at the earliest opportunity. 
(d)  Counties within the San Antonio Operational Area. The San Antonio Operational Area is defined in Appendix D of the Texas EAS plan. It is one of twenty-five (25) local operational areas in the state. The San Antonio Local Operational Area includes the following sixteen (16) Texas counties: Atascosa, Bandera, Bexar, Comal, Dimmit, Frio, Gonzales, Guadalupe, Karnes, Kendall, Kerr, Medina, Real, Uvalde, Wilson, and Zavala. A list of EAS location codes for each county is included in Appendix A of the San Antonio Local Area Plan. 
(e)  Voluntary participation by broadcast stations and cable systems. 
(1)  All broadcasters (including AM and FM radio stations, television stations, and low power television stations) and all wired cable systems with more than 10,000 subscribers operators are required under FCC rules and regulations to transmit all EAS tests and national emergency messages. Under the FCC's First Report and Order, broadcasters and cable operators may be asked by the FCC or San Antonio Local Emergency Communications Committee to indicate in advance whether they intend to voluntarily transmit or rebroadcast state and/or local emergency messages. 
(2)  Each station and cable system is responsible for deciding the types (event codes) of emergency messages that will be broadcast, what counties (locations) those emergency messages will cover, and if their EAS decoder will manually or automatically relay local, state, or national EAS messages. 
(f)  Conditions of EAS participation. Acceptance of/or participation in the San Antonio Local Area Plan shall not be deemed as a relinquishment of program control. A broadcast licensee or cable operator shall not be prohibited from exercising independent discretion and responsibility in any given situation. The concept of management of each broadcast station and cable system to exercise discretion regarding the transmission of emergency information and instructions to the general public is provided by FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 11. Broadcast stations and cable systems originating EAS emergency communications shall be deemed to have conferred rebroadcast authority as specified in section 11.54(d). 
(g)  EAS promotional and public service announcements. 
(1)  Broadcasters and cable operators that voluntarily follow the recommended procedures of the local area plan may identify themselves as a "Local Participant in the Emergency Alert System for the San Antonio Operational Area" in EAS tests, public service announcements, and other promotional materials. 
(2)  Under Part 11.46 of the FCC rules and regulations, broadcasters and cable operators may use public service announcements or obtain commercial sponsors for announcements, infomercials, or programs explaining EAS to the public. Such announcements and programs may not be a part of alerts or tests, and may not simulate or attempt to copy alert tones or codes. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § IV, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-155. - Monitoring and re-broadcast. 
(a)  Designation of local primary sources. 
(1)  Local Primary (LP-1): WOAI-AM 1200. 
Location: 6222 NW IH 10, San Antonio, TX 78201. 
Monitoring Assignments: KTRH-AM 740 
NOAA Weather Radio or Weather Wire 
Texas State Network (Channel 1 or A-Left) 
KKYX-AM 680 
Station Contact: Dan Walthers, Chief Engineer 
Office: _____-___-_____ 
E-mail: 
Contact Method: 
Main Line: 210-736-9700 
Direct Line: 210-804-0245 
Newsroom: _____-___-_____ 
FAX: _____-___-_____ 
E-mail: 
(2)  Local Primary (LP-2): KKYX-AM 680. 
Location: 8122 Datapoint, San Antonio, TX 78229. 
Monitoring Assignments: WOAI-AM 1200 
NOAA Weather Radio or Weather Wire 
Station Contact: Paul Reynolds, Chief Engineer 
Office: _____-___-_____ 
E-mail: 
Contact Method: 
Main Line: 210-615-5400 
Direct Line: _____-___-_____ 
Newsroom: _____-___-_____ 
FAX: _____-___-_____ 
E-mail: 
(b)  Responsibilities of local primary stations. 
(1)  In consideration of this designation, the local primary station agree to: 
a.  Provide staff trained to broadcast EAS messages twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
b.  Install an EAS decoder capable of receiving all three (3) of its monitoring assignments. 
c.  Install an EAS encoder capable of alerting all sixteen (16) counties for all EAS event codes. 
d.  Install a direct telephone line answered twenty-four (24) hours by a trained operator on duty. 
e.  Follow the established call back and code word system to authenticate telephone requests for activation. 
(2)  The LP-1 and LP-2 stations agree to broadcast all local and state EAS messages with the proper SAME header code within five (5) minutes of receipt. 
(c)  Monitoring assignments. 
(1)  All broadcast and cable systems serving any portion of the San Antonio Operational Area must monitor the LP-1 (WOAI-AM 1200) and LP-2 (KKYX-AM 680) sources as their primary and secondary monitoring assignments. 
(2)  It is strongly recommended that all stations add a NOAA weather radio receiver as an additional input to their EAS decoder. 
(d)  Rebroadcast of EAS messages. 
(1)  Local primary sources transmitting EAS messages shall be deemed to have conferred authority for rebroadcast by other broadcast stations and cable operators serving the San Antonio Area. 
(2)  All other broadcasters and cable systems are encouraged to rebroadcast the audio portion of the EAS message received from a local primary source, or use their own on-air staff to repeat or summarize the EAS message following the same format for local EAS messages in 7-157(b). The on-air staff should be careful that they broadcast only the audio (verbal) portion of the EAS message. They should not precede the audio with the EAS digital codes. Use of the eight-second attention signal is optional for rebroadcast of local EAS messages. 
(3)  Broadcasters and cable operators are encouraged to set their EAS encoder/decoders to either automatic or semi-automatic mode in order to rebroadcast local EAS messages within five (5) minutes of receipt. 
(e)  Event code recommendations. 
(1)  The San Antonio Local Plan recommends that all EAS encoder/decoders should be programmed to rebroadcast local EAS messages with any of the six (6) event codes, listed below, that affect the specific counties within the station's coverage area or cable system's franchise area. 
(2)  The following four event codes will originate from the New Braunfels office of the National Weather Service. 
a.  FFW—Flash flood warning. 
b.  FLW—Flood warning. 
c.  SVR—Severe thunderstorm warning. 
d.  TOR—Tornado warning. 
(3)  Other severe weather warnings, watches, and statements may be broadcast without EAS activation as part of normal programming at the station's discretion. 
(4)  Upon the request of a city or county office of emergency management, in any portion of the sixteen (16) counties in the San Antonio Operational Area, the local primary stations will activate EAS. The emergency must meet the EAS criteria listed in subsection (c). The designated event codes are: 
a.  CEM—Civil emergency message. 
b.  ADR—Amber Alerts. 
(5)  Suggested Eas scripts for different civil emergency messages are included in Appendix B. The criteria for Amber Alerts is listed in Appendix D. 
(f)  Video text or crawl. 
(1)  Under the FCC's second report and order, television stations and cable systems serving ten thousand (10,000) or more subscribers are required to provide both audio and video versions of national EAS messages and all EAS tests on all programmed channels to ensure EAS messages are accessible to all viewers, especially those with hearing disabilities. 
(2)  For state and local EAS messages, television stations and cable systems are encouraged to provide a full-screen text summary or video crawl summarizing the EAS message, including the originator, event, location, and valid time period of the message. Any video crawl must be displayed at the top of the screen or another location in order to prevent interference with any closed captioning system or character-generated supers. Spanish-language television stations can display its text summary or video crawl in either Spanish or English. 
(g)  Cable override. 
(1)  To prevent repetition of the same EAS messages, cable systems and wireless systems shall not interrupt programming of any broadcast station which carries its own news or weather related emergency information with state or local EAS messages or cable-originated required weekly or monthly tests. 
(2)  To qualify for a cable override agreement, the local broadcast station must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The ability to originate live news programming from a studio facility. 
b.  The station must have direct access to weather equipment at the studio facility to track severe local weather conditions. 
c.  The ability to generate and broadcast video crawls over network or local programming to advise the public of weather conditions or other emergency situations. 
d.  The station's master control center is staffed at all times when the station is on the air. 
e.  The general manager of the station shall certify the above conditions to each cable system that retransmits their signal to exempt the station from cable system equipment placing video crawls over the programming of the broadcast station. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § V, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-156. - Activation criteria. 
(a)  Guidance for emergency services personnel. 
(1)  The Emergency Alert System is designed for the rapid dissemination of news and official information during emergency situations. Civil authorities have acquired a valuable tool that provides direct access to area broadcasters and cable operators. Use of the EAS must be reserved for catastrophic situations when time is of the essence to prevent the loss of lives or property. 
(2)  The decision to activate the EAS rests with Emergency Services Personnel. Some broadcasters and cable operators will have the EAS equipment operating in the Automatic Mode that pass through any messages without any pre-screening. Facilities that operate in automatic mode depend on civil authorities to carefully determine if situation warrants EAS activation. All broadcasters and cable operators participate on a voluntary basis in the local-level EAS. Broadcasters and cables systems will continue participate in the San Antonio Local Area Plan only if there is judicious use of EAS activations. 
(b)  Definition of an emergency. The FCC defines an emergency as a "situation posing an extraordinary threat to the safety of life and property." The following list is intended for guidance only and is not intended to be an exhaustive list. Some examples include: 
(1)  Immediate weather situations: tornadoes, floods, severe thunderstorms, high winds, icing conditions, heavy snows, and widespread fires. 
(2)  Man-made or technological situations: nuclear attack or war, industrial explosions, discharge of toxic or flammable gases, release of chemical, biological or radioactive agents, terrorist attacks, widespread power failures, civil disorders, and dam failures. 
(c)  Local activation criteria. 
(1)  Requests for local activation of the Emergency Alert System should be limited to an emergency event or situation which: 
a.  Poses an immediate or imminent threat to life or property, 
b.  Has the potential to adversely impact a significant population or geographic area, 
c.  Requires immediate public knowledge to seek shelter or take protective action and other means of disseminating information are inadequate to ensure rapid delivery of the information. 
(2)  The media and public should be informed through other methods for non-emergency events that do not meet the above criteria. Examples include, but are not limited to, school or business closings, ozone alerts, pollen reports, water rationing, and prohibitions on outdoor burning. 
(3)  The San Antonio Local Area Plan allows an exception to the above criteria for the Amber Plan. Local primary stations are authorized to disseminate alerts and updates concerning abducted children, subject to terms of an LECC-approved Amber Plan (see Appendix D). Broadcasters and cable operators are encouraged to re-broadcast such Amber Alerts and updates. 
(d)  Follow-up activations. Due to the automated nature of the EAS system, activation will result in a single broadcast. The same information will not be repeated at specified intervals. After the initial EAS activation, further information will be considered a news item to be covered by local media outlets. The EAS system may be reactivated if the emergency situation escalates and life-saving instructions to the affected population must be updated immediately. 
(e)  Local authorized officials. 
(1)  In accordance with the Texas Disaster Act, the local area plan can be activated at the request of: 
a.  The mayor or emergency management coordinator of any incorporated city within the San Antonio Operational Area. 
b.  The county judge or emergency management coordinator of any county or unincorporated area within the San Antonio Operational Area. 
c.  The commander of any local military base. 
d.  The National Weather Service located in New Braunfels. 
(2)  Other city or county departments or state agencies should route their request for local EAS activation through the local office of emergency management of the affected city or county. 
(3)  Overnight, weekends and holidays when the city/county administrative and emergency management offices are closed, local EAS activation may be requested through the 24-hour police or fire dispatch center if so authorized by their city or county office of emergency management. 
(f)  Multiple jurisdictions. If an emergency impacts multiple jurisdictions in the San Antonio Operation Area, the decision to activate the local EAS must be coordinated between all of the impacted jurisdictions. This will allow a single standardized message to be relayed to the affected population. Each jurisdiction located in the San Antonio Operational Area must develop and distribute local procedures to appropriate public officials. It is important that public officials understand the use of the EAS and use it only when it is the most appropriate method of getting initial lifesaving information to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § VI, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-157. - Activation procedures for authorized local officials. 
(a)  Procedures for emergency management personnel. Emergency management personnel must follow the procedures outlines below once they have determined that a situation qualifies for local EAS activation. Emergency information must be very clear and concise. Designated officials should use the appropriate form in Appendix B to organize the information. 
(1)  Request activation of EAS through the LP-1, WOAI. 
(2)  In the event that it is not possible to reach WOAI, request activation through the LP-2, KKYX. 
(3)  Activation may also be requested through the National Weather Service office in New Braunfels to trigger NOAA weather radios. 
Important Note: Local officials should not request EAS activation for severe weather warnings through WOAI or KKYX. Any weather related concerns should be directed to the National Weather Service. 
(4)  Designated officials and personnel at the local primary stations must follow the authentication procedures outlined in Appendix C. 
(5)  Upon authentication, the designated officials and local primary station personnel must determine the transmission details. (Live or recorded, immediate or delayed). Officials should fax or read the information from the appropriate form in Appendix B. The maximum length of any message should not exceed 90-seconds. Some EAS decoders will automatically reset after two minutes and cut off the message. 
(6)  If necessary, maintain an open line of communication. 
(7)  For a unique emergency not involving the entire San Antonio Operational Area, authorities may request EAS activation through the cable system and broadcast stations serving only the affected area. 
(b)  Procedures for broadcast and cable system personnel. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a request to activate the local EAS from appropriate authority; (verify authenticity through procedures outlined in Appendix C). Personnel at the local primary station utilize the following format: 
a.  Interrupt normal programming. 
b.  Optional announcement: 
"We interrupt our programming to activate the San Antonio Emergency Alert System. Important information will follow." 
c.  One-second pause (no audio). 
d.  Send EAS header code three times (the required amount to trip EAS decoders) and incorporate the county FIPS code(s) and event codes following the format in Appendix A. 
e.  One-second pause (no audio). 
f.  Eight second attention signal (853 and 960 Hz tone). 
g.  Activation announcement: 
"We interrupt our programming to activate the San Antonio Emergency Alert system." 
h.  Broadcast EAS message. 
i.  Termination announcement: 
"This concludes activation of the San Antonio Emergency Alert System." 
j.  One-second pause (no audio). 
k.  Send EAS end-of-message code three times (The required amount to release EAS decoders). 
l.  Resume normal programming. 
Important Note: When relaying EAS messages for state and local emergencies, broadcasters and cable operators have the option of transmitting only the EAS header and EOM codes without the attention signal and emergency message. This is enables EAS coded message to be quickly relayed through areas unaffected by the emergency. 
(2)  All other broadcast stations and cable systems are monitoring key sources via EAS equipment and will be alerted by the header codes and attention signal. Each station and cable system upon receipt of the signal will, at the discretion of management, perform the same procedures as in the Step 1 above by transmitting the emergency message from the LP-1 or LP-2. Broadcast stations and cable systems using automatic interrupt of programming should receive the EOM codes before retransmitting state or local level EAS messages. This can prevent downstream locations from missing parts of the EAS message. 
(3)  Appropriate notations should be made on the station logs and cable system records. A very brief summary may be sent to the FCC for informational purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § VII, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-158. - Tests. 
(a)  The following requirements regarding required weekly tests (RWT) and required monthly tests (RMT) apply to all cable systems and broadcasters, "PN" as well as "NN" stations. Stations and cable systems that have elected not to participate in local EAS alerts are required to rebroadcast the RMT. 
(b)  There are two (2) exceptions to the rules. Class "D" FM and LPTV stations are not required to have an EAS encoder. They are however, required to have an EAS decoder. Such stations are exempt from running the weekly digital code RWT test. The same stations must retransmit the RMT, as outlined in this section, minus the EAS header codes and attention signal. In addition, LPTV stations must present all EAS information visually, the same requirement as all other TV stations. The second exception is FM translator and TV translator stations, which are not required to have any EAS equipment. 
(1)  Required weekly test (RWT). 
a.  Transmission: All broadcasters and cable operators must transmit an RWT once each week at random days and times except for the week of the RMT test. There are no time-of-day restrictions. 
b.  Reception: All broadcasters and cable operators receiving a RWT from one of their monitored sources and must long receipt of the test. No further action is required. 
(2)  Format of the required weekly test (RWT). Use of any audio test message is optional, but must air before or after all digital codes. 
a.  Stop regular programming. 
b.  One-second pause (no audio). 
c.  Send EAS header code (with RWT event code) three times. 
d.  One-second pause. 
e.  Send EAS end-of-message code three times. 
f.  One-second pause. 
g.  Read the optional audio test message: 
"This is a test of the Emergency Alert System. In the event of an emergency, this system would bring you important information. This test is now concluded." 
h.  Resume normal programming. 
(3)  Required monthly test (RMT). 
a.  All broadcast stations and cable systems (including those that have elected not to participate in state or local EAS messages) must log and re-broadcast the required monthly test each month. 
b.  Statewide tests of the Texas Emergency Alert System are conducted during the first full week of each month (the week including the first Sunday in any given month). The Texas State Emergency Communications Committee will coordinate planning with the Texas Department of Public Safety's Division of Emergency Management to initiate the required monthly test by contacting the two primary entry point (PEP) stations in Texas, KTRH-AM 740 in Houston and WBAP-AM 820 in Fort Worth. The date and time of the required monthly test will vary each month and be chosen by the chief engineers of the PEP stations. 
c.  Upon receipt of the required monthly test, all other broadcasters and cable operators must log receipt of the test and re-transmit the required monthly test within five (5) minutes, including the EAS header codes, attention signal, and the audio test message transmitted or re-broadcast by one of the local primary sources they monitor. 
d.  Broadcasters and cable systems are assigned to monitor at least two (2) local primary stations, so they will receive two (2) required monthly test messages each month. Broadcasters and cable systems are required to re-broadcast either one (but not both) of the RMT messages they receive each month. 
e.  Television stations and cable operators must provide both audio and video versions of the required monthly test on all programmed channels to ensure EAS messages are accessible to all viewers, especially those with hearing disabilities. 
f.  Television stations and cable systems are required to provide either a full-screen text summary or video crawl of the test message. The video message shall identify the originator (EAS), event (RMT), location (all San Antonio Area County Codes listed in Appendix A), and the valid time period of the message (+0015) as provided in the EAS header of the message; the video message should also contain a text summary of the audio test message. 
g.  Any video crawl must be displayed at the top of the screen or another location in order to prevent interference with any closed captioning system or character-generated supers. Spanish-language television stations can display its text summary or video crawl in either Spanish or English. 
h.  Radio stations licensed for daytime-only operations that receive a required monthly test at night must re-transmit the required monthly test within five (5) minutes of the station's sign-on. 
i.  Broadcast and cable management should impress on their staff that re-broadcast of the required monthly test is not an option and cannot be replaced by the station or cable system conducting its own monthly test. Failure to re-broadcast the required monthly test within fifteen (15) minutes is a FCC violation. The Texas State Emergency Communications Committee has adopted a 5-minute rebroadcast requirement as part of the Texas EAS Plan. 
(4)  Format of the required monthly test (RMT). 
1.  Stop regular programming. 
2.  Optional intro: 
"This is a test of the Texas Emergency Alert System." 
3.  One-second pause. 
4.  Send EAS header code (with RMT event code) three (3) times. 
5.  One-second pause. 
6.  Send eight-second EAS attention signal (853 and 960 Hz). 
7.  Read (or re-broadcast) the required audio test message: 
"This is a Required Monthly Test of the Texas Emergency Alert System. In the event of an emergency, this system would bring you important information. This test is now concluded." 
8.  One-second pause. 
9.  Send EAS end-of-message code three (3) times. 
10.  One-second pause. 
11.  Resume normal programming. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § VIII, 10-14-02)  
Sec. 7-159. - Local emergency communications committee (LECC). 
(a)  Membership. 
(1)  Membership in the San Antonio Area Local Emergency Communications Committee is voluntary and open to San Antonio area representatives of the local primary stations, other radio and television stations, wired cable system operators, city and county offices of emergency management, local cable TV franchising authorities, local emergency planning committees, the Texas Department of Public Safety's Division of Emergency Management, the New Braunfels Office of the National Weather Service, and any other membership category approved by the LECC. 
(2)  Membership is also available to San Antonio area representatives of other services regulated by the FCC that may voluntarily participate in EAS, including but not limited to wireless cable systems, direct satellite broadcast systems, digital paging services, telephone and cellular carriers, Internet Service Providers, Open Video Systems, Local Multipoint Distribution Services, Satellite Master Antenna Television systems, and other digital technology systems. 
(3)  Requests for membership must be approved by the LECC, and then be submitted to the Texas State Emergency Communications Committee, which in turn will submit nominations to the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)  Meetings. 
(1)  The LECC will select a chairperson who will schedule and conduct two annual meetings. The LECC members shall meet in the first two (2) weeks of March. A general meeting of all involved with the EAS plan shall meet in the first two weeks of October. The purpose of the meeting is to review all aspects of the San Antonio Local Plan to ensure the plan is achieving its goal. 
(2)  The chairperson will also call a meeting and/or conference with the San Antonio LECC after each EAS activation review the event and local procedures 
(c)  Adoption or amendment of plan. 
(1)  By majority vote of the LECC members in attendance, the San Antonio Area LECC shall elect its own officers and subcommittees as needed, approve motions and bylaws, adopt or amend the local area plan, and conduct other EAS business within the San Antonio Operational Area. 
(2)  Proposed changes to the San Antonio EAS local plan must be submitted in writing to the LECC chairperson for consideration at the next regular meeting. 
(3)  Upon adoption of the plan or any amendment by the San Antonio Area LECC, the local area plan must be submitted for approval by the Texas State Emergency Communications Committee (SECC) and the Federal Communications Commission before incorporation into the Texas EAS plan. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § IX, 10-14-02)  
Appendix A: - EAS Protocols 
The emergency alert system (EAS) utilizes a digital specific area message encoding (SAME) protocol adopted by the FCC and the National Weather Service. All EAS audio messages must be preceded by a header code of high-speed digital data identifying the: 
1.  Originator of the message (such as weather service or civil authority). 
2.  Event code (such as tornado or flood warning, or civil emergency message). 
3.  Location of county or portion of county affected by the emergency. 
4.  The valid time period of the message (in 15 or 30 minute increments). 
5.  Date and time the message was issued. 
This digital information can be received, stored, and displayed on EAS decoders, computers, cellular phones, pagers, video crawl and closed captioning systems, and other digital receiving equipment. All broadcasters and cable operators are required to install equipment necessary to encode/decode EAS messages using the SAME protocol. 
The EAS header code consists of the following ASCII data codes: 
ORG-EEE-PSSCCC+TTTT-JJJHHMM-LLLLLLLL 
The character string represents the following items: ORG (originator code)-EEE (event code)-PSSCCC (location code)-TTTT (Time Code)-JJJHHMM (Date Code)-LLLLLLLL (Identification Code). 
Here are the details for each code: 
Originator codes (ORG): 

EAN 	= 	Emergency Action Notification Network (National Alert) 
EAS 	= 	Local broadcast station or cable system 
CIV 	= 	Civil authorities (city, county, or state office of emergency management) 
PEP 	= 	Primary Entry Point System 
WXR 	= 	National Weather Service 

Required national EAS event codes (EEE): 

(All EAS Decoders must activate and relay the following four (4) codes) 

EAN 	= 	Emergency action notification (national alert) 
EAT 	= 	Emergency action termination (national alert) 
RMT 	= 	Required monthly test (state or local) 
RWT 	= 	Required weekly test (local) 

Recommended local EAS event codes (EEE): 

(The San Antonio Local Plan recommends that area broadcast stations and cable systems program their EAS decoders to activate and relay the following six (6) event codes) 

ADR 	= 	Amber Alerts (Secondary use of event code for local level) 
CEM 	= 	Civil emergency message (city or county office of emergency management) 
FFW 	= 	Flash Flood Warning (NWS) 
FLW 	= 	Flood Warning (NWS) 
SVR 	= 	Severe Thunderstorm Warning (NWS) 
TOR 	= 	Tornado Warning (NWS) 

Optional local EAS event codes (EEE): 

ADR 	= 	Administrative message (state or local) 
ADR 	= 	Amber Alerts (secondary use of event code for local level) 
DMO 	= 	Practice/Demo Warning (state or local) 
EVI 	= 	Evacuation Immediate 
FFA 	= 	Flash Flood Watch (NWS) 
FFS 	= 	Flash Flood Statement (NWS) 
FLS 	= 	Flood Statement (NWS) 
HUW 	= 	Hurricane Warning (NWS) 
HWA 	= 	High Wind Watch (NWS) 
HWW 	= 	High Wind Warning (NWS) 
SPS 	= 	Special Weather Statement (NWS) 
SVA 	= 	Severe Thunderstorm Watch (NWS) 
SVS 	= 	Severe Weather Statement (NWS) 
TOA 	= 	Tornado Watch (NWS) 
WSA 	= 	Winter Storm Watch (NWS) 
WSW 	= 	Winter Storm Warning (NWS) 
 
Location codes (PSSCCC): 
The location code uses the six (6) digit federal information processing system (FIPS) code to indicate the specific geographic area affected by the local EAS message. 
The first character in the PSSCCC string is called the P code. The P code is presently "0" but is reserved for later use to identify portions of a specific county. 
The SS refers to the two (2) digit state code. The State of Texas is assigned 48. 
The CCC refers to the county code. For example, Bexar County is assigned 029. The complete string for Bexar County is 048029. 
Here are the location codes for all counties in the San Antonio Operational Area. 
Atascosa 	048013 	Karnes 	048255 
Bandera 	048019 	Kendall 	048259 
Bexar 	048029 	Kerr 	048265 
Comal 	048091 	Medina 	048325 
Dimmit 	048127 	Real 	048385 
Frio 	048163 	Uvalde 	048463 
Gonzales 	048177 	Wilson 	048493 
Guadalupe 	048187 	Zavala 	048507 
 
Time codes (+TTTT) 
This code indicates the valid time period of a message in 15-minute increments up to one-hour, and then in 30-minute increments after one hour (i.e., +0015, +0030, +0045, +0100, +0130, +2000). For events (such as hazardous materials incidents) where the duration of the emergency cannot be estimated, the initial time code should be two (2) hours (+0200); the EAS message can be cancelled earlier or extended later if needed. 
Date code (JJJHHMM) 
This is the day in Julian Calendar Days (JJJ) of the year and the time in hours and minutes (HHMM) when the message was initially released by the originator using 24-hour Universal Coordinated Time (UTC). The EAS encoder automatically inserts these codes. 
Identification code (LLLLLLLL) 
This is the call sign or other identification (up to eight (8) characters) of the broadcast station cable system, or National Weather Service office transmitting or re-broadcasting the message. The EAS encoder automatically inserts these codes. 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. A, 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-1: - Activation Message Procedures and Script Civil Emergencies 
Procedures: 
1.  Complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to 90-seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
6.  Contact the same station when the emergency is over. Otherwise, the message will automatically expire after the time period you provide. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to broadcast a Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ until _____ (time) _____ a.m./p.m. due to a ___________ (type of incident) ___________. 
(Provide information and recommended actions to be taken by the public) 
(If needed, add any other information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-1, 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-2: - Cancellation Message Procedures and Script Civil Emergencies 
Procedures: 
1.  When the emergency condition has ended, complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to ninety (90) seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to report that the Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ has been cancelled as of (time) _____ a.m./p.m. 
(Provide updated information and whether public can return to normal activities.) 
(If needed, add any additional information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-2, 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-3: - Activation Message Procedures and Script Hazardous Materials Release 
Procedures: 
1.  Complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to ninety (90) seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow activation procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow activation procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow activation procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
6.  Contact the same station when the emergency is over. Otherwise, the message will automatically expire after the time period you provide. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to broadcast a Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ until _____ (time) _____ a.m./p.m. due to a ___________ (type of incident) ___________ located at ___________ (name and/or street 
location) ___________ in ___________ (city or county) ___________. 
As a safety precaution, we recommend all persons within _____ mile(s) of this location between ________________ (street) ________________ on the north, ________________ (street) ________________ on the south, ________________ (street) ________________ on the east, and ________________ (street) ___________ on the west to: 
SHELTER IN PLACE until the release is stopped and fumes have dissipated. This means you should go inside the nearest building or vehicle, close all doors and windows, and turn off any air conditioning or heating systems that might draw in outside air. Stay off the telephone to keep phone lines open for emergency use. 
EVACUATE and stay clear of the area by heading cross-wind toward the ___________ (safe directions or shelter location) ___________. 
(If needed, add any other information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-3, 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-4: - Cancellation Message Procedures and Script for Hazardous Materials Release 
Procedures: 
1.  When the condition has dissipated, complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to ninety (90) seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to report that the Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ has been cancelled as of _____ (time) _____ a.m./p.m. 
The ___________ (type of incident) ___________ located at ___________ (name and/or street 
location) ___________ in ___________ (city or county) ___________ is now under control and no longer poses any threat to the area. 
The earlier recommendation to SHELTER IN PLACE has been cancelled. Instead, persons who sheltered-in-place should now open all doors and windows, and turn on their air conditioning or heating systems in order to air out the building before returning inside and resuming normal activities. 
The earlier recommendation to EVACUATE the area has been cancelled. Instead, persons who evacuated the area can now safely return to the area and resume normal activities. Evacuees should be prepared to show proper identification to local law enforcement to gain admission to the area. 
(If needed, add any other information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-4, 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-5: - Activation Message Procedures and Script for Flood Evacuation 
Procedures: 
1.  Complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to ninety (90) seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
6.  Contact the same station when the emergency is over. Otherwise, the message will automatically expire after the time period you provide. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to broadcast a Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ until _____ (time) _____ a.m./p.m. due to a ___________ (type of incident) ___________. 
Based on National Weather Service warnings, the ___________ (Mayor or County Judge) ___________ of ___________ (city or county) ___________ recommends the following persons evacuate immediately: 
all residents in the area threatened by high water (all persons in low-lying or flood-prone areas along ___________ (river or lake) ________________ from ___________ (location) ________________ to ___________ (location) ________________ 
all persons located in ___________ (subdivision, city or county) _____ should evacuate before _____ (time and date) _____ to a safe location. 
(If needed, add any other information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-5 10-14-02)  
Appendix B-6: - Cancellation Message Procedures and Script for Flood Evacuation 
PROCEDURES: 
1.  When the flooding has subsided, complete the script. All blanks must be filled out. Limit message to 90-seconds max. 
2.  Call WOAI at 210-802-0245, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
3.  Or call KKYX (If unable to reach WOAI) at 210-615-5400, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
4.  Or call the National Weather Service at 830-606-3600, identify yourself and follow authentication procedure. 
5.  Fax a copy of the completed script to the same local primary station. 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
The ___________ (city or county) ___________ Office of Emergency Management requests activation of the Emergency Alert System to report that the Civil Emergency Message in effect for a portion of ________________ (county) ___________ has been cancelled as of _____ (time) _____ a.m./p.m. 
The threat of _____ (flooding or hurricane damage) _____ has now ended for the area. 
The earlier recommendation to EVACUATE the area has been cancelled. Instead, persons who evacuated the area can safely return to the area and resume normal activities. 
Evacuees should be prepared to show proper identification to local law enforcement to gain admission to the evacuated area. 
(If needed, add any additional information or special instructions here.) 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. B-6, 10-14-02)  
Appendix C: - Authentication Procedures 
1.  Telephone the LP-1, LP-2, or the New Braunfels Office of the National Weather Service. 
2.  The caller must identify themselves in the following way: 
"This is (name/title) of (organization). I request local activation of the Emergency Alert System because of (description of emergency). My call back number is ___________." 
3.  Station personnel at the LP-1, LP-2, or NWS will randomly select a number between 1-20. 
4.  The caller must provide the corresponding code word from the current authentication list. 
5.  If the caller is unable to provide a valid code word the station personnel must promptly terminate the telephone call. 
6.  Upon authentication, the designated officials and local primary station personnel must work out the details of the requested activation. 
7.  When necessary both parties should keep an open line of communication. 
Effective Date: October 2001 
Code Word List #1 
 1. Juliett Zulu 
 2. Bravo Golf 
 3. Mike Romeo 
 4. Echo India 
 5. Quebec Uniform 
 6. Sierra Kilo 
 7. Romeo Tango 
 8. Whiskey Papa 
 9. India Juliett 
10. Tango Lima 
11. Sierra X-Ray 
12. Romeo Hotel 
13. November Papa 
14. Echo Yankee 
15. India Whiskey 
16. Delta X-Ray 
17. Charlie Romeo 
18. Yankee Zulu 
19. Victor Delta 
20. Yankee Foxtrot 
The local emergency communications committee must revise the code word list at least once annually. The list will be distributed to the LP-1, LP-2, the National Weather Service, members of the LECC and appropriate civil authorities. The code word list is not for general distribution and must be kept confidential. 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. C, 10-14-02)  
Appendix D: - Amber Plan 
A.  Background information 
1.  The purpose of this policy and procedure is to establish the criteria for activating the Amber Alert by law enforcement when a child is abducted. The program is a cooperative public service effort between local law enforcement, news media outlets, Amber Plan business partners, and the public. 
2.  According to the U.S. Justice Department, up to four thousand six hundred thousand (4,600) children are abducted every year nation-wide. There are another one hundred fourteen thousand six hundred (114,600) attempted non-family abductions. The primary motivation for the child abduction is sexual assault. Ninety percent of all abducted children are sexually assaulted. When an abduction occurs, fast action is necessary because sixty percent of the time there is typically a two-hour delay in making the initial missing child report. Seventy-four (74) percent of the abducted children are murdered within three (3) hours of the abduction. It is essential for the public to be notified as soon as possible to help find the missing child. 
3.  The San Antonio Regional Amber Plan is based on a similar successful program created by the Association of Radio Managers in the Dallas/Fort Worth area. The program was named after nine-year-old Amber Hagerman who was abducted and murdered in 1996. The Dallas Amber Plan involves thirty-three (33) law enforcement agencies, thirty (30) radio stations and 11 television stations in the Dallas metroplex. 
4.  Since July 1997, the Dallas Amber Plan has been activated thirty (30) times; eight (8) children have been safely recovered due to the Dallas Amber Plan. Since 1997, Amber Plans and similar missing children alerts have expanded to twenty-one (21) states. In October 2001, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children launched an initiative for a nationwide Amber Plan. 
5.  The San Antonio Local Emergency Communications Committee (LECC) administers the San Antonio Regional Amber Plan. The LECC is appointed by the Federal Communications Commission to develop and implement the Emergency Alert System (EAS) for a sixteen (16) county region of South Texas. 
6.  WOAI-AM 1200 and KKYX-AM 680 originate and broadcast the EAS activation in the San Antonio Operational Area. Other radio, television, and cable systems can interrupt their normal programming to voluntarily re-broadcast the EAS local activations as a news/weather bulletin or character-generated "crawl" at the top or bottom of the television screen. 
7.  Participating media outlets would interrupt their normal programming and broadcast the Amber Alert at least twice an hour for the first two hours. The Amber Alert message encourages the public to look for the missing child or suspect, but take no action themselves. Instead anyone who thinks they saw the child or suspect should immediately call the law enforcement agency number included in the Amber Alert. Once the child is found, an Amber Update would be similarly distributed to law enforcement agencies and media outlets. The Amber Plan subcommittee, composed of representatives of participating media outlets and law enforcement agencies, will review every Amber Alert Activation within seven days. 
B.  Benefits of "EAS-based" Amber Plan. 
1.  Every radio/TV/cable system will receive the information at the same time. 
2.  No additional expense or re-programming of EAS receiver. 
3.  Stations have the option of retransmitting the audio that is received when the EAS is activated, or information can be re-voiced by station personnel. 
4.  With current weekly EAS tests, control room operators are already aware of the system, and use it regularly. 
C.  Activation criteria. 
In order to activate the San Antonio Amber Plan, all four of the following items must be met: 
1.  The missing child must be seventeen (17) years of age or younger and police believe the child has been abducted (unwillingly taken from their environment without permission from the child's parent or legal guardian). 
2.  Police believe the missing child is in danger of serious bodily harm or death 
3.  A police investigation has taken place that verified the abduction or eliminated alternative explanations. 
4.  Sufficient information is available to disseminate to the public that could assist in locating the child, suspect, and/or the suspect's vehicle. 
If all four (4) items are not met, the Amber Alert should not be activated. 
D.  Non qualifying situations. 
Based on the above criteria, the following situations do NOT qualify for Amber Plan activation: 
1.  Missing child believed to have run away from home. 
2.  Missing child taken by a non-custodial relative in a child custody case. 
3.  Missing adult (age eighteen (18) or older). 
4.  Police search for other criminals (murder suspect, bank robber, etc.). 
E.  Police procedures. 
Upon confirmation of a child abduction: 
1.  Determine and prepare information for public distribution. The information should be written in clearly understood terms, not in police "shorthand". 
2.  Designate a department contact for the local primary stations. Include the name and telephone number on the standardized form. (Appendix D-1). 
3.  Fax the document to the LP-1 or LP-2 stations. 
4.  The local primary station will immediately call back to the originating department to confirm the information. Upon confirmation, the local primary station will immediately distribute the information to the participating stations and cable systems via the Emergency Alert System. 
5.  Subsequent updates from the originating department should be provided as events warrant. 
6.  Upon closure of the child abduction case, a final bulletin should be distributed from the local primary station. 
F.  Broadcaster and cable system procedures. 
Here is how the Amber—EAS Activation Procedure works in San Antonio: 
1.  Fax is received from police agency at WOAI and KKYX, (the LP-1 and LP-2 stations serving the San Antonio area). Both stations communicate with each other upon receipt of Amber activation fax, to insure that each other has received the information. 
2.  WOAI and KKYX will activate EAS to transmit Amber Activation. The event code is ADR. All participating broadcast stations in cable systems have programmed their decoders to receive the alerts. All broadcast stations and cable systems in the San Antonio area monitor WOAI or KKYX on the EAS decoders. 
3.  After transmission of the digital data bursts that trigger your receiver, WOAI and KKYX will transmit the Amber Tone, followed by the text message from the police agency. There will be no reference to WOAI or KKYX in the Amber activation. 
4.  Following transmission of the message, the digital data bursts to terminate the message will be transmitted. At that point, the audio message from WOAI or KKYX will be in the EAS decoder. Stations then have an option of either retransmitting the audio, or transcribing the message and originating their own broadcast. 
5.  As stated above, this procedure gives the receiving stations complete flexibility to either re-transmit the audio received with the EAS activation or re-voice the message with the receiving station personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. D, 10-14-02)  
Appendix D-1: - Activation Message Procedures and Script Amber Alert 
ORIGINATING AGENCY:___________ 
CONTACT PERSON:___________ 
PHONE NUMBER:_______OR:_______ 
We have just confirmed a child abduction in our jurisdiction. Please broadcast the following information through the Emergency Alert System. 
At approximately (time) ___________, (age) ___________ year old (Full Name) ___________ was abducted from (Street) ________________ in (City) ___________, Texas. 
(Name) ___________ is a (race) _______ (sex) _______. 
Stands (height) _____ feet tall, weighs approximately (weight) _____ pounds. 
Has (Color) _______ hair and (Color) _______ eyes. 
(Name) ___________ was last seen wearing (clothing description) _____ ______________________. 
The suspect is described as (desciption) ______________________ 
He/She was last seen traveling (direction) _______ on (road) ___________ 
In a (vehicle description) _____
______________________. 
If you have information or have seen this child, please call your local law enforcement agency or 911 immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. D-1, 10-14-02)  
Appendix E: - Glossary 
EAN (emergency action notification): A notice to all broadcast stations, subject cable systems, participating industry entities, and to the general public that the EAS has been activated for a national emergency. 
EAT (emergency action termination): A notice to all broadcast stations, subject cable systems, participating industry entities, and to the general public that the EAN has terminated. 
EAS (emergency alert system): A system for the rapid dissemination of emergency information through radio stations, television stations and cable systems. 
EAS decoder: A receiving device that monitors two assigned sources for incoming emergency messages. The decoder can be programmed with filters to activate only for specific emergencies in designated geographic areas. 
EAS encoder: A device capable of transmitting digitally coded emergency messages in the EAS format. 
EAS endec: A combination encoder/decoder. 
EOM end of message: A character string comprised of four ASCII "N" characters broadcast three times at the tail of the EAS message as a termination signal for EAS decoders. 
EAS header: A digitally coded character string that is broadcast three at the beginning of an EAS Alert. The header contains codes that identify the originator, the event type, the affect locations, the duration of the emergency event, the time and date of transmission, and an ID of the sending station. 
Event code: Describes why the EAS was activated. The FCC has defined several, mostly weather, related events. (See Appendix A) 
LP (local primary): A source of EAS local area messages. An LP source is responsible for coordinating the carriage of common emergency messages from sources such as the National Weather Service or local emergency management offices. 
NIC (national information center): Messages received from national networks that are not broadcast at the time of original transmission must be recorded locally by LP sources for transmission at the earliest opportunity. 
NN (non-participating national): Stations that have elected not to participate in the national level EAS and hold an authorization letter to that effect. Upon activation of the national level EAS, NN sources are required to broadcast the EAS codes, attention signal, the sign-off announcement in the EAS Operating Handbook and then remove their signal from the air. After the sign-off announcement, NN stations must monitor for the emergency action termination message. 
NP (national primary): A source of EAS presidential messages. 
NWS: Acronym for National Weather Service. 
Originator: Describes who originally activated the EAS. Included are broadcast or cable, civil authorities, the National Weather Service, a primary entry point station, or the national level Emergency Action Notification Network. 
PEP (primary entry point): A nationwide network of broadcast stations connected with government activation points. 
PN (participating national): Stations that transmit EAS national, state or local area messages. The EAS transmissions of PN sources are intended for direct public reception. 
RMT (required monthly test): A test initiated by the LP-1 or LP-2 stations during the first full week of the month. All broadcasters and cable operators must retransmit the RMT within fifteen (15) minutes of receiving the test. 
RWT (required weekly test): A weekly system test that must be transmitted and received by all broadcasters and cable operators. The RWT is only required on the weeks without an RMT. 
SP (state primary): A source of EAS state messages. These messages can originate from the governor or a designated representative in the state emergency operating center (EOC) or state capital. Messages are sent via the state relay network. 
SR (state relay): A relay source of state EAS messages. It is part of the state relay network and relays national and state common emergency messages into local areas. 
State relay network: A network composed of state relay (SR) sources, leased common carrier communication facilities or any other available communication facilities. The network distributes state EAS messages originated by the governor or designated officials. 
(Ord. No. 1513, App. E, 10-14-02)  
Chapter 8 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to set health regulations, Art. VII, § 3. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Health authority designated. 
The health authority in the city is the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1688, 3-5-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1688, adopted March 5, 2007, repealed the former § 8-1, and enacted a new § 8-1 as set out herein. The former § 8-1 pertained to rules on food service sanitation adopted; health authority designated and derived from Code 1965, § 10-1.  
Sec. 8-2. - Notice to health authority of communicable disease. 
If the manager or person in charge of a food-service establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, he shall notify the health authority immediately. 
(Code 1965, § 10-22)  
Sec. 8-3. - Sale of food from service establishments outside health authority's jurisdiction. 
Food from food-service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health authority of the city may be sold within the city if such food-service establishments conform to the provisions of this article or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food-service establishments are located. 
(Code 1965, § 10-10)  
Sec. 8-4. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the health authority or his representatives. 
(Code 1965, § 10-12)  
Sec. 8-5. - Position created; appointment and removal. 
The position of city health inspector for the city is hereby created. The position shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. The city health inspector may be removed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 8-6. - To function under supervision of city engineer. 
The city health inspector shall function under the general supervision of the city engineer, of whose department he shall be a part. He shall comply with all reasonable instructions, consistent with this article, given by the city engineer.  
Sec. 8-7. - Appeals from rulings of city health inspector; of city engineer. 
Any interested person dissatisfied with any ruling or action of the city health inspector or his representatives may appeal to the city engineer, who shall have the authority to decide the controversy within the framework of this chapter. Any person dissatisfied with any decision of the city engineer, may appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 8-19)  
Sec. 8-8. - Hours of permitted sales. 
Food service establishments may not sell food between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and the following 6:00 a.m. within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1277, 4-13-92)  
Sec. 8-9. - Duties and responsibilities of the city health inspector. 
(a)  The city health inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to make such inspections at any address throughout the city as are consistent with the purpose of protecting the health and sanitation of the citizens and public in general, and may suspend or revoke food-related permits per section 8-39. 
(b)  Such inspections shall be on a regular basis, and at other times as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure adequate monitoring and supervision of food establishments and other facilities open to the public. 
(c)  Special inspections may be conducted on an as-needed basis for any area in which public health may be impacted. 
(d)  The city health inspector, in the performance of these duties and responsibilities, shall be granted unfettered access to all portions of those facilities which are to be inspected. Failure to grant such access, in the absence of a proven and documented waiver for security or overall safety concerns, shall be grounds for an automatic failure of the inspection and appropriate subsequent actions by the city health inspector and city health department. 
(e)  Inspections shall be based upon the guidance and regulations of such state agencies as are appropriate for the facility, such as the Texas Department of Health (Bureau of Food and Drug Safety, Retail Foods Division) for Food Establishment Inspections. In the event there is no published guidance and/or regulation for an inspection, then generally accepted practices shall be used for comparison, keeping in mind at all times the health and safety interests of the public. 
(f)  After an inspection, the health inspector shall provide a written report to the city engineer's office, with copies to the address that was inspected and for the health inspector's file. 
(Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 11-8-04)  
Sec. 8-10. - Adoption of Texas food establishment rules. 
(a)  The city adopts, by reference, the provisions of the current rules and amendments thereto by the Texas Department of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in the city's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  The words "authorized agent or employee" mean the employees of the regulatory authority. 
(2)  The words "food establishment," in the context of the applicability of the Texas food establishment rules, mean a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
(3)  The words "state rules" mean the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175, which are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(4)  The words "regulatory authority" mean the City of Alamo Heights. 
(Ord. No. 1688, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 8-11. - Food manager certification required. 
(a)  Requirement. 
(1)  At least one certified food manager shall be employed by each permitted food establishment. 
(2)  Certification must be obtained by passing an examination approved by the Texas Department of Health and meeting all requirements in HSC, Chapter 438, Subchapter G, and 25 TAC § 229.176 (relating to Certification of Food Managers). 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  The words "food establishment," in the context of required food manager certification, mean a fixed location retail establishment in which food is prepared on-site for sale to the public. 
(2)  The words "food manager" mean an individual who conducts, manages, or operates a food establishment. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following food establishments are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Establishments that handle only prepackaged food and do not prepare or package food; 
(2)  Child-care facilities, as defined by Section 42.002, Human Resources Code; 
(3)  Establishments that do not prepare or handle exposed potentially hazardous foods as defined in 25 TAC § 229.162(66); or 
(4)  Nonprofit organizations as defined in 25 TAC § 229.371(9) (relating to Permitting Retail Food Establishments). 
(5)  A county or public health district may exempt other establishments under the provisions of 25 TAC § 437.0076(e) if the county or public health district determines that the application of the requirement to those establishments is not necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(d)  Responsibilities of a certified food manager. Responsibilities of a certified food manager include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying hazards in the day-to-day operation of a food establishment that provide food for human consumption; 
(2)  Developing or implementing specific policies, procedures or standards to prevent foodborne illness; 
(3)  Supervising or directing food preparation activities and ensuring appropriate corrective actions are taken as needed to protect the health of the consumer; 
(4)  Training the food establishment employees on the principles of food safety; and, 
(5)  Performing in-house self-inspections of daily operations on a periodic basis to ensure that policies and procedures concerning food safety have been implemented and are being followed. 
(e)  Certificate reciprocity. A certificate issued to an individual who successfully completes an examination approved by the Texas Department of Health shall be accepted as meeting the training and testing requirements under HSC, § 438.046(b). 
(f)  Certificate posting. The original food manager certificate shall be posted in a location in the food establishment that is conspicuous to consumers. 
(g)  Implementation. 
(1)  Food establishments not in operation at the time this section is adopted shall comply with these provisions as a condition of their application for licensing and occupancy. 
(2)  Food establishments in operation at the time this section is adopted shall have a period of six (6) months in which to comply with the certified food manager requirements noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 1688, 3-5-07)  
Secs. 8-12—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service establishment within the city or its police jurisdiction who does not possess a valid permit. 
(Code 1965, § 10-13)  
Sec. 8-32. - Application. 
Any person desiring to operate a food-service establishment shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the health authority. Such application shall include: The applicant's full name and post office address; the location and type of the proposed food-service establishment; and the signature of the applicant. If the application is for a temporary food-service establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation. 
(Code 1965, § 10-14)  
Sec. 8-33. - Inspection of applicant's premises. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this article, the health authority shall make an inspection of the food-service establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 10-15)  
Sec. 8-34. - Fees. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  If at any time during the period of validity of any such permit additional persons are employed by the establishment operating under such permit, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of such establishment to immediately notify the health department of such increase and if such increase brings that establishment into a higher permit fee bracket, he shall pay to the city secretary the additional sum required. This charge shall be prorated according to the semester in which the charge occurred as set forth in the charges for permit fees for new establishments in the next paragraph. 
(c)  Payment of food establishment permit fees shall be based upon an annual renewal on the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. 
(d)  A "new" eating or drinking establishment shall be one which is newly erected or constructed at a given location or it may be such an establishment newly organized or started at an old location which will also include establishments remodeled from other construction. Any change in ownership will be considered a new establishment. 
(e)  Permit fees are based upon the number of employees. An employee for the purpose of determining licensing fees is one that, as a reasonable expectation and execution of their job/position, comes into contact with food — either the preparation or the serving thereof. This generally includes, but is not limited to, cooks and wait staff, but does not generally include hosts, hostesses and bussing staff. 
(f)  Fees are not refundable in the event of an establishment closing or changing ownership. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  The city council may, at its discretion, authorize a waiver of the temporary food establishment permit fee for non-profit organizations and activities. The application to the city council for this waiver shall be made by the non-profit organization at the time of their appearance in front of the council for a special activity permit, or prior to their application for the temporary food establishment permit in the event a special activity permit is not needed or requested. 
(Code 1965, § 10-16; Ord. No. 1570, § 2, 11-8-04; Ord. No. 1517, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 8-35. - Issuance. 
When inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this article have been met, a food-service establishment permit shall be issued to the applicant by the health authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. 
(Code 1965, § 10-17)  
Sec. 8-36. - Temporary establishment. 
Permits for temporary food-service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days. 
(Code 1965, § 10-18)  
Sec. 8-37. - Display. 
A valid permit issued under this division shall be posted in every food-service establishment. 
(Code 1965, § 10-19)  
Sec. 8-38. - Not transferable. 
Permits issued under this article shall not be transferable from one (1) person to another person or place. 
(Code 1965, § 10-20)  
Sec. 8-39. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article may be suspended temporarily by the health authority for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this section, the permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health authority by the permit holder. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever the health authority finds insanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food-service establishment which, in his judgment and the judgment of the city health officer, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he may, without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken; and, if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended, and all food-service operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the health authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. 
(b)  Any person whose permit has been suspended under this section may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(c)  For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the health authority in the performance of his duties, a permit issued under this division may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health authority. Prior to such action, the health authority shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the health authority, by the permit holder, within such five-day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(d)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the city council at a time and place designated by it. 
(e)  In the event that all food service operations at an inspected facility are to be immediately suspended as provided for in section 8-39(a), a placard shall be placed at the facility noting the facility food-service operation is closed to the public by order of the city health inspector. The placard shall not be removed until a valid food service establishment permit is obtained. Removal of the placard shall be deemed a violation of this section, subject to the penalties noted in this section, and shall also result in an additional amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) being levied against the facility in addition to any other amounts noted herein. 
(f)  A penalty amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed in addition to the standard food service establishment permit application fee if the facility was determined to be operating without a valid food service establishment permit. 
(g)  These penalties and procedures are also valid for temporary food establishments. 
(h)  The penalties and procedures noted herein shall not be construed to limit options available to the city under other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances at other levels of authority. 
(Code 1965, § 10-21; Ord. No. 1570, § 3, 11-8-04)  
Chapter 9 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate the disposal of garbage and trash, Art. VII, § 3(c). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1808, § 2, adopted Feb. 9, 2009, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 9-1 and 9-2, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1965, § 11-1—11-17; Ord. No. 1558, adopted Aug. 9, 2004; Ord. No. 1562, adopted Sept. 13, 2004; and Ord. No. 1662, adopted July 31, 2006. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director is defined as the director of the department of public works or designee. 
Industrial waste has the meaning ascribed to the term "industrial solid waste" by Chapter 361 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
Premises means business houses, boardinghouses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, apartments, sanitariums, rooming houses, schools, private residences, vacant lots and all other places within the city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates in ordinary quantities. 
Regular service includes the regular collection of garbage, trash and brush by city crews. 
Rubbish means aluminum and tin cans, bottles, glass, paper, rags, old clothing, rubber, lumber, metal, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers, weeks, yard trimmings, leaves, tree limbs, old furniture, plastics, old appliances, batteries, and junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, boats, airplanes, trailers, buses or motor homes and other similar debris. 
Solid waste operator is defined as any person who collects, hauls, or transports solid waste or industrial waste for a fee by use of any means, including, but not limited to, front-load dumpster trucks, roll-off trucks, or rear-load garbage trucks. 
Trash means, for the purposes of this chapter, the same as the term "rubbish." 
Unit is defined for the purposes of this chapter, as a single living, commercial or occupied space within a developed property. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-2. - Solid waste collection fee. 
A monthly solid waste collection fee shall be charged as noted below for the collection of solid waste, including ordinary garbage, recyclable materials, trash and brush, for locations from which such matter is collected by the city. Said fee shall be added to the water bill for the premises of which the location is a part. If the collection fee is not paid, collection services may be discontinued following the procedures by which water service may be disconnected for non-payment of a water bill. If the collection fee is not paid within thirty (30) days after discontinuance of collection services, the city may also discontinue water service to the premises ten (10) days after notice of such termination is sent. 
Collection Category 	Monthly Collection Fee 
Residential regular service—Single family 	$10.00 per unit 
Residential regular service—Duplex or 
multi-family 	$10.00 per unit 
Non-residential regular 
service 	$20.00 per unit 
Recycling service—Regular service customers 	No additional charge 
Recycling service only 	$10.00 per city-issued 
container 
 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-3. - Single family or duplex residential solid waste customers. 
Unless approved in writing by the public works director, only the city shall provide solid waste services to single family or duplex residential solid waste customers within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-4. - Multiple family and non-residential solid waste customers. 
Multiple family and non-residential solid waste customers shall have the option of utilizing the services of the city or a solid waste operator to collect, haul or transport solid waste from properties located within the city. The city may decline to provide solid waste or recycling services to any multiple-family or non-residential customer for any reason deemed material by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 2-9-09)  
Secs. 9-5—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Compliance required. 
All garbage and waste matter of any kind shall be placed by the person in charge of the premises in containers as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1965, § 11-2; Ord. No. 1808, § 3, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-27. - Use of containers required. 
All garbage, trash or waste matter shall be placed in the containers required herein by the owners of such containers, and not in, around or near such containers, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any container to fail or refuse to place in such container the garbage, trash or waste matter upon his premises. Owners of such containers shall place them for collection in an alley or on the parkway of a street, and store them in an orderly manner. 
(Code 1965, § 11-3; Ord. No. 1557, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 1808, § 3, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-28. - Solid waste containers. 
(a)  Capacity, weight. Unless issued by the city, residential containers shall not exceed thirty (30) gallons in capacity, and the combined weight of each container and its contents shall not exceed forty (40) pounds. 
(b)  Construction. Containers shall be watertight receptacles of a solid grade of metal or plastic, provided with two (2) handles on opposing sides of the outside and with a tightly fitting cover equipped with a handle, and must not have bands, reinforcing angles or anything within the container that will prevent free discharge of the contents. Containers that have jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to collectors of garbage or waste matter and containers that have deteriorated to the extent that they will not securely hold the contents will be carried off by the city forces as waste matter. 
(c)  Recycling containers. The city shall issue containers for the provision of recycling service to residential customers that receive regular service. However, customers may also utilize their own approved containers for recycling. 
(d)  Variance from specifications. If a container does not meet the above requirements or specifications and same is approved by the public works director, such container shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 11-4; Ord. No. 1253, 4-17-91; Ord. No. 1557, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 1808, § 3, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-29. - Mingling wastes. 
Food garbage, wet garbage, kitchen waste and any other kind of garbage or waste matter may be placed in the same container, provided the container meets the specifications for the containers set forth in section 9-28. 
(Code 1965, § 11-5)  
Sec. 9-30. - General duties of person in charge of premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any premises to have, maintain or keep garbage on any premises except in such garbage containers as are provided in section 9-28 or as are approved by the sanitary inspector. Such person shall also keep clean and free from rubbish and similar loose material all premises whether improved or unimproved as well as all open lots and areas. 
(Code 1965, § 11-6)  
Sec. 9-31. - Location of cans, receptacles. 
(a)  When a garbage can or receptacle has been provided as herein required, the same shall be located upon the premises of the owner of such can or receptacle as shall be designated by the sanitary inspector or other officer of the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to place such can or receptacle in the places designated. 
(b)  All garbage and trash containers shall be placed in the alley abutting the property, or on the parkway on those days collection of garbage and trash is made by the city. 
(c)  After a garbage can or trash/brush can or receptacle has been emptied, it shall be removed by the owner of such can or receptacle from the collection point on the parkway of a street at the earliest possible time on the day of collection, and returned to a point of storage on private property and not readily visible from said street or alley. Cans or receptacles at collection points in alleys may be stored in the alleys in an orderly manner so as to not block the alley. 
(Code 1965, § 11-7; Ord. No. 1557, 9-13-04)  
Sec. 9-32. - Containers to be kept tightly covered. 
Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when momentarily open to receive garbage or to have the contents removed. No container shall be so overloaded with garbage or waste matter that its cover will not fit securely. 
(Code 1965, § 11-8)  
Sec. 9-33. - Maintenance of containers. 
Garbage cans shall be kept in sanitary condition. The contents of all receptacles shall be so protected that the wind cannot blow out and scatter the same over the streets, alleys and premises of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-9; Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 11-8-04)  
Sec. 9-34. - Disturbing contents of containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick from or disturb the contents of any garbage containers or vessels, or other containers provided for in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 11-10)  
Sec. 9-35. - Placing garbage or waste in streets or alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage or waste matter in any street or alley in the city except in strict compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 11-11)  
Sec. 9-36. - Collection by other than city authorized collectors prohibited. 
The collection of garbage, trash, rubbish or recyclable materials within the city limits is hereby prohibited except by the city, its agents or its authorized solid waste operators. 
(Code 1965, § 11-12; Ord. No. 1808, § 3, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-37. - Disposal of dead animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the dead carcass of any animal within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-13)  
Sec. 9-38. - Disposal of accumulations of brick, lumber, cinders. 
Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, clinkers, cinders, dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees or other bulky, heavy materials shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling the same under the direction of the superintendent of the sanitation department. 
(Code 1965, § 11-14)  
Sec. 9-39. - Open burning. 
The burning of trash, leaves, branches, rags, papers or garbage in incinerators or open fires in the city shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance and fire hazard. 
(Code 1965, § 11-15)  
Sec. 9-40. - Cooking fires. 
The provisions of section 9-39 shall not apply to barbecue pits or fires built in the same for cooking purposes only. Provided however, if the barbecue pits are used for burning trash, leaves, branches, rags or garbage the same shall constitute a violation. 
(Code 1965, § 11-16)  
Sec. 9-41. - Incinerators. 
The provisions of sections 9-39 and 9-40 shall not prevent the construction and operation of an incinerator in connection with any permitted business or commercial establishment, for which a building permit has been issued by the building official of the city in accordance with the building code. 
(Code 1965, § 11-17)  
Sec. 9-42. - Disposal of "sharps". 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Sharps shall mean any hypodermic needle, lancet or lancing device, syringe with needle, scalpel blade, dental burrs and drills, dental probes and picks, razor blade, scraper, box or carton cutter, broken glass, disposable razor, wire (all types) or any other object that can be reasonably anticipated to penetrate the skin or any other part of the body. 
(2)  Sharps container shall mean a leak-proof container, made from puncture-resistant material, such as hard plastic or metal, with a lid that is also puncture-resistant and is securely fastened. The container shall be identified as a "sharps" or "biohazard" container, with a bio-hazard symbol and/or appropriate wording and color-coding (red). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place "sharps" into any garbage or trash container unless said "sharps" are first placed in a securely closed and properly labeled "sharps container". 
(c)  It shall further be unlawful for any person or persons to place "sharps" or "sharps containers" into recycling program containers. 
(Ord. No. 1497, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 1570, § 2, 11-8-04)  
Secs. 9-43—9-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARDEN AND YARD TRASH 
 
Sec. 9-61. - Garden and yard debris not to be placed in streets or alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or any tenant or occupant of any building or premises, in person or by his servant, agent or employee, to cast, throw, place or deposit any yard or garden debris, such as grass cuttings, leaves, shrub cuttings, vine cuttings, branches, tree limbs or tree cuttings, onto any public street or into any alley so as to hinder or block passage through such alley. 
(Code 1965, § 11-28)  
Sec. 9-62. - Commercial tree trimmers and commercial yard or garden services to remove tree limbs, or tree cuttings, grass clippings and other yard debris cut or removed by them. 
It shall be unlawful for any commercial tree trimmer or commercial yard and garden service to leave in the city any tree limbs, tree cuttings, grass clippings, leaves and other yard debris cut or removed by such commercial tree trimmer or commercial yard and garden service from trees, lawns and gardens in within the city. A commercial tree trimmer is any licensed, registered or incorporated business or entity who cuts or removes tree limbs or branches from trees on residential or commercial property for hire. A commercial yard and garden service is any business or entity, other than an individual person, who cuts grass, does pruning of bushes and shrubs, or other yard and gardening work on residential or commercial property for hire. City employees shall not pick up or remove tree limbs, tree cuttings, grass clippings, bush and shrub trimmings or other yard and garden debris left in the city by commercial tree trimmers or commercial yard and garden services. Sections 9-81 and 9-82 of this Code shall apply to any property owner who permits accumulation of tree limbs, tree cuttings, grass clippings, bush and shrub trimmings or other yard and garden debris within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-29; Ord. No. 1557, 9-13-04)  
Sec. 9-63. - Pick up of tree, yard and garden debris by city. 
Yard and garden debris generated by the private property owner or other person, and not by a commercial yard and garden service, such as grass cuttings, leaves, shrub and bush cuttings, and vine cuttings, in order to be picked up by the city, shall be placed in a container, such as a sack, bag, cardboard or wooden box, or can which does not exceed forty (40) pounds in combined weight of container and contents, and is such that it can be placed into a city truck while intact. Tree limbs and tree cuttings generated by the private property owner or other person, and not by a commercial tree trimmer, and not containerized as provided in the preceding sentence, shall be picked up by the city only if such tree limbs and tree cuttings are cut into lengths not exceeding three (3) feet and are not left by commercial tree trimmers. 
(Code 1965, § 11-30; Ord. No. 1557, 9-13-04)  
Secs. 9-64—9-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, TRASH, WEEDS AND OTHER MATTER 
 
Sec. 9-81. - Unlawful to allow accumulation of garbage, trash, weeds or other matter. 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to allow garbage, rubbish, trash, and any other objectionable, unsightly, and unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate on property under his control and within the city limits, and to permit weeds to grow to a height in excess of six (6) inches. 
(Code 1965, § 11-36)  
Sec. 9-82. - Failure to remove accumulations of garbage, weeds, rubbish, brush and other matter. 
In addition to the other remedies allowed by law, the city council may instruct the city engineer to notify the owner or other person having control over the offending property to remove such garbage, weeds, rubbish, brush and other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter. Such notice shall be mailed by first class mail addressed to the owner or other person in control of the offending property at his post office address, or if such personal notice may not be obtained, then notice shall be by publication at least two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days. The period between notifications of a violation of this section shall, under normal conditions, be approximately thirty (30) calendar days from the initial request to clear to the second notice and advisory of potential costs, and then another thirty (30) calendar days between the second notice and initiation of cutting or clearing by the city. In instances of significant public safety and/or health issues, the timing shall be stated in the notification letters, but shall not be less than seven (7) calendar days. If the owner or other person having control over the offending property fails or refuses to remove such garbage, weeds, rubbish, brush or other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter, within ten (10) days after the aforesaid notice, the city may enter onto such property or premises and remove any accumulation of garbage, weeds, rubbish, brush and other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter, and may cut all weeds back to a height of no more than six (6) inches. The city shall then send an invoice and notification of potential lien placement to the property owner or person in control of the property stating that such a lien shall be filed if the invoice for work is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days. The expense of such removal or cutting shall be assessed against the real estate or lots as a privileged lien. Such lien shall be perfected in the manner provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. An administrative charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed in addition to the actual cost of the removal or cutting and shall be increased by an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each time such a charge is assessed against a specific property owner for a specific property during a calendar year, starting with the initial assessment. The expense of such removal or cutting incurred by the city shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date that the city pays for such removal or cutting. For any such expenditures, and interests, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-37; Ord. No. 1530, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 1570, § 3, 11-8-04) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess expenses and obtain lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007.  
Secs. 9-83—9-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS WASTE 
 
Sec. 9-90. - Disposal of hazardous waste and similar materials in trash, rubbish and garbage. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any hazardous waste or material, as defined in appropriate federal, state, regional or local regulations, statutes, ordinances and laws, into trash, rubbish and garbage collected by the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1611, 12-12-05)  
Sec. 9-91. - Unauthorized disposal causing injury. 
(a)  Should any city employee suffer injury of any kind due to the unauthorized placement of hazardous waste into trash, rubbish and garbage collected by the city, the depositor shall be deemed in violation of this section and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(b)  Should any city employee suffer injury of any kind due to the unauthorized or improper disposal of "sharps" into trash, rubbish and garbage collected by the city, the depositor shall be deemed in violation of this section and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1611, 12-12-05)  
Secs. 9-92—9-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE OPERATORS 
 
Sec. 9-101. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any municipally-owned commercial solid waste operator or to any commercial solid waste operator for services performed under a contract between the operator and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-102. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any solid waste operator to collect, haul or transport solid waste or industrial waste from properties located within the city unless they are registered with the City of Alamo Heights pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-103. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any solid waste operator to collect, haul or transport solid waste or industrial waste from properties located within the city unless they have registered with the City of Alamo Heights. 
(b)  The fee for said registration is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year, which may be changed from time-to-time by the city council upon the recommendation of the director and shall be valid for a period of one (1) calendar year. 
(c)  A solid waste operator shall carry, and provide documentation upon request, the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance covering all employees of contractor engaged in any operation covered by the permit; 
(2)  Automobile liability insurance; 
(3)  General liability insurance of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage; 
(4)  Umbrella coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) on an occurrence basis and must include coverage for personal injury or death, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, and explosion and collapse hazards; and 
(5)  The name and address of each customer that is provided commercial solid waste services within the city along with the size of container, frequency and scheduled times for services. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-104. - Authorized hours of solid waste operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any solid waste operator to collect, haul or transport solid waste or industrial waste from properties located within the city outside of the authorized hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. without the written authorization of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 9-105. - Penalty. 
(a)  Without limitation of other remedies available to the city, persons operating in violation of the terms of this article shall be liable to the city for all fees authorized by this article dating to the inception of such violation. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1808, § 4, 2-9-09)  
Chapter 10 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 14; traffic, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Preemption of violations of offenses for conduct covered by state penal code which are subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators or other containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building, unattended, any icebox, refrigerator or any other containers designed to be airtight, if such container has a door equipped with a catch or lock which cannot be released from the inside. 
(Code 1965, § 13-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.011 et seq.  
Sec. 10-2. - Breakage, removal of street lights and traffic-control devices—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to break, damage, destroy or to in any way render inoperative any street light, traffic reflectors or traffic light in the city. The term "street light" shall include all lights used for illumination of the streets and public properties in the city regardless of how the same may be constructed or where located. The term "traffic light" shall include all electric traffic signals in the city. The term "traffic reflector" shall include any device that reflects light and used as a traffic warning. 
(Code 1965, § 13-2)  
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Reward for information leading to conviction. 
The mayor of the city is hereby required, authorized and empowered to offer a reward of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to any person who will give information to the city police which will lead to the apprehension, arrest and conviction of any person committing in the city the offense of breaking or destroying any street light, traffic reflectors or traffic light. 
(Code 1965, § 13-3)  
Sec. 10-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2100 , adopted April 4, 2018, repealed former § 10-4 which pertained to loaded rifle or shotgun to be carried only by peace officers in city, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 13-4.  
Sec. 10-5. - Air, gas, spring guns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or shoot, within the corporate limits of the city, any air gun, air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets of any kind, or any solid object.  
Sec. 10-6. - Fireworks. 
(a)  No person shall cast, throw or fire any fireworks, firecracker, squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(b)  No person shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale or sell, within the city any fireworks, firecracker, squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(Code 1965, §§ 13-6, 13-7) 
State Law reference— State law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004.  
Sec. 10-7. - Signs and advertisements not to be placed on private property without permission of property owner. 
No person shall place, attach, paint, write, stamp, paste, throw, drop, hurl or otherwise put any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gatepost, gate, tree box, yard or driveway on private property without first having obtained the written permission of the owners, agents, or occupants of the premises and having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 3-21; Ord. No. 1803, 1-12-09)  
Sec. 10-8. - Noise nuisance. 
(a)  Defined. A "noise nuisance" is any loud, irritating, vexing or disturbing noise which causes distress, annoyance, discomfort, or injury to, or which interferes with the comfort and repose of, any person or persons of normal nervous sensibilities in the vicinity or hearing thereof. 
(b)  Examples. The following acts are examples of "noise nuisances" when done in such a manner as to disturb, annoy or distress others of normal sensibilities: 
(1)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, juke box, nickelodeon, or any musical instrument. 
(2)  Any loud or vociferous language or any soliciting for, or description of, any amusement house, moving picture theater, or other like place of amusement, or for the performance therein, in the entrance thereto, the foyer or lobby thereof, or on the sidewalks adjoining the same. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal, fowl or bird, which makes frequent or long continued noise. 
(4)  The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or other signal device on any automobile or vehicle, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal. 
(5)  The running of any motor of any automobile or vehicle, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle so out of repair, loaded or operated, as to create loud, grating, grinding, jarring or rattling noise vibrations. 
(6)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, automobile, motorcycle, other motor vehicle or boat, except through a muffler or other device which prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work, on any building or other structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of extreme and urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by permit obtained from, and issued by the city engineer of the city or any of its duly appointed and acting assistants and employees, which permit may be renewed during the time the emergency exists. 
(8)  The crying, calling, or shouting, in person or by a mechanical device, or the use of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, loudspeaker or phonograph with or without an amplifier, hand organ, or other devices or instruments, musical or otherwise, for the purpose of advertising any candidates for elective office, any goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of attracting attention to or inviting persons to any political rally, meeting or gathering, to any place of amusement, to any performance or show, or to any business or activity whatsoever. 
(9)  The raucous shouting, whistling, yelling, singing, hooting or crying of peddlers, hawkers, vendors, or any other person or persons. 
(c)  Not limiting. The above list is only a number of examples of "noise nuisances" and is not intended to limit the definition of that term or the prohibitive application of this chapter in abating "noise nuisances." 
(d)  Unlawful activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause any noise nuisance within the corporate limits of the city, to permit, or allow to be created or caused, a noise nuisance on any premises under his control or supervision within the corporate limits of the city. 
(e)  Prohibited. The use of gasoline-powered equipment such as, but not limited to, lawn mowers, edgers, weed eaters, blowers and chain saws by lawn service companies and tree service companies, defined as those companies having more than two (2) employees inclusive of the owner, is prohibited before 10:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and city-observed holidays. 
(Code 1965, §§ 13-12, 13-13; Ord. No. 1682, 10-9-06)  
Sec. 10-9. - Injuring plants or trees. 
Any person who shall within the corporate limits of the city wilfully and maliciously cut, mar, or injure any tree, shrub, plant or flower shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 13-14)  
Sec. 10-10. - Enforcement of code. 
(a)  Applicability. This section does not apply to licensed peace officers who are employed by the city as peace officers. The authority, responsibility and duties of peace officers to issue citations, pursuant to article 14.06(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and/or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 543.003, is not obviated or in any way eliminated by the provisions of this section. 
(b)  City manager designation. The city manager is hereby authorized to designate city employees with authority to enforce state laws and city ordinances by issuing citations in municipal court for violations of state laws and city ordinances, including specifically, but not limited to, building officials, development service officers, code enforcement officers, stormwater inspectors, public health officials and animal control officers. 
(c)  Authority to issue citations to appear in municipal court. The employees designated by the city manager may issue a citation or citations to a person requiring such person to appear in the municipal court if the designated city employee believes that the person has engaged in conduct that violates any law or ordinance of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2130 , § 2, 5-28-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1250, adopted March 5, 1991, repealed § 10-10, which pertained to satellite and microwave antenna systems restricted and derived from Code 1965, § 13-17.  
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 2130 , § 2, adopted May 28, 2019, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out.  
Secs. 10-11—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BURGLARY AND HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1266, approved Sept. 23, 1991, amended Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-35 to read as herein set out; former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-35, pertained to emergency alarm systems and derived from Code 1965, §§ 13-20—13-24. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Alarm system permits. 
No person shall install or use a burglary or hold-up alarm system within the city without having applied for and been issued a valid alarm user permit. The application form for such permits shall be promulgated by the chief of police, and the police department shall issue such permits and maintain the records relating thereto. Such permits shall not be transferable. Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 9-23-91)  
Sec. 10-32. - Alarm systems fees. 
(a)  Residential alarms: 
(1)  Alarm permit fee. An administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for the initial issuance of a residential alarm system permit. A twenty-four dollar ($24.00) annual renewal fee shall be paid in advance to the City of Alamo Heights by the alarm holder. 
(2)  Fees for false alarm notification. An alarm user shall pay a fee for each false alarm notification. Each false alarm notification is subject to the following conditions. 
a.  The city may not consider a false burglary alarm to have occurred unless a response is made by the police department within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and the police department determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
b.  The penalty for the signaling of a false alarm by a burglary alarm system may not be imposed unless three (3) other false alarms have occurred during the preceding twelve-month period. 
c.  The fee schedule for false burglary alarms in the preceding twelve (12) month period is: 
One (1) to three (3) false burglary alarms: No fee. 
Four (4) to five (5) false burglary alarms: Fifty dollar ($50.00) fee per false alarm activation. 
Six (6) to seven (7) false burglary alarms: Seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee per false alarm activation. 
Eight (8) or more false burglary alarms: One hundred dollar ($100.00) [fee] per false alarm activation. 
The city reserves the rights to revoke an alarm permit for more than eight (8) false alarms in a twelve (12) month period. 
(b)  Non-residential alarms: 
(1)  Alarm permit fee. An annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for the issuance on an alarm system permit for any non-residential entity (plus an additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional location of such entity). There shall be no charge for permits issued to the United States, the State of Texas, the City of Alamo Heights, or any agency thereof. 
(2)  Fees for false burglary alarm notification (See section 10-32(a)(2) above). 
(3)  Fees for false robbery alarm notification. An alarm user shall pay a fee for each false alarm robbery notification (includes panic and duress alarms). The fee schedule for false robbery, panic or duress alarms in the preceding twelve (12) month permit cycle is: 
No fee for the first false alarm. 
One hundred dollar ($100.00) fee for the 2 nd and 3 rd false alarms. 
One hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fee for the 4 th false alarm. 
Two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee for the 5 th and successive false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1668, 7-31-06; Ord. No. 1689, 12-11-06)  
Sec. 10-33. - Denial, revocation, suspension or cancellation of permits. 
The chief may terminate law enforcement responses to a permit holder because of excessive false alarms if the permit holder fails to pay the false alarm fees required by this article. In order to effect termination, the chief must issue written notice to the alarm permit holder that the account is past due on false alarm charges. The notice must specify that law enforcement responses will be terminated if the alarm permit holder does not remit payment or make arrangements for payment within a period of time not less than thirty (30) days. 
The city reserves the right to revoke an alarm permit for more than eight (8) false alarms in a twelve (12) month period. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1668, 7-31-06)  
Sec. 10-34. - Duties of permit holder. 
A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications; 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within one and one-half (1½) hours when requested by the city to repair or deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system or to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises; 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(5)  Notify the police department dispatcher prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance purposes; 
(6)  Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation, an audible or visible alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without first being reset; and 
(7)  Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than twenty (20) minutes after being activated. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 9-23-91)  
Sec. 10-35. - Monitoring security alarms by police department. 
Subject to the approved of the police chief, security alarms may be connected directly to the Alamo Heights Police Department. The city shall assume no liability or responsibility to respond to such alarms. The police chief may require the disconnection or removal at any time for any reason of such security alarms, including specifically disconnection or removal for nonpayment of the required fees. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month payable annually in advance shall be charged for any security alarm located in the police department which originates from premises in the city, and eighteen dollars ($18.00) per month payable annually in advance for any security alarm which originates from premises outside of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1307, 6-28-93)  
Sec. 10-36. - Enforcement. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be, upon conviction thereof, punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. The city shall furthermore be entitled to injunctive relief against any violation of sections 10-31 through 10-34 and for any damages that may result to the city or the general public by reason of such violations. 
(Ord. No. 1266, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1307, 6-28-93) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1307, adopted June 28, 1993, renumbered former § 10-35 as § 10-36.  
Secs. 10-37—10-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF JUNKED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 10-40. - Definition of junked vehicle. 
For the purposes of this article, "junked vehicle" shall have the meaning prescribed in § 683.071 of the Texas Transportation Code, currently in effect or as hereafter amended. "Junked vehicle" does not include a vehicle or vehicle part described in § 683.077 of the Texas Transportation Code, currently in effect or as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
Sec. 10-41. - Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance. 
Junked vehicles, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
Sec. 10-42. - Procedures. 
Notice requiring abatement and removal of a junked vehicle, or a part of a junked vehicle, shall be furnished by the chief of police or his designee not less than ten (10) days before the date the junked vehicle, or a part of a junked vehicle, must be abated and removed. The notice must be sent by certified mail with a five day return requested to: (1) the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle or motor vehicle part; (2) each lienholder of record of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part; and (3) the owner or occupant of the property on which the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part is located, or, if a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part is located on a public right-of-way, the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the right-of-way. The notice shall include an admonition that any request for a public hearing regarding the abatement and removal must be made not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle or motor vehicle part is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, or, if the owner is located, and delivered. If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
Sec. 10-43. - Public hearing. 
The city council shall conduct the public hearing required in section 10-42. If a public hearing is requested by person for whom notice has been sent, the public hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. At the public hearing, the junked vehicle or vehicle part is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. If the information is available at the location of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, an order requiring removal of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part shall include the vehicle's description, vehicle identification number, and license plate number. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
Sec. 10-44. - Disposal of junked vehicle or junked vehicle part. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by a municipality or county. The junked vehicle or junked vehicle part shall not be reconstructed or made operable after removal. The police of chief or his designee shall furnish notice of the removal of a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part to the Texas Department of Transportation within five (5) days after the date of removal. The relocation of a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part to another location in the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
Sec. 10-45. - Enforcement. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be, upon conviction thereof, punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. The city shall furthermore be entitled to injunctive relief against any violation of this article and for any damages that may result to the city or the general public by reason of such violations. The Alamo Heights Municipal Court may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures in this article. The chief of police or his designee may enter private property to examine a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part to obtain information to identify the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, and to remove or direct the removal of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part. 
(Ord. No. 1465, 8-14-00)  
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1750-A, § 3, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 10-50—10-57. Section 4 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. IV, §§ 10-46—10-57, as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to use or disposition of public rights-of-way and derived from Ord. No. 1651, adopted Nov. 13, 2006. The user's attention is directed to § 16-100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-46. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or brew for the purpose of sale or to sell or distribute any beer within the corporate limits of the city without first having applied for and secured a license to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-47. - Application. 
Any person desiring to manufacture, sell or distribute beer within the corporate limits of the city shall file with the city secretary an application, made under oath, for a license so to do. Such application shall state: The name and address of the applicant; the address where such applicant desires to manufacture, sell or distribute beer; whether or not the principal business of the applicant is the sale of beer; whether or not the place of business of the applicant where such beer is to be sold is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, school or other educational institution, the measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections, the measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in direct line across intersections, for any permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections; and whether such applicant desires to do business as a manufacturer, a general distributor, a local distributor or a retail dealer. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-48. - Applicant must have county license. 
No license required by this article shall be issued by the city secretary unless the applicant presents to him a license duly issued to such applicant by the tax collector of the county, authorizing such applicant to manufacture, sell or distribute beer in the county, which county license shall be in full force and effect at the time of the application for a license under this article, and which license shall be examined by the city secretary and returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-49. - Fee to be the maximum allowed by state law. 
Every person licensed to sell liquor, wine or beer or mixed beverages in the city under the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a license fee equal to the maximum allowed as provided for in the Alcoholic Beverage Code. Such fee shall be payable on the first of January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-50. - Issuance generally; contents. 
Upon compliance with all provisions of this article and subject to section 3-31, the city secretary shall issue a license required by this article to the applicant therefore. Such license shall be signed by the city secretary, under the seal of his office, shall be dated, and shall state on the face thereof for what it is issued, how much was paid for the same, the date of expiration, and by whom and where such business is to be conducted. The license shall further state whether or not the licensee is authorized to operate as a manufacturer, general distributor, local distributor or retail dealer of beer, as set out in the application of such applicant, and if a dealer, it shall state whether or not the principal business of such licensee is the sale of beer. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-51. - Not to issue for sales near schools or churches. 
If the principal business of an applicant for a license under this article is to be the selling of beer, and if the city secretary determines that such place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a church, school or other educational institution, as measured as provided in section 10-47, then the city secretary shall not issue a license to such applicant, but shall refuse to so do. If a license is erroneously issued under such conditions, it shall be revoked by the city secretary immediately upon discovery of such error. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-52. - Posting required. 
A license issued under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the licensee where his business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-53. - Assignment or change of place of business. 
No license issued under this article shall be voluntarily assigned more than once, and before any assignee of any such license may engage in business thereunder, he shall fully comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as required of the original license. In case an original licensee or his assignee desires to change the place designated in such license, he may do so by applying to the city secretary as in the case of the original application for such license. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-54. - Separate license for each place of business. 
No manufacturer, general distributor, local distributor or retail dealer shall carry on such business at more than one (1) place under the same license, but a separate license must be obtained under this article for each place of business conducted for such purpose or any of them. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-55. - Termination; renewal. 
Any license issued under the terms of this chapter shall terminate one (1) year from the date issued, and no license shall be issued for a longer term than one (1) year. Any such license may be renewed upon written application of the licensee filed with the city secretary not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the expiration of the license held by such licensee. Such application shall be in writing and filed by the applicant and shall contain full and complete information as set out and required in the original application upon which such original license was issued. No such renewal license shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefore shall exhibit to the city secretary, his renewal license issued by the tax collector of the county. Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements by such applicant, it shall be the duty of the city secretary to issue the license as applied for in the same manner as the original license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-56. - Records to be kept. 
The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued under the terms of this article. Such record shall state the names and addresses of all persons to whom licenses are issued, the address of the place of business of each licensee, the classification of each licensee, the date such license was issued and the amount paid therefore. The city secretary shall also keep a permanent record of all transfers of such licenses and of all such licenses cancelled or revoked and the full details of such transactions. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 10-57. - Penalty for failure to pay fee. 
Failure to pay the license fee as provided in section 10-49 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, 1-28-08)  
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 1750-A, Ord. No. 1742, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2007, repealed Art. V, §§ 10-60—10-62, which pertained to prevention and control of the spread of Oakwilt and derived from Ord. No. 1369, adopted March 11, 1996; Ord. No. 1511, adopted Sept. 23, 2002; Ord. No. 1672, adopted Oct. 23, 2006. The user's attention is directed to § 5-406.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2076 , adopted April 24, 2017, repealed art. V in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 10-58—10-62 pertained to peddlers and solicitors, and derived from Ord. No. 1750-A, § 4, adopted Jan. 28, 2008. At the editor's discretion, the title of art. V has been changed. 
 
Sec. 10-58. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following words have the meaning indicated: 
Itinerant vendor or hawker is a person who sets up and operates a temporary business on privately owned property, whether improved or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services. A temporary business is one that continues for forty-five (45) days or less; and, exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or freestanding. 
Canvasser is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: (1) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause, or (2) distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or service. 
Peddler is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service. A "peddler" does NOT include a person who distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence or at a time different from the time of visit. Such a person is a "solicitor." 
Solicitor is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: (1) attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such purpose there is the sale of some good or service, or (2) distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or service. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-59. - Exception. 
This article shall not apply to a federal, state or local government employee or a public utility employee in the performance of his/her duty for his/her employer. This article shall also not apply to persons who are licensed by the state to act as peddlers and the applicable licensing authority prohibits local governments from requiring local licenses and fees for peddlers. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-60. - License required for peddlers, hawkers, and solicitors, available for canvassers. 
No person shall act as a peddler, hawker, or solicitor within the city without first obtaining a peddler license in accordance with this article. A canvasser is not required to have a peddler license but any canvasser wanting a peddler license for the purpose of reassuring city residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued one (1) upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-61. - Fee. 
The fee for the issuance of each peddler license shall be: 
(1)  For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year plus a pass through charge for each background search (twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in 2017 - subject to change). 
(2)  For a solicitor (including a commercial solicitor advertising an event, activity, good or service for purchase at a location away from the residence), no fee. 
(3)  For a canvasser requesting a peddler license, no fee. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-62. - Application for peddler license. 
Any person or organization (formal or informal) may apply for one (1) or more peddler licenses by completing an application form at the office of the issuing officer, during regular office hours. 
The peddler license shall be issued promptly after application but in all cases within three (3) business days after the completion of an application, unless it is determined within that time that: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years; 
(2)  With respect to a particular license, the individual for whom a card is requested has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years; or 
(3)  Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable neglect. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-63. - Contents of application. 
The applicant (person or organization) shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Number of peddler licenses required. 
(3)  The name, physical description and photograph of each person for which a card is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's license, state identification card, passport, or other government-issued identification card (issued by a government within the United States) containing this information may be provided, and a photocopy taken. If a photograph is not supplied, the city will take an instant photograph of each person for which a card is requested at the application site. The actual cost of the instant photograph will be paid by the applicant. 
(4)  The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant. 
(5)  The permanent and (if any) local address of each person for whom a license is requested. 
(6)  A brief description of the proposed activity related to this peddler license. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be substituted for this description at the option of the applicant). 
(7)  Date and place of birth for each person for whom a card is requested. 
(8)  A list of all infraction, offense, misdemeanor and felony convictions of each person for whom a license is requested for the seven (7) years immediately prior to the application. 
(9)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom a card is requested. 
(10)  If a license is requested for a peddler: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the business offering the event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal). 
b.  A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the State of Texas, provided that no copy of a license shall be required of any business which appears on the city's annual report of sales tax payees as provided by the Texas Comptroller's office. 
c.  The location where books and records are kept of sales which occur within the city and which are available for city inspection to determine that all city sales taxes have been paid. 
(11)  If a license is requested for a solicitor: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the organization, person, or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted. 
b.  The web address for this organization, person, or group (or other address) where residents having subsequent questions can go for more information. 
(12)  Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-64. - Investigation. 
During the time following the application for one (1) or more peddler licenses and its issuance, the city shall investigate as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. If the city has not completed this investigation within three (3) business days after the completion of an application, the identification card will nonetheless be issued, subject, however, to administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation. [If a canvasser requests a peddler license, the investigation will proceed as described above, but if the city refuses to issue the peddler license (or revokes it after issuance), the canvassers will be advised that the failure to procure a peddler license does not prevent him/her from canvassing the residents of the city.] 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-65. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Grounds. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked if the license holder is convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article or has knowingly made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Notice. If the issuing officer denies (or upon completion of an investigation revokes) the peddler license to one or more persons he shall immediately convey the decision to the applicant orally and shall within 16 working hours after the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which shall be immediately made available to the applicant. 
(c)  Appeal; hearing. The licensee shall have ten (10) days from the date of revocation or denial in which to file notice of his appeal to the city manager from the order denying or revoking the license. The city manager shall hold a hearing within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the licensee's appeal. The city manager shall make a determination within five (5) days after the hearing to either deny the appeal or to reinstate the license. The city manager's determination shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-66. - Hearing on appeal. 
If the applicant requests a hearing under Section 8, the hearing shall be held in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act of the State of Texas, and review from the decision (on the record of the hearing) shall be had to the county court of Bexar County, Texas. The hearing shall also be subject to the Texas Open Meetings and Records law. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-67. - Display of peddler license. 
Each peddler license shall be (when the individual for whom it was issued is acting as a peddler or solicitor) worn on the outer clothing of the individual or otherwise displayed, as so to be reasonably visible to any person who might be approached by said person. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-68. - Validity of peddler license. 
A peddler license shall be valid within the meaning of this article for a period of one (1) year from its date of issuance or the term requested, whichever is less. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-69. - Revocation of card by municipal court judge. 
A municipal court judge, in addition to imposing a fine, may institute proceedings to suspend or revoke the license of a person if the person is required by law to obtain a peddler license from the city and the judge finds the person guilty of violating the article relating to peddlers. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-70. - "No visit" list. 
The issuing officer shall maintain a list of persons within the city who restrict visits to their residential property (including their leasehold, in the case of a tenant) by peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers. The issuing officer may provide a form to assist residents, and this form may allow the resident to select certain types of visits that the resident finds acceptable while refusing permission to others. This "no visit" list shall be a public document, and may be reproduced on the city's web site and available for public inspection and copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided to each applicant for and each recipient of a peddler license. If a canvasser chooses not to apply for a peddler card, it will be the responsibility of that canvasser to obtain in some other way a copy of the current "no visit" list. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-71. - Distribution of handbills and commercial flyers. 
In addition to the other regulations contained herein, a solicitor or canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers about the community shall observe the following regulations: 
(1)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any sign, utility pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-of-way. The police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer found within the right-of-way. 
(2)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any privately owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately owned property. 
(3)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any of the property: (a) listed on the city "no visit" list, or (b) having a "no solicitor" sign. 
(4)  Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be required to identify himself/herself to the police (either by producing an peddler license or other form of identification). This is for the purpose of knowing the likely identity of the perpetrator if the city receives a complaint of damage caused to private property during the distribution of handbills or flyers. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-72. - General prohibitions. 
No peddler, hawker, solicitor or canvasser shall: 
(1)  Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right-of-way (public or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/or canvassing. Such sign need not exceed one (1) square foot in size and may contain words such as "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" in letters of at least two (2) inches in height. (The phrase "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall also prohibit peddlers, hawkers, and canvassers) 
(2)  Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter, which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser. 
(3)  Enter upon any private property where the current occupant has posted the property on the city's "no visit" list (except where the posting form indicates the occupant has given permission for this type of visit), regardless of whether a front yard sign is posted. 
(4)  Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main entrance to the dwelling, or step from the sidewalk or indicated walkway (where one (1) exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the property. 
a.  Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors. 
b.  Enter upon the property of another during the hours of daylight, specifically one-half (½) hour after sunrise and one-half (½) hour after sunset. Except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the peddler, hawker, solicitor, or canvasser has an express invitation from the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to enter upon any posted property. 
(5)  For a commercial solicitor, peddler, or hawker to solicit for a purpose other than that set out in the application upon which the license was issued. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-73. - Solicitation in public right-of-way. 
(a)  A person may solicit for a charitable or political purpose in or upon a roadway, except those areas prohibited in this article. 
(b)  A person may conduct commercial solicitation in or upon the public right-of-way, except those areas prohibited in this article, if the solicitor has obtained a license or who is a member of an organization that has obtained a license. 
(c)  Solicitation for any purpose in the public right-of-way shall be conducted only during the hours of daylight, specifically one-half (½) hour after sunrise and one-half (½) hour before sunset. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age to solicit in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway unless the solicitor has been granted authorization pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.0071. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway so that their presence impedes the flow of traffic. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in the public right-of-way that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when such school is in session. The measurement of the distance shall be made from the nearest property line of the public or private elementary or secondary school. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-74. - Violation. 
Any person violating any part of this article or failing to observe any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every day the violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Sec. 10-75. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council of the City of Alamo Heights that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and words of this article are severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word(s) of this article shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and words or this article since the same would have been enacted by the city council of the City of Alamo Heights without the incorporation in this article of any such unconstitutional or invalid portion of the article. 
( Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17)  
Secs. 10-76—10-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGE SALES AND ESTATE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1638, adopted May 22, 2006, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 10-63—10-72, pertained to garage sales, and derived from Ord. No. 1551, adopted June 28, 2004; Ord. No. 1575, adopted Dec. 13, 2004; Ord. No. 1594, adopted July 25, 2005.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2076, adopted April 24, 2017, renumbered former §§ 10-63—10-72 as §§ 10-80—10-89. 
 
Sec. 10-80. - Purpose. 
In order to preserve, enhance and perpetuate the value and residential character of the city's residential neighborhoods, it is necessary to regulate garage sales and estate sales. Such regulation will promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, economic investment and general welfare of the citizens living in Alamo Heights. Regulation of garage sales and estate sales shall (a) protect residential areas from encroachment of commercial uses, (b) protect the aesthetic quality of residential neighborhoods, and (c) ensure the orderly conduct of garage sales and estate sales in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-81. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Charitable/non-profit organization. Any organization qualifying as non-profit under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or the Texas Non-profit Corporation Act. 
Estate sale. A sale or auction, open or advertised to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, for the purpose of selling, bartering, trading or otherwise disposing of tangible personal property belonging to a person who resided in the residence and is recently deceased. 
Garage sale. A sale, open or advertised to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, for the purpose of selling, bartering, trading or otherwise disposing of tangible personal property. 
Tangible personal property. Tangible property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 1938, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-82. - Certain items prohibited. 
Tangible personal property moved from another location to the sale site for sale at a garage sale or at an estate sale is prohibited. Tangible personal property moved from another location to the sale site for a garage sale is prohibited except that multiple neighbors may consolidate their tangible personal property at a single location. Tangible personal property purchased for resale or obtained by consignment shall not be sold at a garage sale or estate sale. These restrictions shall not apply to sales conducted by churches, charitable or non-profit organizations at locations other than a residence. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 1938, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-83. - Garage sale and estate sale signs. 
Garage sale and estate sale signs shall be temporary signs and shall not be exhibited more than two (2) days prior to the sale and shall be removed immediately after the completion of the sale. Signs shall be limited to two (2) on-premises signs that do not exceed four (4) feet square each in surface area. Garage sale signs must be staked on the private property at which the sale is being conducted (not closer than five (5) feet to the front or side property lines) and cannot be attached to utility poles, street light standards or other public facilities. The person or persons exercising ownership or leasehold rights over property on which a sale is held or advertised to be held shall be presumed to have placed and exhibited the sign advertising the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-84. - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or participate in the operation of a garage sale or estate sale without first obtaining a proper permit from the director of planning and development services. No garage sale or estate sale permit shall be transferable, nor shall a permit holder allow his name to be used by any other party for the purposes of obtaining a garage sale or estate sale permit. An application for a garage sale or estate sale permit shall be made upon forms provided by the director of planning and development services. The application will contain all the information necessary to fully advise the director of planning and development services of the date(s), location, hours of operation, date of the last sale held at the residence and any other information that may be reasonably required by the director of public works. Only the owner, lessee or agent of the owner or lessee of the residential property upon which the garage sale or estate sale is being conducted may obtain such a permit. An applicant for a garage sale or estate sale permit shall provide proof of address (driver's license, utility bills or other identification) and any other pertinent information as may be reasonably required by the director of public works. Upon verification and compliance with the provisions of this article, and payment of the proper fee, the applicant will be issued a permit for a garage sale or estate sale by the director of planning and development services. By making application for a garage sale or estate sale permit, accepting such a permit and conducting such a sale, the owner, lessee or agent of the property to whom the permit is granted authorizes any officer or employee of the City of Alamo Heights to enter upon the property for the purpose of determining that such sale is being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Alamo Heights Code Inspector and/or Police Department has the authority to revoke the estate sale permit if any consignment or personal property from other locations is offered for sale at an estate sale. Any permit issued by the director of planning and development services shall bear the street address of the residence where the sale will be located, the date(s) and hours when the garage sale or estate sale will be held and any other information deemed necessary by the director of planning and development services. The permit shall be clearly displayed and visible from a distance of six (6) feet from the curb-line or nearest edge of the paved portion of the street or right-of-way. 
Permits shall be obtained by 12:00 noon of the second calendar day prior to the start of the garage sale or estate sale in order to give the city sufficient time to install temporary "No parking" signs, if needed, on the street(s). Otherwise, the requested permit shall not be issued by the director of planning and development services. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 1938, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-85. - Frequency of garage sales and estate sales, hours of operation and duration. 
Each residence is allowed two (2) garage sales per calendar year, each of which shall be in different calendar quarters. Garage sales shall not commence prior to 8:00 a.m. and shall conclude not later than 6:00 p.m. on dates authorized by a garage sale permit. No garage sale shall exceed two (2) days in duration. Garage sales shall not be held on Sundays. 
Each residence is allowed one (1) estate sale per calendar year, which may be held in any calendar quarter. Estate sales shall not commence prior to 8:00 a.m. and shall conclude not later than 6:00 p.m. on dates authorized by an estate sale permit. No estate sale shall exceed three (3) days in duration. Estate sales shall not be held on Sundays. 
The director of public works shall have the authority in unusual circumstances to extend the duration of a garage sale for more than two (2) days or an estate sale for more than three (3) days if the director of public works is satisfied that such extension will be in harmony with the purposes expressed in section 10-63 of this article. If an applicant for an extended garage sale or estate sale permit is dissatisfied with the determination made by the director of public works in response to a request for an extension, a garage sale or estate sale applicant may appeal the decision of the director of public works to the city manager who may under extraordinary and limited circumstances extend the duration of garage sale or estate sale permits. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-86. - Display of sale items. 
Personal property displayed or exhibited at a garage sale or estate sale shall not be displayed or exhibited closer than five (5) feet to the front or side property lines of the property where the garage sale or estate sale is being conducted and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-87. - Sale of food items 
Food items shall not be sold under authority of a garage sale or estate sale permit. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-88. - Exception for churches, charitable and non-profit organizations. 
Church, charitable or non-profit organizations may hold a maximum of four (4) garage sales per calendar year, provided that the church or organization (a) does not hold more than one garage sale in the same calendar quarter, (b) the sale must be conducted on the church or organization property, (c) a member of the church or organization, authorized to represent it, must register with the director of public works, and (d) none of the net earnings of a garage sale shall inure to an individual. Sales allowed by this section shall conform to those requirements and limitations for garage sales as set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Sec. 10-89. - Penalty. 
Any person, corporation or business entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1638, 5-22-06; Ord. No. 2076 , 4-24-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI.  
Secs. 10-90—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTIONEERING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1750-A, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, renumbered Ch. 10, Art. VII, § 10-101, which pertained to use the public streets and rights-of-way for parades, races, runs, walks and other organized activities in the city. The user's attention is directed to § 16-150.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2014 , adopted Feb. 23, 2015, added new provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Electioneering restricted. 
Electioneering is permitted near the Alamo Heights City Hall on dates that the city hall facilities are a polling place for municipal, county, school district, state and federal elections. Electioneering may not occur within one hundred (100) feet of an outside door used by voters to enter the polling site. If state law increases the distance in which electioneering is prohibited, the increased distance designated by state law shall supersede the one-hundred-foot distance. The city manager shall designate a location on the city hall property upon which electioneering may occur, and electioneering on any other place on the city hall property is prohibited. Political signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area, are limited to a maximum of two (2) signs for each candidate, measure or political party, and shall not be erected earlier than 6:00 a.m. on election day and shall be removed by 8:00 a.m. on the second day following election day. If a candidate or his/her representative installs a political sign before 6:00 a.m. on election day or fails to remove a political sign by 8:00 a.m. on the second day after election day, such sign(s) will be removed by the city and destroyed. 
( Ord. No. 2014 , 2-23-15)  
Chapter 11 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court generally, Art. XVI, § 1; duties of the judge of municipal court set out, Art. V, § 11. 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous provisions and offenses, Ch. 10; police, Ch. 14; traffic, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the city, and shall also have concurrent jurisdiction with the justice of the peace in the precinct in which the city is situated in all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of this state in which punishment is by fine only, and where the maximum of such fine may not exceed the maximum allowed by law and arising within such territorial limits. 
(Code 1965, § 7-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Sec. 11-2. - Duties of presiding judge. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court authorized in Article V, section 11 of the city charter shall be designated the presiding judge of the municipal court. In addition to presiding over municipal court sessions, the presiding judge of the municipal court shall have the following additional duties: 
(1)  Coordinate the scheduling of court sessions with the deputy municipal court clerk and the police department; 
(2)  Coordinate attendance at court sessions by the municipal court judges; 
(3)  Prepare a schedule of fines for mail-ins and drop-ins; 
(4)  Establish municipal court administrative policies; 
(5)  Act as liaison for the municipal court with the mayor, city council, prosecutors, police department, city secretary and deputy municipal court clerk. 
(b)  The presiding judge of the municipal court shall receive the compensation determined from time to time by the city council for the duties hereinabove stipulated. 
(Code 1965, § 7-4)  
Sec. 11-3. - Summoning jury. 
Upon all trials, if the accused or person charged shall demand a trial by jury, proper writ shall issue to the chief of police to summon a jury, conforming in all things, as well with respect to the qualifications of the persons selected to act as jurors as the summoning and impaneling, and the compensation of such jurors, to the statutes of the state regulating juries in the courts of justices of the peace. 
(Code 1965, § 7-8)  
Sec. 11-4. - Administering oaths. 
Oaths of witnesses to testify before the court may be administered by the judge of the court, the clerk of the court, the deputy clerk of the court, the city secretary, the deputy city secretary, the city attorney, or the assistant city attorney. 
(Code 1965, § 7-10)  
Sec. 11-5. - Judgment. 
The judgment in the case of a conviction in a criminal case before the judge shall be that the city recover of the defendant the fine and fees and that the defendant remain in custody until fine and fees are paid or other order of the court is followed. 
(Code 1965, § 7-11)  
Sec. 11-6. - Capias issued. 
In each case of conviction before the judge from which no appeal is taken, a capias shall be issued for the collection of the fine and costs, which shall be enforced and returned in the manner prescribed by law in civil actions before justices of the peace of this state. 
(Code 1965, § 7-14)  
Sec. 11-7. - Collection of administrative fees. 
The municipal court shall assess and collect the maximum administrative fees authorized by state law for traffic related offenses. 
(Code 1965, § 7-18)  
Sec. 11-8. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The clerk of the municipal court shall keep a record of all violations of traffic ordinances of the city and of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and, from that time on, the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of traffic violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records shall be public records. 
(Code 1965, § 20-23)  
Sec. 11-9. - Failure to appear. 
Any person who willfully violates his promise to appear in the municipal court at the time and place promised by him in a duplicate written notice to appear signed by him after arrest for a violation of any state or municipal law or ordinance punishable by a fine in the municipal court of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(Code 1965, § 20-25)  
Sec. 11-10. - Municipal court technology fund. 
A municipal court technology fund is hereby created as authorized by Article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. The municipal court clerk shall collect a technology fee of four dollars ($4.00) as a cost of court from each defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court of the City of Alamo Heights. The technology fee shall be added to each offense for which a defendant is convicted. A defendant shall be considered convicted of a misdemeanor offense under any of the circumstances listed in Article 102.0172. The municipal court technology fund shall be expended by the city administrator for any of the purposes authorized in Article 102.0172. The technology fee shall be collected for all convictions occurring in the Municipal Court of the City of Alamo Heights after January 31, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 1450, 1-10-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1450, adopted Jan. 10, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 11-10 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Chapter 12 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate parks and playgrounds generally, Art. XI, § 3; authority of city to establish recreation department, Art. VIII, § 5. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage licenses, § 10-46 et seq.; animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; miscellaneous provisions and offenses, Ch. 10; sign regulations, Ch. 15; traffic, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001; park to be open for public use under rules prescribed by local governing authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007; home-rule municipality has exclusive control over public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 282.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the area of any city park to commit or do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Operate wheeled vehicle. To drive or propel any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter, or other motor-driven device or any wheeled vehicle, excluding a wheelchair used for the purpose of conveying an invalid, into, along, across or through any portion of any park, except in and along the parking area provided for parking vehicles, which parking area and driveways thereto shall be designated off the 200 block of Greely Avenue. 
(2)  Shoot firearms, fireworks or explosives. To shoot, fire, or explode any firearms, fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, explosives of any kind, mechanically powered guns, air rifles, pellet guns, or slingshots in any part of the park. 
(3)  Act as a solicitor or vendor. To be or act in the vocation of a solicitor, agent, peddler, vendor, mendicant, beggar, strolling musician, showman, or bootblack, in any part of the park. 
(4)  Bring dogs or other animals into the park. To bring any dog or other animal into the park except that a dog being securely fastened to a leash and accompanied by the owner or an attendant may be permitted in the park during the hours that the park is open to the public. 
(5)  Camp or sleep in park. To camp or sleep within the park or any portion thereof. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages. To possess alcoholic beverages within a park. 
(7)  Erect or post signs. To place or erect any sign, bulletin board, or advertising device of any kind whatsoever, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, or sign to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or structure within any park. 
(8)  Remove, mutilate or damage park property. To remove, destroy, mutilate, deface, damage or disfigure any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, bench, trees, plants, shrubs, bridges, pathways, signs, markers, feeders, or any other property in the park, or to dump trash or other matter within the park. 
(9)  [Reserved.] 
(10)  Fires. To build, start, or cause to be started a fire of any kind. 
(11)  Carry on with boisterous language or lascivious conduct. To conduct or carry on any boisterous or insulting language or be guilty of any disorderly, lewd or lascivious conduct of any kind in any part or area of the park. 
(b)  The foregoing rules and regulations shall not be construed to apply to workmen, either employees of the city or employees of an independent contractor employed by the city, in the legitimate discharge of their respective duties. 
(Code 1965, § 14-43; Ord. No. 2-9-04)  
Secs. 12-2—12-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1750-B, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, repealed Art. II, §§ 12-26—12-28, which pertained to recreation board and derived from Code 1965, §§ 14-1—14-3. 
 
Secs. 12-26—12-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1750-B, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008, repealed Art. III, §§ 12-46—12-48, which pertained to park and beautification board and derived from Code 1965, §§ 14-9—14-11. 
 
Secs. 12-46—12-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1359, adopted July 24, 1995, repealed former art. IV, §§ 12-66—12-73, which pertained to swimming pools. 
 
Secs. 12-66—12-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NATURE TRAILS 
 
Sec. 12-91. - Park area defined. 
The nature trails park area shall lie within an area of approximately fifty (50) acres in the Olmos Detention Basin lying south of Alamo Heights Boulevard, east of the Olmos Creek, west of Greely Street and north of the Olmos Dam, more particularly described as being bounded by a line: 
BEGINNING at the intersection of the south line of Alamo Heights Boulevard and the east line of Jones Maltsberger Road and proceeding in an easterly direction with the south line of Alamo Heights Boulevard to the intersection with the south line of Argo Avenue, a distance of 861 feet, more or less; 
THENCE east along the south line of Argo Avenue to the intersection with the west line of Ogden Lane, a distance of 128 feet, more or less; 
THENCE south with the west line of Ogden Lane to the end of the Swimming Pool Drive, a distance of 131 feet, more or less; 
THENCE south and southeast along the west and southwest side of the Swimming Pool Drive to the west line of Greely Street, a distance of 1300 feet, more or less; 
THENCE south along the west line of Greely Street, which is also the east line of Block 111, Argo addition, across Hondondo Avenue to the northeast corner of Block 110, a distance of 415 feet, more or less; 
THENCE southwest along the south line of Hondondo Avenue, which is also the north line of Block 110 to the northwest corner of Block 110, a distance of 183 feet, more or less; 
THENCE south along the west line of Block 110 to a point 30 feet south of the north line of Lot 7 of this Block 110, a distance of 300 feet, more or less; 
THENCE west to the northwest corner of 0.57 acres belonging to Ann Page Chandler, which is also the northeast corner of 0.814 acres belonging to the City of Alamo Heights, a distance of 125 feet, more or less; 
THENCE southeast with the west line of the 0.57 acres belonging to Ann Page Chandler, which is also the east line of the 0.814 acres belonging to the City of Alamo Heights to a point in the northwest line of Block 109, a distance of 283 feet, more or less; 
THENCE in a southwesterly direction with the northwest line of Block 109 to the center of the Olmos Creek, a distance of 115 feet, more or less; 
THENCE in a northwesterly direction with the meanderings of the center line of Olmos Creek to the east line of the Jones Maltsberger Road, a distance of 2,500 feet, more or less; 
THENCE north with the east line of the Jones Maltsberger Road to its intersection with the south line of Alamo Heights Boulevard, a distance of 656 feet, more or less, which is the point of beginning. 
The following property included within the above perimeter description is excluded from the nature trails area: 
(1)  A tract 275 feet by 300 feet, a part of O.C.L. 41 adjoining Alamo Heights Boulevard. 
(2)  The Pony League Baseball Park and parking area. 
(3)  The Little League Baseball Park, parking area and access roads. 
(4)  The Alamo Heights Swimming Pool, parking areas and access roads. 
(5)  Audubon Society Club House and parking area. 
(Code 1965, § 14-41)  
Sec. 12-92. - Hours open to the public. 
The nature trails park shall be open to the public at such times as may be specified by the chief of police and such park shall be closed at all other times and shall also be closed during any period or periods when the trails or any portions thereof are flooded. The chief of police is authorized to permit use of the nature trails park when it is otherwise closed to the public by special permit. Notice shall be posted at the entrances to the park stating the times of permitted public use. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be in the nature trails park when the park is closed to the public without a special permit authorizing the use of the park. 
(Code 1965, § 14-42)  
Chapter 13 - STORM DRAINAGE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
Alamo Heights Municipal Storm Drainage System (MS4). The system of conveyances, including but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, streams, tributaries, man-made channels, or storm drains, which: 
(1)  Provide collection or conveyance of stormwater, rain water, flood water, or other surface water; and 
(2)  Are located on public property; and 
(3)  Are not designed and intended to be part of the collection system of a sanitary sewer system utilized by a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in Title 40 C.F.R. 122.2. 
Benefitted property: Real property that is a parcel of property or lot within the corporate boundaries of the City of Alamo Heights to which stormwater drainage plans, programs, or services are made available and which receives water, wastewater, or electric utility service from the City of Alamo Heights. A parcel of property is a piece of land regardless of size under one (1) ownership, such ownership being further defined as the way in which property is legally described in duly recorded legal documents in the official public records of real property of the county in which the parcel of property is located. A lot is a designated property shown on a recorded plat duly recorded in the official public records of real property of the county in which the recorded plat is located. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs): A technique or series of structural and non-structural techniques and practices which, when used in an erosion control plan or considered as part of a construction site's housekeeping efforts, are proven to be effective in controlling construction-related runoff, erosion, sedimentation, and associated pollutants. 
Brush cuttings, clippings: All herbaceous materials, including lawn trimmings and leaves. 
Construction activity: Clearing or grading of land, dozing or mechanical removal of trees which dozing or mechanical removal disturbs the soil, excavation for installation of utility lines, streets, drainage facilities, and site preparation for housing and commercial development, as well as on-going construction activities which produce waste products. 
Director: The Director of Public Works of the City of Alamo Heights or designee(s). 
EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Erosion: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
Final inspection: Occurs after responsible party meets definition of final stabilization and files a NOT, if required by state or federal law, at which time the city will conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with final stabilization and removal of temporary BMP's has occurred. 
Final stabilization: Reference to standards in the NPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges for Construction Activities in EPA's Region 6 concerning development acreage that: (1) where state or federally regulated development acreage is concerned, all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover, with a density of seventy (70) percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed and (2) where local, individual lots associated with residential or commercial construction are concerned, by either (a) the responsible party complying with cover requirements guided by federal or state standards recited above, or (b) the responsible party establishing temporary stabilization including perimeter controls and informing the home buyer or commercial purchaser in writing of the need for and benefits of final stabilization. 
Grade: The vertical location of the ground surface. 
Grading: Any land disturbance or land fill, or combination thereof. 
Household hazardous waste: Waste from materials utilized for residential or housekeeping purposes containing regulated substances which either singularly or by its interaction with other wastes or by its accumulation in the MS4 becomes injurious or potentially injurious to human, plant, or animal life, or property. For purposes of this chapter household hazardous wastes include but are not limited to paint, paint thinners, paint solvents, beaches, and drain cleaners. 
Impervious cover: Ground surfaces including concrete or paved driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, buildings and other improvements that resists the infiltration of water, thereby resulting in water runoff. Impervious cover includes any surface material or surface treatment or surface condition which sheds fifty (50) percent or more of rainfall, or water, which falls on it. 
Impervious surface area: For the purposes of calculation for this chapter, the total square footage of all impervious cover on a developed property, excluding public sidewalks. 
Improved: Altered by man-made conditions. 
Land disturbance/land-disturbing activities: Any moving or removing by manual or mechanical means of the soil mantle or top six (6) inches of soil, whichever is shallower, including but not limited to excavations. 
Land fill: Any human activity involving the disposition of soil, earth, or other earthen or aggregate materials. 
Measurable volume: For purposes of determining a violation, the amount of sediment, soil, soil material, or pollutant, shall be such volume as is capable of being truly and correctly depicted in a photograph, motion picture, or video recording of the sediment, soil, soil material, or pollutant in question. 
Municipal storm drainage system (MS4): All natural and man-made collection and conduit facilities within the corporate limits of the City of Alamo Heights and within applicable limits of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and for which MS4 protection the City of Alamo Heights has been issued a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit by EPA, which collection and conduit facilities constitute a system of conveyances, including but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, streams, tributaries, man-made channels, or storm drains, which provide collection or conveyance of stormwater, rain water, flood water, or other surface water, and may be located on public property, drainage easements, or other property, and are not designated and intended to be part of the collection system of a sanitary sewer system utilized by a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined by federal regulation at 40 CFR 122.2. 
NOI: Notice of intent filed by a responsible party with EPA or TCEQ. This NOI is required under federal regulation, or future state regulation, for certain construction activity. The NOI is part of the federal general permit process for construction activity concerning projects or runoff deemed to potentially impact waters of the United States of America. 
NOT: Notice of termination. The notice required by EPA or TCEQ for sizeable projects within the jurisdiction of either agency, which notice verifies "final stabilization" of the site has been achieved, as described above; EPA form 3510-7 terminating coverage under the NPDES general permit or corresponding TCEQ form for the TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System general permit. 
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
Ordinance: This ordinance [Ordinance No. 1817] in its entirety, pertaining to Chapter 13, Code of Ordinances of the City of Alamo Heights. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or the legal representatives, agents, or assigns thereof. 
Pesticide: Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest, and/or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. 
Pollutant: Any substance introduced into the environment that adversely affects a resource. Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, soil, soil material, sediment, human waste, other wastes and debris generated at construction sites. 
Responsible party: Any person or legal entity, individual or corporate, including an owner, operator, contractor, or subcontractor, any or all of whom may be engaged in, consent to, or actually perform a construction project or construction activity. 
Rubbish: Inorganic solid waste including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, glass, crockery, tin and aluminum cans, metal furniture, and other like materials. 
Soil and/or soil material: Naturally occurring superficial deposits of earth mantle overlaying bedrock or clay; any naturally occurring surface deposit of sand, gravel, silt, clay, or any mixture thereof. 
Stormwater: Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage, as per NPDES Permit No. TXS001901. 
Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP): The state or federally required plan for identifying and implementing appropriate measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges into the city's municipal stormwater drainage systems (MS4), which pollutants include eroded sediments. Protective measures include, but are not limited to, natural and man-made collection components, good housekeeping for site maintenance, and other common sense actions, all frequently referred to as best management practices (BMPs). 
TCEQ: Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
Unimproved: Natural conditions, unaltered. 
Unit: Single living, commercial or occupied space within a developed property. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-2. - Administration; rules and regulations. 
The director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The director shall develop necessary rules, regulations and procedures necessary for the administration of the chapter including a methodology for considering variances. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of this Code. Each day any violation or noncompliance shall continue shall be subject to being constituted as a separate offense. 
(b)  A civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation of this chapter may be imposed. Each violation of a particular section of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day such an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this chapter. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-4. - Injunctive relief and other remedies for violation. 
(a)  Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who shall commit any of the acts described by this chapter, or be guilty of any of the omissions thereof, shall be liable to injunctive action prohibiting the violation of this chapter and shall be subject to being mandatorily enjoined to immediately remediate any violations of this chapter, and shall be liable and responsible for any and all expenses that may be incurred by the city in connection with any such action, omission or other violation, including reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the City of Alamo Heights may, at any time, seek legal and/or equitable remedies or may file charges against any person, corporation, or other entity believed to be in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The use of negotiated civil settlements or other methods of alternative dispute resolution to reach a civil settlement is hereby authorized; provided that the civil penalty imposed by any such agreement or settlement is of a sufficient amount in relation to the violations to which they provide a sanction. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-5. - Conflict. 
The provisions of this article shall take precedence over those of any other existing ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights which may contain provisions that are less restrictive than those specified in this article. However, nothing contained in this article shall mitigate, interfere with, alter or repeal any provisions of any other ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights not in conflict with the provisions of this article. No provision of this chapter is intended to, nor shall any part or portion hereof be construed, so as to conflict with state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-6. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held to be void or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this chapter and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances shall nevertheless be valid, and the city council hereby declares that this chapter would have been enacted without such invalid chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Secs. 13-7—13-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALAMO HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 13-26. - Declaring the drainage of the city to be a public utility. 
The city council hereby adopts Texas Local Government Code Chapter 402 Subchapter C (entitled "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems"); declares the drainage of the city to be a public utility, to be known as the City of Alamo Heights Storm Drainage System; and dedicates to the drainage utility all city owned property, real and personal, facilities, materials and supplies constituting the city's drainage system as constituted on the effective date of this chapter and as may be acquired in the future, to be used for the purpose of the drainage utility. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-27. - Establishment and revision to drainage utility service area. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Texas Local Government Code § 402.044(8)(B) the drainage service area includes all land within the municipal boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-28. - Stormwater fund. 
A separate fund shall be created, effective as of the effective date of this chapter, known as the stormwater fund, for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to the drainage utility. All stormwater fees collected by the city and other monies city council may wish to designate for this fund, shall be deposited in the stormwater fund. Such utility revenues shall be used for the purposes of administration, studies, engineering, construction, reconstruction and other reasonable and customary charges associated with the operation of the drainage utility. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-29. - Stormwater development fee. 
(a)  The stormwater development fee is deemed a nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable methodology to provide and fund regional detention, watershed protection, land purchase, waterway enlargement, channelization, improved conveyance structures and administration of the drainage utility. 
(b)  To be effective on July 1, 2009, the city council hereby establishes a stormwater development fee to be paid by users of benefitted property in the service area of the drainage utility. The stormwater development fee is a one-time drainage charge assessed to developers whose properties are served by the drainage utility pursuant to this Code. The fee shall be assessed for any construction that increases the total impervious surface area (excluding public sidewalks) of real property. 
(c)  For undeveloped residential lots or residential lots where all of the buildings were previously removed or demolished and no accurate documentation exists for the size of the demolished structures, the stormwater development fee shall be calculated at fifty (50) percent of the normal rate. For example, if the rate is normally calculated at forty cents ($0.40) per additional square foot of impervious cover, the stormwater development fee for a residential project proposed on a vacant lot would be calculated at twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following real property, only, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Property owned by the City of Alamo Heights and/or dedicated to right-of-way for public streets and/or to provide drainage service; and 
(2)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a privately owned drainage or stormwater system wholly sufficient to provide all the drainage or stormwater service for that property. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 4-13-09; Ord. No. 1861, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 1941, 9-10-12)  
Sec. 13-30. - Stormwater development credit. 
A stormwater development credit shall reduce the building permit fees for any construction project which decreases the total net impervious surface area (excluding public sidewalks) of real property at the same rate per square foot as the rate for stormwater development fees. 
(Ord. No. 1941, 9-10-12)  
Secs. 13-31—13-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES INTO THE MUNICIPAL STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 13-51. - Prohibited discharges into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit, throw, drain, discharge, cause or allow to be deposited, thrown, drained or discharged, or otherwise cause to be injected into the MS4, or any storm sewer manhole, catch basin, private drain, ditch, street, gutter, creek, stream, tributary, or any other drainage device which connects with or drains into the MS4, any of the following described materials or substances within the corporate limits of the City of Alamo Heights: 
(1)  Any acid waste materials; 
(2)  Any alkaline waste materials; 
(3)  Any water or waste containing free-floating, or insoluble oil; 
(4)  Any gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(5)  Any noxious, malodorous, poisonous, or reactive substance which, either singularly or by interaction with other substances, or by its accumulation in the MS4 becomes injurious or potentially injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property; or 
(6)  Any domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that such person was authorized to commit any act under a valid permit from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, which would otherwise constitute a violation at the time of commission. 
Commentary: It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit indiscriminate discharging to the MS4; such indiscriminate discharging includes dumping or releasing of any accumulations of process materials, washing or cleaning materials or other wastes into the MS4. It is also the intent to eliminate improper storage or handling of dangerous, hazardous, or otherwise harmful materials in such a manner as to cause or allow their discharge into the MS4. However, these regulations are not intended to prohibit discharge of non-contaminated and non-polluting water which are not expected to be significant sources of pollutants because of the nature of their discharges. Consequently, no special controls or conditions are established for sources such as: 1) water line and fire hydrant flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life); 2) runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources; 3) discharges from potable water sources; 4) diverted stream flows; 5) rising ground waters and springs; 6) uncontaminated ground water infiltration; 7) uncontaminated pumped ground water; 8) foundation and footing drains; 9) air conditioning condensation; 10) water from crawl space pumps; 11) individual residential vehicle wash water; 12) external building wash water; 13) flows from wetlands and riparian habitats; 14) dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 15) pavement and street wash water; 16) water used to control dust; 17) discharges or flows from fire fighting activities (fire fighting activities do not include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities); 18) other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR (122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1); 19) non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit (MSGP) or the TPDES Construction General permit (CGP); and 20) other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-52. - Placing brush cuttings, clippings, and/or rubbish into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit, discard or dump, or cause or allow to be deposited, discarded or dumped any brush cuttings, clippings, or rubbish within the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place or cause or allow to be placed or dropped, brush cuttings, clippings, and/or rubbish within any street in the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that the same may be washed by the flow of water into the MS4. 
Commentary: It is the intent of this section to restrict placement of rubbish, brush, lawn clippings or leaves, etc. into the MS4. It is also the intent to require that during certain seasons when leaves are shed that these materials are removed properly and prevented from collecting in mass quantities in the streets or MS4. It is recognized that from time to time during certain seasons or during normal yard maintenance, leaves, clippings, etc. will fall into the streets. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-53. - Placing household hazardous wastes into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place, or cause or allow to be placed, a household hazardous waste within the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place, or cause or allow to be placed, a household hazardous waste within any street in the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that the same may be washed by the flow of water into the MS4. 
Commentary: The intent of this ordinance is to prohibit those conducting household activities such as cleaning, renovating, painting, auto repair, and other similar activities which utilize household hazardous wastes from discarding such wastes into the MS4, or from performing any activity that would result in the contamination of the MS4 with such household hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-54. - Prohibiting the improper use of pesticides in order to keep them from entering the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to cause or allow a pesticide to enter into the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to utilize a pesticide in a manner inconsistent with the proper usage set out in the labeling for such pesticide in accordance with the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to utilize a pesticide which is not properly labeled in accordance with FIFRA. 
(d)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the person accused of such violation utilized a pesticide in accordance with the requirements of FIFRA in a manner consistent with its labeling. The term "labeling" pursuant to Section 136 of FIFRA means all labels and all other written, printed or graphic matter: 
(1)  Accompanying the pesticide or device at any time; or 
(2)  To which reference is made on the label or in literature accompanying the pesticide or device except to current official publications of the Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Departments of Agriculture and Interior, the Department of Health and Human Services, state experiment stations, state agricultural colleges, and other federal or state institutions or agencies authorized by law to conduct research in the field of pesticides. 
Commentary: It is recognized that excess pesticides will migrate into the MS4 even under normal and proper usage. It is the intent of this ordinance to restrict the usage of those chemicals to the manner deemed appropriate by their manufacturer and consistent with FIFRA. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Secs. 13-55—13-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER COMPLIANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of this article is to satisfy conditions imposed by the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. Delegation of federal authority to the State of Texas, to administer NPDES permit requirements, has been made by EPA to the TCEQ. The city will, to the extent allowable under state and local law, develop, implement, and enforce a program to reduce pollutants in construction stormwater runoff from projects that disturb areas of one (1) or more acres of land or projects that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one (1) or more acres of land. The program will utilize Best Management Practices (BMPs) to require erosion and sediment controls with sanctions to ensure compliance to the extent allowable under state and local law; requirements for construction site contractors to control erosion and sediment; requirements for controlling construction waste; procedures for the city's review of site plans; procedures for receiving information and complaints; and procedures for the city to inspect construction sites and to enforce controls. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-102. - Declaration of nuisance for violation. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, no person shall perform construction activity that violates provisions of this article. Construction activity in violation of this article is hereby declared unlawful. 
(b)  Violations committed within the corporate limits and within five thousand (5,000) feet outside the city's corporate limits shall also constitute public nuisance. Violations of any provision of this article within the city's corporate limits shall be deemed a criminal class C misdemeanor. Violations of any provision of this article within the city's corporate limits or any part of the applicable ETJ shall be further subject to a civil enforcement option. 
(c)  No culpable mental state is required of any responsible party in order to constitute a violation of this article. Some of the requirements of this article may be generally characterized as good housekeeping protocols, those expected to be employed by a reasonably prudent contractor, operator, owner, or other person having responsibilities for various activities on a construction site. Where state or federal permits require the site operator, owner, or other responsible party, to make a stormwater management plan (SWMP), such plans must be readily available for city inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-103. - Prohibition against construction pollution of the municipal storm drainage system; measurable volumes for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity which activity results in a measurable volume of sediment, soils, soils material, or pollutants entering the city's municipal storm drainage system (MS4). 
(b)  "Measurable volume" of sediment, soil, soil material, or pollutant, for purposes of determining a violation, shall be such volume as is capable of being truly and correctly depicted in a photograph, motion picture, or video recording of the sediment, soil, soil material, or pollutant in question. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall diminish or change the general prohibitions against MS4 pollution found in section 13-102, article II of this chapter 13, prohibited discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system. The city shall continue to exercise all enforcement powers set out in this chapter 13, and to gather such evidence as may include, but not be limited to, samples and analysis appropriate to enforcement of chapter 13 provisions. 
(d)  The responsible party shall use best management practices (BMPs) to prevent sediment, soils, soils materials, and pollutants from entering the city's MS4. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity without employing BMPs necessary to protect the city's MS4 from run-off or other media capable of transporting sediment, soil, soil material, and pollutants into the city's MS4. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-104. - Additional federal and state requirements generally applicable to responsible parties associated with five-acre or larger projects. 
(a)  Concerning projects for which the EPA or TCEQ have permitting authority, the responsible party shall post at the site, as required by federal or state regulations, a true and correct copy of the NOI. 
(b)  The responsible party shall have available for city inspection, on site, the stormwater management plan (SWMP) imposed by EPA or TCEQ, when the site in question is subject to such plans imposed by federal or state law. 
(c)  The responsible party shall make the swmp available to the city inspector, on reasonable request made during normal working hours. 
(d)  Failure, refusal, or inability to provide such plan for inspection, when the plan is required under state or federal law, constitutes a violation of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity in violation of the elements of an applicable SWMP. 
(f)  The responsible party shall provide the city a true and correct copy of any notice of termination (NOT) necessary to close out a project regulated by EPA or TCEQ. This copy shall be sent to the city. 
(g)  Where permanent improvements have been constructed, the final inspection shall verify whether or not the "final stabilization" criteria have been met. 
(h)  Where no permanent improvements are planned, temporary BMPs shall continue to be maintained until site has reached final stabilization. 
(i)  A site shall continue to be regulated until final stabilization is achieved; and, where applicable to state and federally regulated sites, until a "notice of termination" (NOT) has been filed. A copy of the NOT, if applicable, will also be filed with the city as described above at subsection (f). 
(j)  Where the site has met final stabilization requirements, but the controls or measures implemented thereafter fail, each discharge of construction related contamination by the responsible party shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(k)  Removal of temporary BMPs shall be required after the site achieves final stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-105. - Best management practices (BMP) guidelines. 
(a)  Responsible parties are advised to utilize established BMPs and other good housekeeping protocols synonymous with federal standards directly associated with EPA's general permit for other construction sites regulated under federal law. Some of these federally regulated construction sites are permitted by the State of Texas under guidelines similar to those of EPA. Responsible parties whose projects of scale fall within state or federal parameters are responsible to EPA or TCEQ to fulfill requirements that may differ from or may be more stringent than the provisions of this ordinance applying to local, individual construction sites of a scale not regulated by state or federal authorities. 
(b)  In contrast, the purpose of this article and its requirements for BMPs are to satisfy the city's own federal permit which specifically requires the city to adopt a construction site regulation. Consequently, the intent of this article is to protect MS4 from pollutants generated from local construction sites. Federal jurisdiction to support this directive is found in the conduit of urban runoff traversing the Alamo Heights area into rivers, streams, and especially bays regulated as "waters of the United States of America." Hence, stormwater generated in the area of Alamo Heights presumes to enter into and impact federal waters. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 13-106. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The director may designate city inspectors (inspectors). 
(b)  Upon observation of an alleged violation or condition an inspector believes constitutes a violation of this article, the inspector shall issue a field correction notice to a responsible party. The field correction notice shall be personally delivered to a responsible party, if such person is available on site; or, in the absence of such person, shall be posted at the construction site. Field correction notices shall afford two (2) twenty-four-hour periods to correct the violation alleged. The first twenty-four-hour period should be used to remediate and remove the offending material, if any, from the city's MS4. A second twenty-four-hour grace period shall follow immediately to allow the responsible party to appropriately install or repair corrective BMPs which was lacking or failed to protect city property. 
(c)  If the violation is cured within forty-eight (48) hours, as described above, no further city action is required. 
(d)  If correction is not made timely, the inspector may issue a stop work order. 
(e)  If a stop work order is not honored at the site and/or corrective action is not timely accomplished to protect the city's MS4, citations may be issued or civil injunctive remedies with appropriate penalties may be pursued. 
(f)  Additional or cumulative enforcement action may be taken as the seriousness of the alleged pollutant encroachment in the MS4 may warrant. 
(g)  Additional compliance time may be afforded, if within the judgment and discretion of the inspector, municipal obligations to environmental health and safety and municipal stormwater compliance obligations to enforcement agencies are not compromised. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 4-13-09)  
Chapter 14 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to establish police department, Art. VIII, § 3. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Home-rule municipality authority to provide police department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003; authority of peace officers to arrest without warrant, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 14.03; qualifications for basic peace officer proficiency certificate, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 221.3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1810, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2009, repealed § 14-26, which pertained to the police department and derived from Code 1965, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1428, adopted Jan. 11, 2000; Ord. No. 1482, adopted May 21, 2001; Ord. No. 1500, adopted June 24, 2002.  
Secs. 14-27—14-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ARRESTS 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Release of person arrested for traffic violation. 
An arrested person, in order to secure a release, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of such notice shall be retained by such officer, and the copy thereof delivered to the person arrested. Thereupon, such officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
(Code 1965, § 16-16)  
Sec. 14-47. - Penalty for failure to appear. 
Any person who wilfully violates his written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 16-18)  
Secs. 14-48—14-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Interlocal assistance by law enforcement officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-66. - State of emergency—Declaration; interlocal assistance. 
The city is authorized to make provision for its regularly employed police officers to assist any other municipality or any county when, in the opinion of the mayor of such other municipality or in the opinion of the county judge of such county or in the opinion of any other municipal or county officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in such other municipality or in such county, there exists in such other municipality or in such county a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other municipality or of such county, its inhabitants and the visitors thereto by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or a threat thereof by three (3) or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or manmade calamity. 
(Code 1965, § 16-30)  
Sec. 14-67. - Same—Chief of police authorized to provide interlocal assistance. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city is hereby authorized, in his discretion and when requested to do so under the conditions above specified to send the regularly employed police officers of the city to assist in the performance of police or peace duties in the requesting municipality or county during the duration of such state of civil emergency. 
(b)  If the chief of police is absent from the city or is otherwise unavailable or unable to receive such request for assistance at the time that it is made, then in that event the senior police officer then on duty is hereby authorized to take the action provided for in the preceding paragraph hereof. 
(Code 1965, § 16-31)  
Chapter 15 - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2105, adopted July 23, 2018, repealed ch. 15 in its entirety, and Exh. A of said ordinance enacted a new ch. 15 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-7, 15-31—15-41, 15-60—15-65, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1304, adopted July 14, 1993; Ord. No. 1380, adopted Sept. 9, 1996; Ord. No. 1530, adopted July 14, 2003; Ord. No. 1537, adopted Dec. 8, 2003; Ord. No. 1541, adopted Jan. 26, 2004; Ord. No. 1569, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 25, 2004; Ord. No. 1592, adopted Nov. 14, 2005; Ord. No. 1664, adopted July 31, 2006; Ord. No. 1687, adopted Nov. 27, 2006; Ord. No. 1769, adopted May 12, 2008; and Ord. No. 1861, adopted April 12, 2010. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate signs and billboards, Art. VII, § 4. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; unlawful to erect signs in city parks, § 12-1; zoning, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Regulation of signs by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.003. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
The purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide a reasonable system for the control of signs; 
(2)  To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance; 
(3)  To regulate the form and allotment of signs within the city to preserve the positive city image, harmony, and pride and thereby strengthening the economic stability of the city; 
(4)  To provide for signs, for which the principal purpose will be to furnish information necessary for business and commerce; and 
(5)  To reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signage. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18) 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign means a sign located on property which is vacant and unoccupied for three (3) months or more or which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business. 
Address sign shall mean a sign not exceeding seventy-two (72) square inches in exposed surface used to identify the address of the premises and is not illuminated or lighted. 
Administrative officer means the city's duly designated official charged with administration and enforcement of the ordinances and codes of the City of Alamo Heights having to do with land use and building. 
Area of sign shall mean the area within the outer dimensions of a sign, including those portions of the frame or support structure which (A) border or adjoin the face of the sign, or (B) are of size, dimension or configuration which attracts attention or (C) are in excess of that necessary to support the sign. If a sign is placed on a wall or other surface, or if letters or other portions of the sign are supported individually, without any border, the area shall be computed by enclosing the entire sign within sets of parallel lines. (See Figure D) 
 
Attached sign means any permanent sign attached, painted, or in some way affixed directly to a building surface. 
Awning sign means a sign or advertising painted on, printed on, attached to, or supported by an awning attached to a building or structure. 
Banner means flexible material, usually made of cloth or plastic, often bearing a symbol or slogan, and which is attached at each end on a pole, or which hangs vertically on a pole. May only be used for temporary signs. 
Billboard (outdoor advertising). See definition for "off-premise sign." 
Building front means the face of a building fronting an improved public street. 
Business sign shall mean any structure or graphic display placed or arranged for the purpose of directing attention to the occupant, building, service, or product existing or offered on the premises on which such sign is located. 
Canopy sign means a sign attached or affixed to a canopy that is attached to or comprises an extension of a building. 
Character representations means a mural, such as a drawing applied directly to a wall, ceiling or window, and similar media types, either animated or inanimate, which draws attention to a business or facility for the purpose of advertising or promoting an establishment or product. Murals may only be displayed as temporary signs. 
Commercial message means wording on any sign, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Contractor (or construction sign) sign, commercial means a sign located on the premises of a permitted commercial construction project, which may be erected for a limited amount of time, identifying any or all of the property owners, developers, engineers, architects, contractors, mortgagees, or other project participants in the construction or improvement of the premises, but which displays no other goods or services for sale or other advertising. 
Contractor (or construction sign) sign, residential means a sign located on the premises of a permitted residential construction project, which may be erected for a limited period of time, identifying any or all of the property owners, developers, engineers, architects, contractors, mortgagees, or other project participants in the construction or improvement of the premises, but which displays no other goods or services for sale or other advertising. 
Construction traffic sign means a sign or system of signs that are placed to provide temporary wayfinding or detouring of traffic during periods of construction. 
Damaged sign means a sign, which is unsafe, unsecure, disfigured, or broken. 
Detached sign means a sign connected to the ground which is not attached to, applied on, or supported by, any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) inclusive of signs on moveable objects, except signs on vehicles that are moving or are parked only temporarily, incidental to their principal use for transportation. 
Development sign means signs giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for construction of or in an approved subdivision or land development at the site where the sign is placed. 
Directory sign means any sign, or combination of signs, attached to or part of a common structure, which identifies, announces or advertises two (2) or more businesses or offices. 
Electrical sign means a sign whereon letters, figures or designs are formed or outlined by electric illumination, or formed by a transparent medium which is illuminated from such lamps, tubes, or other electric illuminate within or on the sign, and all outside building outlining, and shall be deemed to include interior decorative displays and gas tube window outlining, also including but not limited to, LED (light emitting diode) signs, television screens, plasma screens, video boards, or other signs that utilize digital or other image projection technology to display a message to the public. Signs which are illuminated by electric lights which are not attached to the sign or which are not essential elements of the sign proper, and signs which are lighted by flood lights or projectors, are not classified as electric signs within the meaning of this chapter. Flashing lights of any configuration, either interior or exterior to the sign proper, are prohibited. 
Face, sign face, or face of a sign shall mean any surface of a sign which is painted, stained, lighted, has lettering, or is illustrated, separately or in combination, to attract attention. 
Feather flag means a temporary detached sign type, that consists of a vertical pole placed into the ground with a fabric flag attached to the pole. Also referred to as tear drop banner. 
Flat sign means any sign attached or inset in the wall of any building in approximately the same plane or parallel to the face of such wall. 
Garage sale or estate sale sign means a sale sign provides information regarding a garage, estate, or yard sale and includes information about the location of the sale and the dates and times of the sale. 
Gas/fuel price electronic message sign means an electronic sign type that is distinguished from electronic message signs due to the limited amount of information displayed and the length of time periods the message will remain unchanged. These signs are limited to displaying the gas/fuel prices only to advertise to the general public. Any messaging capacity beyond the gas/fuel price shall constitute an electronic message sign as defined and regulated herein. 
Hanging blade sign means any sign that is hung, mounted, or attached underneath a canopy or covered walkway and placed perpendicular to the walkway in order to help pedestrians identify the occupants of building or structure. 
Hologram/laser sign means any sign that generates a projected image into the atmosphere or onto the surface of an object, originating from a device connected to an electrical or battery power source. 
Identification sign means any sign identifying a business, including its name, logo, address, phone number, uses, services and products sold, credit/charge cards accepted, check approval agencies and phrases that are an integral part of the corporate identity. For an individual this includes title or designation (e.g., M.D., D.C., D.V.M., C.P.A., etc.). 
Illuminated sign or lighted sign. These terms may be used interchangeably and shall refer to any sign which has a source of light, either internal or external, for the purpose of illuminating such sign. 
Instructional signs means signs prohibiting activity (e.g. "no smoking", "no animals," "no entrance," "no soliciting," "no trespassing/private property," etc.) or providing directions/instructions (e.g. "entrance," "exit," "drop off point," "pick up here," "deposit here," "order here," etc.) which do not exceed three (3) square feet in size. Instructional signs may utilize a pole type base provided the height of the sign does not exceed four (4) feet. 
Landmark sign means any one (1) of the following types of signs that exemplifies the cultural, architectural, or commercial identity of the city, is iconic in its location, and contributes to the surrounding neighborhood character: 
(1)  Historic sign means a landmark sign that exemplifies the cultural, architectural or commercial history of the city and was constructed more than fifty (50) years before the date of application. 
(2)  Vintage sign means a landmark sign that is iconic and culturally significant and was constructed between fifty (50) and twenty-five (25) years before the date of application. 
(3)  Replica sign means a landmark sign that is an exact reproduction of a historic sign which no longer exists. 
Maximum height means the maximum sign height allowed by this chapter. 
Maximum size means the established maximum area a sign is permitted to be as regulated herein. 
Menu board means a sign or portion of a sign constructed to accommodate regular changes in content (ordinarily by removing and replacing letters and numbers). 
Monument sign (ground sign) shall mean a sign which is supported by a pedestal or other solid foundation in or upon the ground and limited to six (6) feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
Moving signs means any sign which, in whole or in part, moves, rotates, flashes, reflects, blinks, or appears to do any of the foregoing, or which simulates motion in any manner. 
Multi-family complex. A multi-family complex consists of one (1) or more buildings with ten (10) or more dwellings on a single property. 
Multi-tenant sign means a permanent detached sign type in which is independent of buildings or structures. This sign form allows larger height and sign surface area for developments with a variety of businesses needing advertising capability all located on the same premises. This sign form is constructed of solid material consisting of a single structure from the ground up to the highest point of the sign. 
Neon sign means a gas filled glass tubing sign. 
Nit means in lighting, the nit is a unit of visible-light intensity, commonly used to specify the brightness of a cathode ray tube or liquid crystal display computer display. One (1) nit is equivalent to one (1) candela per square meter. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean a sign which was not in violation of any ordinance of the town at the time of its erection, which was intended to be and which is permanent, and does not constitute a hazard to public safety or a nuisance, but which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Non-commercial sign means any sign that does not contain or is not used to convey a commercial message. 
Obscene signs means signs displaying indecent, obscene gestures or pictures or profanity are prohibited in any zoning district within the town. 
Off-premise sign shall mean any sign not constructed on the same building site as the business it is advertising. 
Opening soon sign means a sign which advertises a business will be accessible to the public within a short time, also includes grand openings. 
Permanent sign means any sign intended to be displayed for more than thirty (30) days. 
Pole sign shall mean any detached sign which is supported by one or more poles, pylons, or similar structural fixture(s) permanently affixed to the ground. 
Political signs shall mean a temporary sign indicating the name, picture, and/or information related to an individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or relating to a forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to the advocating by persons, groups, or parties of political views or policies. 
Portable sign shall mean any outdoor advertising display sign not permanently attached to a support structure via commonly used construction standards. 
Prohibited support means a sign shall not be supported in whole or in part from any public utility installation or any tree on private premises. 
Projecting sign means a sign so constructed and erected as to be attached to a building or other structure and projecting out therefrom. 
Real estate sign shall mean a sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of property only for a use for which it is legally zoned. 
Realty or real estate sign, commercial means a real estate sign located on commercial, industrial, mixed-use, and multi-family developments. Real estate signs, commercial, requires a permit. 
Realty or real estate sign, residential means a real estate sign located on property zoned for residential use. A real estate sign, residential sign shall not include multi-family residential properties. Real estate signs, residential, does not require a permit. 
Reface. Reface of a sign shall be defined as replacing, restoring, repainting, or repairing the existing advertising sign face area. It does not include resizing the sign, rebuilding, reconstructing, reconfiguring, or expanding the area, size, height, or form of the existing sign structure or existing sign support structure. The city's administrative officer shall approve all sign re-facings provided that the re-facing is similar in text and color patterns and no enlargement of the sign is proposed. The city's administrative officer may choose to send a re-facing application to the architectural review board. A reface does not include any structural addition or expansion to the sign structure and does not require architectural review board approval. 
Retaining wall sign means a permanent detached sign affixed to a retaining wall, the retaining wall must be protecting an earth slope or embankment and have a natural appearance to its construction. 
Roof sign means any sign erected on or over the roof of a building. 
Sandwich board sign means a temporary sign that is also known as an "a" frame sign, which is portable and displayed to provide business information to the public directly adjacent to a business space. There signs are meant to function as the detached sign form for the downtown or main street district areas. 
Searchlight or beacon sign means a sign form that utilizes a high-intensity beam of light with one (1) or more beams, that may rotate or move, directed into the atmosphere or toward any other point, or any type of light projected to attract or distract the attention of persons in a public right-of-way. This definition does not apply to the use of searchlights by government entities. 
Setback means the required distance between any point on private land and the property line abutting the nearest public right-of-way. 
Shopping center means any building or group of contiguous buildings containing two (2) or more businesses or offices, such as a strip center, shopping center or office building. 
Sign means any structure, placard, display, mural, figures, painting, drawing, message, poster, plaque, billboard, rendering, notice, device, sandwich board, or other object which is arranged, intended, located, placed, arranged, lighted, erected, or that includes text or images for the purpose of attracting attention to a building, premises, commodity, product, business, service, or activity or which gives information or communicates about same. Displays, notices, names and other announcements on canopies or awnings are signs. 
Sign height. Height shall be measured from the vertical distance between the highest point of the ground elevation within the sign footprint to the highest point of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever point is highest. All signs herein shall be measured by this method. 
Significant improvements means improvements to an on-premises nonconforming sign which includes but is not limited to changing a pole sign to a monument sign, a reduction in height or display, surface or panel area square footage, or an increase in setback, or an improvement in materials or landscaping such that an on-premises existing nonconforming sign meets the criteria set out in this chapter and becomes more compliant with the sign regulations. 
Special event. A special event is a one (1) time or infrequently occurring event outside normal programs or activities of the sponsoring or organizing entity or business. 
Sponsorship signs means signs placed in approved areas for sponsorship of nonprofit organizations are considered to be sponsorship signs. 
Surface area of a sign means the total surface which the sign text, images, and message content is printed, painted or displayed including frame and mounting. In cases where the frame and mounting are part of a building or when the frame and mounting could be considered a landscape element the total surface area may be calculated as the perimeter using straight lines and right angles around the sign text, images, and message content. Surface area of a sign is regulated in this chapter as the maximum size. 
Supplementary definitions means those found in chapter 2 of the Uniform Sign Code, 1988 edition, recommended by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
Temporary sign means any sign intended to serve as a limited and/or temporary advertisement of specific events for the property on which it is located or as an interim identification sign until a permanent sign is available. Temporary signs shall be displayed for thirty (30) days or less. 
Time and temperature sign means a sign or part of a sign which is devoted to changeable messages limited to display the current time and temperature. 
Wall sign means a sign erected upon a constructed wall made of cinderblock, stone, brick or similar material, constructed upon cement or concrete footing. This definition shall not be inclusive of fences. 
Window sign means all forms of signs, graphics, language, images, and logos placed upon, behind, attached to, seen through, or occupying space within a window. This sign form includes all forms of material on which a message may be printed. For the purposes of this regulation, glass doors constitute windows and are subject to all window sign regulations herein. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18; Ord. No. 2146 , § 4, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 15-2. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to comply with any provision of this chapter or any of the requirements thereof or who shall construct, alter, maintain or use any sign in any manner different from that described in the application for a permit therefor, or who begins such construction, installation, alteration or use without having first secured a permit required hereunder, or who continues to use or maintain any sign not authorized or prohibited in this chapter, or for which the permit has been revoked or expired, or who assists in any such violation or omission, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of this Code. 
(b)  Any owner or owners of any such sign or anyone interested therein, or of any building or premises, or any part thereof, on which such sign is located, who participates in or knowingly or willfully permits any violation of this chapter, or any builder, contractor, tenant or agent of any person or corporation employed in connection therewith who assists in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and on conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-3. - Maintenance of signs. 
All signs shall be well maintained. The city's administrative officer shall revoke the permit for any sign which is not well maintained and shall direct its removal. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-4. - Continuation of existing nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Structural nonconforming signs such as monument, pole, awnings, roof, or other similar signs legally in place at the date of adoption of this chapter shall remain approved for as long as the sign is considered safe and in good working order. 
(b)  Non-structural nonconforming signs, such as window signage, banners, and character representations, legally in place at the adoption of this chapter shall remain approved for a period of six (6) months. After the expiration of six (6) months from the adoption of this chapter, nonconforming non-structural signs shall be promptly altered, removed or otherwise made to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any property owner or business owner who wishes to continue an existing non-structural nonconforming sign must apply to the architectural review board to have their request considered. 
(d)  No nonconforming sign, whether structural or non-structural, may be reconstructed, altered, changed or undergo significant improvements without complying in all respects with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-5. - Injunctive relief available to the city. 
The city shall be entitled to injunctive relief against any violation of this chapter or any use of any premises in violation hereof. Any person and the agents, employees and tenants of any person who violates this chapter are liable to being enjoined for any violation thereof, and are liable for the cost of removing any sign erected, altered, maintained or used in violation of this chapter and for any damages that may result to the city or to the general public by reason of such violation, and for the reasonable attorney's fees of the city for obtaining such relief. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-6. - Impounding of unauthorized signs on public property. 
Any unauthorized sign that is found on public property may be removed by the city's administrative officer and stored until claimed by the rightful owner or person who has the immediate right to possession of such sign, or until disposed of as hereinafter provided. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day shall be charged for such storage. Any such sign so impounded and stored shall be retained and held until all charges for removal, impoundment and storage shall have been paid to the duly authorized officer in charge of the city pound or storage area and the city shall have a lien against such signs until all charges have been paid. All signs stored by the city which remain unclaimed by the owner or person who has the immediate right to possession thereof for at least sixty (60) days shall be reported by the city's administrative officer to the city council. Upon such report being received by the city council, it may, if the property is unclaimed, or if the cost of storage and care and all other expenses in connection therewith are not paid within the following sixty (60) days, order the same sold or cause the same to be sold by the chief of police, at public auction, after publication twice in the official newspaper of the city, of the date, hour and place of the sale and the property to be sold. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-7. - Appeals. 
Any interested person dissatisfied with any ruling or action of the city's administrative officer or the architectural review board in connection with this chapter may appeal to the city council, which shall have authority to decide the controversy within the framework of this chapter. All appeals must be in writing and clearly set out the portions of the regulations that are applicable to the appeal and the justification for the appeal. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Secs. 15-8—15-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIGN REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-31. - General provisions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, no sign shall be erected, structurally changed, refaced, or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city without a permit having been first obtained. 
(b)  All signs shall pertain to the identification of the primary uses and/or primary services provided or primary products sold on the premises. 
(c)  All signs, where applicable, shall meet the standards of the adopted city building code(s). 
(d)  All business locations shall be identifiable by a street number and address sign which is clearly visible from the street. 
(e)  All signs are prohibited from blinking, flashing, or pulsing lighting or messages to adversely attract attention or otherwise detract from the consistent sign forms in the city. 
(f)  All signs are prohibited from being erected upon trees, bridges, fences (unless specified herein), towers, utility poles, junk or abandoned automobiles and/or vehicles, and dilapidated buildings shall not be used as sign supports. 
Excepting only the signs described in paragraphs (1), (3), (4), (5), and (6) of section 15-64, no sign of any kind or character shall be erected, maintained or permitted on any property situated in SF-A, SF-B, or 2F-C zoning districts. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18; Ord. No. 2146 , § 4, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 15-32. - Limitation of signs for business or office premises. 
(a)  Vacant lot. No more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted facing a street that borders a lot. 
(b)  Freestanding business or office building. 
(1)  Only one (1) external identification sign shall be permitted for a building that faces a street bordering that business or office building. 
(2)  Buildings that face more than one (1) street may have an identification sign facing each street. 
(3)  Each business or tenant may have one additional hanging blade sign, limited to three (3) square feet to help pedestrians identify businesses (see "hanging blade sign" definition). 
(c)  Shopping center or multi-tenant building. 
(1)  A business or office in a shopping center or multi-tenant building may have one (1) identification sign, per tenant, attached to the building and one (1) detached sign (monument or multi-tenant sign) for the shopping center. 
a.  The monument sign shall only display the name and address of the facility. 
b.  Multi-tenant signs for the shopping center shall only be allowed when the businesses do not front or are not visible from city streets or rights-of-ways. 
(2)  A business or office in a shopping center that faces more than one (1) street rights-of-way may have an attached identification sign facing each rights-of-way and one (1) detached sign (monument or multi-tenant sign) for the shopping center. 
a.  The monument sign shall only display the name and address of the facility. 
b.  Multi-tenant signs for the shopping center shall only be allowed when the businesses do not front or are not visible from city streets or rights-of-ways. 
(3)  Each business or tenant may have one (1) additional hanging blade sign, limited to three (3) square feet to help pedestrians identify businesses (see "hanging blade sign" definition). 
(d)  Multi-family complex. 
(1)  A multi-family complex may have one (1) monument sign. 
(e)  Sign types and limitations. All signs must be located on the property for which the business or service corresponds, unless specifically authorized in this chapter, and may not encroach into public rights-of-way. Various types of signs shall be limited in size as follows: 
(1)  Multi-tenant signs: 
a.  Signs (up to four (4) tenants): 
1.  Six (6) feet maximum height; and 
2.  Twenty-four (24) square feet maximum sign area. 
b.  Signs (five (5) or more tenants): 
1.  Twelve (12) feet maximum height; and 
2.  Eighty-four (84) square feet maximum sign area. 
c.  All monument or multi-tenant signs shall maintain a ten-foot setback from a street and a setback of fifteen (15) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines. 
d.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. If the sign is located at an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building fronts. 
e.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. 
f.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
g.  Additional. If a sign is located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement at a utility company's request or upon request of the city. 
(2)  Wall signs: 
a.  Maximum size. Shall be no more than twenty-four (24) square feet; alternative sign sizes may be considered by the architectural review board based on the wall in which the sign is being attached, due to the wide variation of potential wall configurations, such as the height, size, and location. 
b.  Maximum height. A wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall it is constructed upon. 
(3)  Canopy/awning signs: 
a.  Maximum size. Shall be no more than twenty-four (24) square feet; alternative sign sizes may be considered by the architectural review board based on the canopy/awning in which the sign is being attached, due to the wide variation of potential wall configurations, such as the height, size, and location. 
b.  Maximum height. A canopy/awning sign shall not project above the top of the canopy or awning it is constructed upon. 
(4)  Window signs/graphics: 
a.  Purpose. To maintain the functional use of windows in buildings as they are intended to be utilized and minimize the volume of signage within windows on structures. 
b.  Window signs are permitted. The total area of the sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the window surface area or three and one-half (3.5) square feet sign area, whichever is less. 
(5)  Hanging blade signs: Three (3) square feet maximum sign area. 
(6)  Neon signs: 
a.  Neon signs are allowed but must be erected within the allotted signs attributed to a building. 
b.  Maximum area. Established by maximum attached sign square footage to building. 
c.  Display. Neon signs are prohibited from pulsing, flashing, or any other function that would create a moving sign. The display of neon signs is to provide a form of fixed illumination. 
d.  An "open" neon sign within a window of a business or attached to the exterior of the business shall not be counted as sign square footage for a building allotment. An "open" sign shall be limited to four (4) square feet. 
(7)  Projecting sign: 
a.  No sign attached to a building shall project from the building more than eight (8) feet from the building facade. Canopy and awning signs shall not count as the "building facade". Such projections must be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the walkway adjacent to the building for head clearance. 
(8)  Wind load pressure requirements. 
a.  No sign shall be erected that does not meet the wind load pressure requirements as set out in the table which follows this paragraph or as determined by the current adopted building code. Permit applications for new signs and permit renewals required for signs which will have or have a height, in feet above ground, as measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the proposed structure, of six (6) feet, or more, must be accompanied by a certificate signed by design professional or licensed engineer to the effect that the proposed or existing sign will withstand wind load pressures in pounds per square foot as set out in the following table. 
b.    
Pressure 	Pounds Per Square Foot 
0—5 	0 
6—30 	20 
31—50 	25 
 
(f)  Exceptions. The general intent of this chapter is to limit the proliferation of signs in the city. Under special or unique circumstances, the authorized components of an identification sign may be displayed on separate signs provided such separate signs have been approved as to location, design, scale, size, material, color, lighting and aesthetic appeal as provided in section 15-60(c) of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18; Ord. No. 2146 , § 4, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 15-33. - Signs on or over public property. 
(a)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, erect or paste any sign, advertisement or other announcement on or over public property, including, but not limited to, any lamppost, electric light, utility pole, tree, fire hydrant, bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, public building or park. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director is authorized to issue permits for banner-type temporary signs across Broadway Street for the promotion of upcoming community events to be held in the City of Alamo Heights which are sponsored by non-commercial, non-profit or not-for-profit organizations, as evidenced by a valid 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) certificate, or for the promotion of community events outside of the City of Alamo Heights that are sponsored by non-commercial, non-profit or not-for-profit organizations whose principal office is located in Alamo Heights, as evidenced by a valid 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) certificate, with such banner locations being limited to one (1) sign across Broadway south of Austin Highway and one (1) sign across Broadway north of Austin Highway. The City of Alamo Heights may, at its sole discretion, use banner type temporary signs across Broadway for public announcements. In no case shall more than the aggregate total of two (2) banner-type temporary signs be permitted to be displayed across Broadway Street at the same time. All organizations are required to pay the current banner permit fee for such installations. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected on or over public property so as to interfere with any fire hydrant, traffic light, fire alarm box or street light, nor shall any sign be erected in any location where, by reason of traffic conditions, fire or explosion hazards, it would imperil public safety or interfere with the functions of the fire department. No sign projecting over a sidewalk or path used by the public shall be erected with its lowest part nearer to sidewalk grade than nine (9) feet. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected on or over public property higher than the highest facade elevation of the building to which the sign relates. 
(d)  Any permit for the erection or alteration of any sign on or over any sidewalk, alley or other public property, or over any roof or building, if considered hazardous, may be revoked by the city council and shall be issued with the understanding that it may be revoked or withdrawn at any time for good cause, in which case such sign shall immediately be removed by the owner thereof. Every application for the erection or alteration of any sign shall include an agreement recognizing such right and privilege in the city. 
(e)  For properties located on Broadway (South of Albany) which utilize a zero (0) foot setback, signs may encroach no more than eight (8) feet into/over public rights-of-way and maintain eight (8) feet ground clearance over pedestrian walkways and fifteen (15) feet ground clearance over vehicular travel paths. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-34. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs shall be securely fastened or anchored to a building wall, structural framing or other foundation or support with a sufficient number of bolts or anchors to resist the stress due to the dead weight of the sign and wind loads. Horizontal wind loads shall be taken at thirty (30) pounds per square foot unless otherwise provided. 
(b)  The use of staples, wires and wood plugs in constructing signs is prohibited. 
(c)  All signs, regardless of location, type or installation, even when entirely within private property, must be installed so as to provide a high safety factor, and all reasonable precautions must be taken in their installation. 
(d)  Only good, sound, straight materials in good condition, free from all major flaws and defects and painted with weatherproof paint, can be used. 
(e)  Flat signs. 
(1)  Frame materials shall be of wood, metal or an equivalent material approved by the city's architectural review board. The panel shall be of metal or other nonflammable material. 
(2)  Sign hooks, expansion bolts or thru bolts with washers on the inside of the wall shall be used for installation, depending upon the weight and area of the sign and the condition of the wall to which it is attached. 
(3)  Such signs shall project not more than twelve (12) inches from the face of the building, except electric flat signs, which may extend not more than eighteen (18) inches. 
(4)  Flat signs may be erected on commercial buildings nonconforming to zoning setback requirements, provided a nine-foot clearance is maintained under same. 
(g)  Electrical signs. 
(1)  Flashing lights of any configuration, either interior or exterior to the sign proper, are prohibited. 
(2)  All provisions of the electrical code of the city shall apply to the erection, alteration, installation and maintenance of electric signs. 
(3)  All electrical connectors shall be concealed from view. 
(h)  Projecting signs. 
(1)  Projecting signs which are fastened to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure so as to project therefrom at any angle across a sidewalk or public thoroughfare, shall not project more than ten (10) feet from the face of the building or structure and shall not in any case extend beyond a line which is two (2) feet back of the outer face of the curb or curbline. 
(2)  A clear space of not less than nine (9) feet shall be provided below all parts of such projecting signs or hanging blade signs. 
(3)  Projecting signs may be installed on a pipe overhanging the sidewalk, provided the following rules are complied with: 
a.  Signs must comply with regulations as to clearance over sidewalk and distance from curbline. 
b.  Pipe, if used, must be equal to or better than steel pipe and conform to the requirements of this subsection. Pipe must be of sufficient diameter and strength to property support the weight of the signs which are to be installed on them. 
c.  Materials other than pipe may be used to provide a desired architectural effect. In such cases, a certificate signed by a registered professional engineer attesting to the structural strength of the material selected to support the dead weight of the sign and a thirty-pound per square foot wind load must accompany the application. 
d.  Cross arms of angle iron for side guys are to be bolted to pipes or poles in a secure manner or needled through pipe and welded and side guys are to be of galvanized cable. 
e.  Pipes or poles must extend far enough above top of sign to provide space for suitable headlift which must be of galvanized cable. 
f.  Display faces are to be metal or other nonflammable material. 
(4)  No projecting sign shall be attached to any door, canopy, awning, or window casing. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-35. - Signs not to block fire escapes, exits. 
No sign shall be so placed as to obstruct or interfere with a window, doorway or other means of egress nor be supported on or hung from any fire escape. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-36. - Height regulations. 
The top of any sign shall not be higher than twelve (12) feet above the ground it sets on, or higher than the highest elevation of the building to which it may be attached to. Exceptions may be granted if natural or manmade features would obstruct the view of the sign or the sign cannot be seen by those intended to see it. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-37. - Menu boards. 
While not encouraged, menu boards may in exceptional situations be incorporated in permanent signs. They will be no wider than the sign of which they are a part. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-38. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  No business or office shall display more than two (2) temporary signs at a time, and the maximum cumulative time that temporary signs may be displayed at one (1) location is one hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year. 
(b)  The text of any one (1) sign may not be displayed more than thirty (30) days per calendar year. The city's administrative officer shall disapprove a temporary sign application when the text of such temporary sign is the same or substantially the same as another temporary sign permitted for the same location during any calendar year. 
(c)  The size of any temporary sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and eight (8) feet in width or a width of twenty-five (25) percent of the front face of the business to which the temporary sign is affixed, whichever is less. 
(d)  Temporary signs shall be well maintained throughout the time they are displayed. 
(e)  A temporary permanent sign may not be displayed for more than ninety (90) days. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-39. - Unlawful or prohibited signs. 
The following signs shall be prohibited: 
(a)  Abandoned signs; 
(b)  Electrical signs; 
(c)  Advertising benches; 
(d)  Character representations, murals, window drawings, and similar media types, either animated or inanimate, for the purpose of advertising, promoting an establishment or product, and any such representation which draws attention to the business or facility; 
(e)  Flashing light signs; 
(f)  Inflated or inflatable signs; 
(g)  Moving signs; 
(h)  Obscene signs; 
(i)  Off-premise signs; 
(j)  Pennants; 
(k)  Pole signs (not including "instructional or directional signs"); 
(l)  Portable signs; 
(m)  Search lights or beacons; 
(n)  Signs that emit sound or smoke; 
(o)  Signs that may resemble or be confused with any traffic-control device; 
(p)  Signs that identify uses, services or products not sold on the premises; 
(q)  Signs upon the face of any marquee except a theater building marquee (regardless of whether the building is being used as a theater); 
(r)  Signs attached to exterior display items shall be deemed temporary signs, and regulated as such; 
(s)  Roof signs that project higher than the highest part of the roof; 
(t)  Interior signs, while signs on the interior of a building or office are allowed, the intent of such an authority is for signs intended for those interior to the building, while the viewing of same on the exterior of the building is incidental. The posting of signs on the interior of the building for the sole purpose of exterior viewing, thereby attempting to circumvent the city's sign ordinance, is prohibited, except where such signage is permitted as a temporary sign, following the regulations of such. 
(u)  After May 12, 2008, no changeable electronic variable message signs (commonly referred to as CEVMS signs) shall be installed in the city. Changeable electronic variable message sign for the purpose of this chapter shall mean a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including a LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A changeable electronic variable message sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-40. - Content of signs. 
Sign content shall be limited to appropriate information necessary to identify the business (see definitions) and to carry out the normally accepted activities for a business of its type. Signs containing information not relevant to the business shall not be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-41. - Prohibited displays. 
Exterior display of wares and goods is prohibited, except when such display is in conjunction with an activity for which a specific permit has been issued. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Secs. 15-42—15-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 15-60. - Required; application; issuance. 
(a)  No sign shall be installed, erected, altered or used without first filing an application therefor and obtaining a permit from the city's administrative officer, except as provided in section 15-64. An application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the city's administrative officer and shall contain or be accompanied by such plans, drawings and specifications as are necessary to fully advise the city's administrative officer of the type, size, shape, location, construction and materials of the proposed sign and the building, structure or premises on which it is to be placed. The application shall detail all the copy or material to be placed on the sign, all of which copy and material shall be pertinent to the use of the property on which the sign is to be erected. 
(b)  The city's administrative officer shall approve or disapprove sign applications for temporary signs. 
(c)  The city's administrative officer shall refer all sign applications for permanent signs not excepted by section 15-64 to the architectural review board for review of location, design, scale, size, material, color, lighting and aesthetic appeal. The architectural review board shall recommend that the application be approved, disapproved or revised. If the application is approved, the city's administrative officer shall issue a permit for the sign. If the architectural review board recommends that the application be disapproved or revised, the applicant may appeal such recommendation to the city council for final action. If the city council approves the application after review of the architectural review board recommendation, the city's administrative officer shall issue a permit for the sign, otherwise it shall be denied. The architectural review board shall have the authority to approve any sign that may deviate from any regulation found within this code. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-61. - Permitting and application procedures. 
(a)  Each application for a sign permit shall include an agreement on the part of those proposing to erect the sign and the owner and tenant of the premises on which it is to be erected that they will protect, indemnify and hold harmless to city against all liability in connection with the erection, use and maintenance and removal of the sign, and that they will comply at all times with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction any sign, as defined herein, without complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  Completion of a sign permit application; 
(2)  Review and approval of a sign permit. 
(c)  The procedures to be followed in fulfilling the intent of these sign regulations are as follows: 
(1)  A sign permit application must be obtained from the city; 
(2)  The sign permit application must be properly completed and returned to the city staff, along with payment of the sign application fee established by council; 
(3)  The administrative officer or his designated representative shall review the sign permit application and, if the application is properly completed and meets the general requirements of this Code, shall place the application on the architectural review board's agenda or approve the sign request if architectural review board approval is not required; 
(4)  The architectural review board will approve, reject or approve upon condition, the sign permit application; 
(d)  Sign permit application—Information required. An application will not be considered complete until all items listed below are submitted. No application will be submitted to the board until it is considered complete by the city staff. An application for a sign permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, telephone number of the applicant and date of application; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number of the business and name and telephone number of the owner/manager; 
3.  Numerical location of building structure upon its lot; block and plat designation; and street address upon which the sign is to be located; 
4.  Position of the sign on the building or on the ground in both site plan view drawn to scale, and elevation views drawn to scale; 
5.  A set of scaled drawings of the plans and specifications, including size and color of the proposed sign and its various parts, the style of lettering, the message, lighting, type of material of which it is fabricated and the method of attachment to the building or to the ground and indicating associated landscaping; 
6.  A color sketch or color photograph of the sign and building, as well as any contiguous street or building in order to display how they would appear in relation to one another; 
7.  Name of person or persons constructing or erecting the sign; 
8.  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, and land to which or on which the sign is to be erected; 
9.  Location, dimensions, and description of any existing sign(s) on the property; 
10.  Signed and sealed plans by a registered engineer including stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressures in any direction, for multi-tenant signs, projecting signs, or any other sign that may pose a safety risk to individuals, in the amount required by this and all other laws of the state or federal government and ordinances of the city; 
(e)  Representations by applicant. All representations, whether oral or written, made by the applicant or his agent on behalf of the application for a sign permit under this chapter become conditions upon which the permit is issued. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to vary from such representations unless the permittee first makes application, as required by the provisions of this chapter, to amend the permit and such amendment is approved. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-62. - Fees. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Only one (1) permit and permit fee is required for an identification sign even though all parts of the sign are not directly connected to one another. 
(c)  A two-sided sign shall count as one (1) sign for the purposes of requesting a permit and paying a fee. 
(d)  A separate fee shall be paid by each business listed separately on a directory sign. If the shopping center is identified by a name or logo, the landlord shall pay a separate fee. No fee shall be due from the landlord for that portion of a directory sign that includes only the address. 
(e)  A new fee is not required to re-file or appeal an application that has not been approved. 
(f)  In addition to the application fees set out in paragraph (a), a separate building permit shall be required for erection of permanent signs, except those of a banner style, flat style less than one (1) inch thick, or a sign box insert replacement. The estimated cost of the sign and the cost of installation/erection of the sign(s) shall be used to determine the building permit fee as set out in the schedule of fees shown in section 5-30 [building permit fees] of this Code. 
(g)  Demolition of permanent signs shall require a building demolition permit. The estimated cost of the removal shall be used to determine the building permit fee as set out in the schedule of fees shown in section 5-30 [building permit fees] of this Code. 
(h)  A separate electrical permit shall be required for the installation, connection, or disconnection of electrified signs, with the electrical permit fee being as provided in section 5-163 [schedule of fees] of this Code. Only a properly licensed electrician (Master grade) may secure said permit. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-63. - Serially numbered. 
Each permit issued shall bear a serial number. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-64. - Permits not required for certain signs. 
No permits shall be required for the following signs: 
(1)  Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot of display surface on a residence or apartment building, stating the name and address of an occupant. 
(2)  Maintenance and repairs to existing signs for which a valid sign permit was obtained, if required at the time of the initial installation, provided the sign area or height is not increased. 
(3)  Nonilluminated signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property not exceeding a display surface of thirty-two (32) square feet in business districts B-1, B-2 and B-3 and not exceeding six (6) square feet in all other zoning districts. Such signs shall be located entirely on private property and affixed to a structurally sound building, fence, wall, post, stake, or other structure on the premises advertised, and may advertise property only for the use for which it is zoned. [The surface area limitation noted above is for the total surface area of all signs falling in this category, not per sign.] 
(4)  Signs or markers used by a public utility holding a franchise from the city to designate bus stops. 
(5)  Political signs, erected wholly on private property (not including an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to use the property for a public purpose) with the consent of the owner may be erected, but are limited to a sign area of thirty-six (36) square feet, are six (6) feet or less in height, and shall not be illuminated or have any moving elements. 
(6)  Signs providing directions to churches, public schools, public buildings or service clubs may be placed in any business or residential district provided signs are not in excess of six (6) square feet and permission of the owner of the property on which they are placed is first obtained and provided that no more than four (4) such signs for any one (1) institution may be placed in the city. 
a.  Signs erected by the City of Alamo Heights, to provide directions or identify entrances to city limits, shall have no limits on numbers, size, or area of signs. 
(7)  Sign or decal (or their equivalent) replicas located inside the business of credit/charge cards accepted by the business, logo or name of check approval agencies used or services provided (e.g. PULSE, ATM, etc.). 
(8)  Decals (or their equivalent) indicating business membership in chambers of commerce and professional organizations or associations. 
(9)  Decals (or their equivalent) indicating the security service(s) employed or used by the business. 
(10)  Emergency notification notices. 
(11)  Any notice, sign or license required by any government agency, law or regulation. 
(12)  Signs indicating business hours of operation which do not exceed two (2) square feet in size. 
(13)  Signs necessary to ensure safety. 
(14)  Internal directory signage inside a building and intended to assist pedestrian traffic in a shopping center or office building (this includes the business identification neatly painted or affixed to the window(s) for pedestrians to be able to identify the business they are walking by). 
(15)  Signage inside a business or office intended for the information and use of customers inside the business or office building including, but not limited to, identification and pricing of merchandise on display or for sale, door or area identification signs, advertisements and information on services available. This exemption applies even if the signs can be seen through a window. 
(16)  Signs prohibiting activity (e.g. "no smoking", "no animals," "no entrance," "no soliciting," "no trespassing/private property," etc.). 
(17)  Signs announcing civic, community or charitable activities or functions. 
(18)  Signs outside restaurants or meeting establishments announcing routine or periodic meetings of civic, community or service organizations (e.g. Rotary, Lions, etc.). 
(19)  Help wanted signs. 
(20)  Signs that cannot be seen from the street. 
(21)  Parking signs (e.g. "no parking," "reserved," "space numbers," "directions," etc.) which do not exceed three (3) square feet in size. 
(22)  Instructional signs (e.g. "entrance," "exit," "drop off point," "pick up here," "deposit here," "order here," etc.) which do not exceed three (3) square feet in size. 
(23)  Signs indicating availability of public telephones or restrooms. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Sec. 15-65. - Noncompliance. 
Any permit which does not comply with the provisions of this article, or which is issued in violation of any provision hereof, shall be void and no right or privilege whatever shall accrue thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2105 , Exh. A, 7-23-18)  
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Streets and alleys generally, Art. XII. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; subdivisions, Ch. 17; traffic, Ch. 18; water and sewers, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— General authority of home-rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001 et seq.; general authority regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; consent of governing body required for utility use of streets and ways, Vernon's Tex. Civ. Stat. Art. 1175; local authorities may regulate parades and assemblages on highways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3); municipal management of public rights-of-way used by telecommunications providers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1651, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed § 16-1, which pertained to consent of city council required and derived from Code 1965, § 18-2; Ord. No. 1440, adopted Sept. 23, 1999; Ord. No. 1530, adopted July 14, 2003; Ord. No. 1571, adopted Oct. 25, 2004.  
Sec. 16-2. - Curbs, curb cuts, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, cross walkways, drive approaches, retaining walls, assignment of responsibility, permit required, fee. 
(a)  A building permit shall be obtained prior to the installation, construction, alteration, modification, repair or removal of any curb, curb cut, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross walkway, drive approach or retaining wall on or adjacent to public rights-of-way within the city limits. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, drive approach is that portion of a driveway extending outward from a property line to the edge of a paved street. 
(c)  Sidewalks of any kind, curbs of any kind, drive approaches or retaining walls that have become defective, unsafe or hazardous are declared to be a nuisance. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any abutting property owner or person making special use of a sidewalk of any kind, curb of any kind, drive approach used for access or retaining wall for any specific use, of whatsoever kind or character, to keep such sidewalk of any kind, curb of any kind, drive approach or retaining wall abutting such property in a good and safe condition and free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner or person making use of such property to endeavor to repair, reconstruct or replace said defects within thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice to do so from the city engineer, and said property owner or person shall bear the full expense of such work. 
(e)  The property owner abutting a nuisance as declared in subsection (c) above may petition the city council for permission to remove such nuisance without the necessity to replace it if the city council determines such removal is not detrimental to the public interest. 
(f)  Permit fees and inspection costs for the required abatement of any nuisance that is upon a public right-of-way, and which has been so ordered by the city engineer, shall be waived. Permit fees and inspection costs for the required abatement of any nuisance that is on private property adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit fee schedule in effect at the time the permit is issued. 
(Code 1965, § 6-12; Ord. No. 1530, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 1559, 10-11-04)  
Sec. 16-3. - Same—When standard specifications required. 
The installation of standard concrete curbs, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and cross walkways shall be required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a building permit for a new building is requested and curbing is in place or curblines established. 
(2)  When a building permit for the repair or improvement of an existing building is requested when the cost of such repair or improvement amounts to fifty (50) percent or more of the assessed valuation of the existing building on the city tax rolls and when curbing is in place or curblines established. 
(3)  When a permit for a new, altered or additional driveway approach is requested. 
(Code 1965, § 6-13)  
Sec. 16-4. - Same—Standard specifications. 
All curbs, curb cuts, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, cross walkways and drive approaches shall be constructed of reinforced concrete and installed in accordance with standard specifications promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 6-14)  
Sec. 16-5. - Service stations and parking lots. 
All premises used as motor vehicle service stations or parking lots shall, in addition to the other requirements of this Code, have a six-inch raised curb or other approved traffic barrier along the property line of the entire street frontage except at the driveway approaches and access walks. 
(Code 1965, § 6-15)  
Sec. 16-6. - Newspaper vending machines. 
Any person or entity desiring to install a vending machine or other apparatus to sell or otherwise distribute newspapers, magazines, advertisements or other written material on public rights-of-way in the city shall first obtain approval for such installation from the city engineer of the city. Prior to any such installation, each applicant shall furnish to the city engineer the following: 
(1)  Proof of the existence of liability insurance adequate to protect the city and its officers and employees for injuries and/or damages which might be sustained by persons or property on account of the existence of the applicant's machine or other apparatus on public rights-of-way. 
(2)  An executed indemnity agreement on a form approved by the city engineer indemnifying the city and its officers and employees from liability on account of the existence of the applicant's machine or other apparatus on public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Plans demonstrating that the proposed location, configuration and/or arrangement of the proposed machine or other apparatus will not impair the public safety or welfare. 
(4)  Plans demonstrating that the machine or other apparatus will be in substantial conformity with the design, size and color standards prescribed by the city engineer. 
(5)  Written confirmation that the applicant will remove the machine or other apparatus when requested to do so by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1248, 2-11-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1248, adopted Feb. 11, 1991, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 16-1.a. Said provisions have been included herein as § 16-6 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 16-7. - Shrubbery and other vegetation upon and over streets and sidewalks. 
No person owning or occupying any lot or premises within the city shall allow weeds, grass, plants or shrubbery of any kind, or trees to grow or remain upon or over the sidewalks or streets in front or side of such lot or premises, or so near thereto as to interfere with the free and full use of such sidewalks or streets, or for any person to refuse or fail to remove such weeds and grass or to trim and keep trimmed weeds, grass, plants, shrubbery and trees so that the same shall not project over the sidewalks or street as to interfere with pedestrians or traffic. 
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction therefore, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1556, 8-23-04)  
Sec. 16-8. - Mary "D" Avenue special parking area. 
One (1) or more signs with a reflective green background shall be installed on the north side of Mary "D" Avenue delineating a special parking area from a point three hundred three (303) feet west of the northwest curb intersection of Broadway and Mary "D" Avenue in a westerly direction to the northeast corner of Mary "D" Avenue and Chester Street. The most easterly sign shall contain the words "RESIDENTIAL PARKING BEGINS HERE" and any other signage shall contain the words "RESIDENTIAL PARKING". The curb in the specified area shall be painted green to match the green of the background of the signs. 
(Ord. No. 1942, 9-10-12)  
Secs. 16-9—16-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 16-26. - Changed street name—Application. 
Any person may file with the city engineer a written application to change the name of any street in the city. Such application to be filed on the form prepared by the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 18-12)  
Sec. 16-27. - Same—Filing fee. 
A filing fee equal to that charged for an amendment to the zoning code shall be paid by any person filing an application to change the name of a street. 
(Code 1965, § 18-13)  
Sec. 16-28. - Same—Reference to planning and zoning commission. 
If the application is in proper form, the city engineer shall refer the same to the planning and zoning commission. Such commission shall set a date for a public hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 18-14)  
Sec. 16-29. - Same—Notice of hearing. 
Written notice of a public hearing on the proposed change of name shall be sent to owners of real property abutting such street on which the change is proposed, such notice to be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for the hearing to all owners who have rendered their property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax rolls. Such notice may be served by depositing same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post office. In addition to such notice, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper, or paper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-15)  
Sec. 16-30. - Same—Recommendations to city council. 
After public hearing is had on such proposed change the planning and zoning commission shall make its written recommendation to the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 18-16)  
Sec. 16-31. - Same—Final action by city council. 
After the receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council will have the authority to hear additional evidence or additional arguments in the event it desires to do so. The city council shall either approve or reject the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. If the name of the street is to be changed, the city council will have the authority to impose such conditions and restrictions upon the effective date of the change as it may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1965, § 18-17)  
Secs. 16-32—16-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Required. 
All building structures within the city limits shall be identified with appropriate numbers as assigned by the city engineer. Builders of new structures will request the number assignment at the time the building permit is obtained.  
Sec. 16-52. - Owners of existing structures responsible for maintenance of numbers. 
All owners of existing structures are responsible to maintain numbers assigned to their business or residence.  
Sec. 16-53. - Placement of numbers. 
Numbers will be affixed to the side of the structure facing the street in such a place and manner where they can be readily seen without obstruction.  
Sec. 16-54. - City may install. 
The city engineer may paint or otherwise install the business or residential address numbers on curbs for all structures within the city limits.  
Secs. 16-55—16-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VISION CLEARANCE 
 
Sec. 16-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vision clearance area at intersections means that space or parcel of land at or near all street corners beginning at a point on the curbline at the side of each corner lot thirty-five (35) feet from the point where such curbline intersects the curbline in front of such property extending forward along such side curbline to the nearest corner; thence from such corner along the intersecting curbline thirty-five (35) feet to a point; thence by a straight line to the point of beginning. 
Vision clearance area at driveways means that space or parcel of land at or near all driveways beginning at a point on the curbline five (5) feet from the point where the curbline intersects the driveway; thence returning to the driveway from a forty-five (45) degree angle of the parcel of land five (5) feet from where the curb intersects the street over three (3) feet from street grade. 
(Code 1965, § 18-29; Ord. No. 2146 , § 5, 10-14-19)  
Sec. 16-72. - Notification of violation by city engineer. 
The city engineer shall notify in writing any person who violates this article. Such notice may be sent to the last known owner of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or be delivered to him in person by the city marshal or any policeman of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-31)  
Sec. 16-73. - Failure to comply after notice. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to remove or clear out any fences, structures, shrubs, weeds or other plant life which exist or grow in violation of section 16-77 hereof after receiving ten (10) days written notice as provided by section 16-72 hereof. 
(Code 1965, § 18-32)  
Sec. 16-74. - Certain rights unaffected by article provisions. 
No provision of this article shall be construed to in any way limit or restrict any and all rights that the city may have to remove any fences, structures, shrubs, weeds, or any other plant life which may be constructed, maintained, or permitted to grow in any vision clearance area, as defined in section 16-71, or to maintain any civil suit for injunctive relief that it might have for the removal or the prohibition of the same. 
(Code 1965, § 18-33)  
Sec. 16-75. - Height limitations, structures, plants, trees. 
No person shall construct, maintain or permit to remain in such vision clearance area fences, structures, shrubs, weeds, or any other plant life, other than trees, to exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the level of the street at the curbline; and no person shall plant, maintain or permit to remain in such area any trees that shall have branches, leaves or other growth (except tree trunks) nearer to the ground than six (6) feet. 
(Code 1965, § 18-34)  
Sec. 16-76. - Corners in districts zoned for business excluded. 
This article shall be cumulative of all ordinances on this subject; but shall not apply to corners in districts zoned for business uses. 
(Code 1965, § 18-35)  
Sec. 16-77. - Penalty. 
Any person who may violate this article shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 18-30)  
Secs. 16-78—16-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 16-81, 16-82, which pertained to tree and vegetation pruning over public right-of-way and derived from Ord. No. 1742, § 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2007. 
 
Secs. 16-81—16-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - USE OR DISPOSITION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 16-100. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Director is defined as the director of public works. 
Encroachment means any intrusion from adjacent private property into or over city right-of-way. 
Petition is defined as a written request by a petitioner for rights or privileges under this article. The petition must be in letter form and must state the location of the affected public right-of-way and the purpose and scope of the proposed use or disposition of such public right-of-way. The petition must further include such attachments and detail as the director may require. 
Petitioner is defined as a person requesting a right or privilege governed by this article. More than one (1) person may combine as one (1) petitioner, but in such case each is jointly and severally liable for the obligations of the petitioner. 
Public right-of-way is defined as any area subject to a public utility, drainage or other easement, and all public streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, and other similar passageways, thorough-fares and public ways within the city, whether improved or not, and which are held by fee simple title or by dedication to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 1927, 4-9-12)  
Sec. 16-101. - General provisions. 
(a)  No person shall use public rights-of-way in a way governed by this article without acquiring rights under the relevant section. To acquire rights under this article, a petitioner must submit a petition to the director of public works and follow the procedures prescribed by the director. 
(b)  The director of public works shall require recording of any instruments granting rights under this article in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Bexar County. The petitioner shall pay the cost of recording such instruments. 
(c)  The director of public works is authorized to approve permits for encroachments, as set out herein, or for rights-of-entry under this article without city council action if the permitted use conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Only the city council may approve: 1) licenses to use public rights-of-way, 2) closure, vacation and abandonment of public rights-of-way, 3) granting or releasing of easements on public rights-of-way, or 4) renewal, continuation or termination of any rights previously granted by the city council. 
(e)  Permits issued by the director of public works shall have an indefinite duration but may be terminated by city council action. Licenses granted by the city council shall have stated durations and shall be terminable according to their terms. 
(f)  All construction, excavation and placement of any facilities in public rights-of-way and easements are subject to regulation by the director of public works. 
(g)  When fair market value is required by this article, the city may, at its option, rely on an average of the per-square-foot Bexar Appraisal District market values in the vicinity of the property in question, or the city may require that an independent professional appraisal be obtained. The petitioner and the city shall jointly select the appraiser, if they can agree. If they cannot agree, the city shall select the appraiser. In either case, the petitioner shall pay for the appraisal. 
(h)  Persons receiving rights under this article shall maintain in good repair and condition any encroachment such as a structure, covering, or appurtenance and the accompanying structural members extending over, under or on any public right-of-way. No such encroachment shall be a nuisance or safety hazard of any kind. All such encroachments, when constructed or renovated, shall conform to the latest city building codes, as appropriate. 
(i)  By accepting rights under this article, the petitioner agrees to indemnify the city against all loss, cost, liability, or expense arising from or relating to the city's granting of the rights or petitioner's exercise of them. This section establishes the indemnity whether or not the petitioner's agreement with the city so provides, and can only be overridden by specific action of the city council. Entities that may not lawfully grant indemnities or may not be lawfully required to do so by the city are not required to grant the indemnity provided for in this section. Further, any indemnity provided hereunder specifically covers the city's own negligence. 
(j)  Grants of rights under this article do not relieve the petitioner of any other approvals, permits or licenses that may otherwise be required. 
(k)  Before the director of public works grants a permit or recommends the granting of rights by the city council under this article, the director shall canvass any interested city department, utility agencies or other entities that may have facilities in the public rights-of-way. Based on comments received, the director may impose, or recommend that the city council impose, special terms as a condition of a permit issued by the director or for granting of rights by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-102. - Rights-of-entry. 
(a)  Petitions for rights-of-entry onto public rights-of-way for minimally invasive work such as surveying, measuring, testing or accessing other property shall be submitted to the director of public works. The director shall process such requests and shall establish any appropriate forms and procedures to implement this section. 
(b)  The director shall grant such rights in writing on a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-103. - Permits for encroachments into city right-of-way. 
(a)  Permits for encroachments into city right-of-way shall be submitted to the director of planning and development services, and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable, one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) processing fee. The director shall process permit requests and shall establish forms and procedures to implement this section. Permits for encroachments into city right-of-way shall be issued by the director to the owner of such property that abuts the public right-of-way to be encroached upon. 
(b)  Permits for encroachments into city right-of-way may be issued by the director are: 
(1)  Awnings, canopies, or similar coverings designed to provide shade to pedestrians; 
(2)  Retaining walls parallel to the street (for the purpose of soil retention) 
(3)  Sidewalks or drop off areas (if greater than ten (10) feet in length) 
(4)  Building features required by city code, such as fire escapes or disability access ramps that extend past property lines; 
(5)  Utility vaults; 
(6)  Minor encroachments on an area reserved for drainage, if the director deems the proposed encroachment does not interfere with drainage. Such encroachments include access bridges, roof overhangs and private utility lines used only by the abutting property owner; 
(7)  A private driveway from the edge of a street surface to the right-of-way line is not an encroachment covered by this section; and, 
(8)  Permits for encroachments that would, in the director's opinion, materially affect the city's use of its rights-of-way, shall not be granted by the director. 
(c)  The director may specify the construction, characteristics, quality and placement of allowable encroachments. The director may further require relocation or removal of an encroachment, upon thirty (30) calendar day notice to the permittee, when appropriate for the efficient use by the city of its right-of-way. Permittee shall be responsible for the costs associated with such relocation or removal of the encroachment. 
(d)  In the case of utility vaults, the applicant will provide notice to all property owners on the same block (which means property owners on both sides of the street) on a form provided by the city and will provide proof of notification about the request for this permit before the permit will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1927, 4-9-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1927, adopted April 9, 2012, repealed the former § 16-103 and enacted a new § 16-103 as set out herein. The former § 16-103 pertained to permits for abutting-property-encroachments and derived from Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, adopted Jan. 28, 2008.  
Sec. 16-104. - Licenses to use city rights-of-way or easements. 
(a)  Petitions for licenses to use public rights-of-way for encroachments for private purposes in a manner that 1) encloses such rights-of-way, 2) inordinately occupies such rights-of-way or 3) is of a structural nature, shall be submitted to the director of public works, and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable five hundred dollar ($500.00) processing fee for each petition. The director shall process such petitions and shall establish any appropriate forms and procedures to implement this section. 
(b)  Prior to city council consideration of the request for a license, the director shall first give fourteen (14) days written notice, by U.S. Mail, to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the requested encroachment, and publish such notice in the official newspaper of the city. Public consideration of, and action on, the requested encroachment will be made at the city council meeting designated in the notice. The city council may authorize or deny issuance of a license to the petitioner for the requested encroachment. 
(c)  Encroachments for which a license may be authorized by the city council include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Parking pads or parking courts; 
(2)  Fences or walls that enclose city rights-of-way or easements; 
(3)  Private property entry features such as gates and walls; 
(4)  Structures such as accessory buildings or pools; 
(5)  Paving an alley for private access; or, 
(6)  A private driveway from the edge of a street surface to the right-of-way line is not an encroachment covered by this section. 
(d)  The fee for a five (5) year license to use public rights-of-way or easements is the greater of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or ten (10) percent of the fair market value of the area of such land to be occupied by the encroachment, the value of which shall be determined in accordance with section 16-101(g). 
(e)  The director shall require the petitioner to sign and deliver to the city an agreement setting out the applicable license fee and such conditions as may be imposed by the city council, upon recommendation of the director, that are necessary to protect the city's use of its right-of-way. 
The agreement shall be executed by the mayor on behalf of the city. 
(f)  Licenses granted hereunder may be renewed by the city council at the end of each five-year term for the greater of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or ten (10) percent of the fair market value of the land occupied by the encroachment at the time of renewal, the value of which shall be determined in accordance with section 16-101(g). If the license fee has been modified by the city council since the issuance of a prior license, the new license shall be based on the modified rate then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-105. - Closure, vacation and abandonment of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Petitions for closure, vacation and abandonment of public rights-of-way shall be submitted to the director of public works and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable five hundred dollar ($500.00) processing fee. The director shall process such requests and shall establish forms and procedures to carry out this section. 
(b)  The petitioner shall include the following information with his petition: 
(1)  From the owners of all property which abuts the public right-of-way to be closed, vacated and abandoned, a signed and acknowledged written 1) approval of the petition for closure, vacation and abandonment, and 2) release of any interest they have in the public right-of-way requested to be closed, vacated and abandoned. 
(2)  A signed and acknowledged written consent and release of all future claims and damages from the owners of all property to which access would be materially and substantially impaired if the requested closure, vacation and abandonment is granted. 
(3)  A title report issued by a title insurance company acceptable to the city identifying the abutting property ownerships; 
(4)  A survey, performed by a registered land surveyor duly licensed in the State of Texas, which shows the public right-of-way to be closed, abandoned and vacated, as well as the division of the public right-of-way between the abutting property owners according to the proportion of their abutting ownership. 
(c)  No public right-of-way shall be closed, vacated and abandoned unless the city council determines in an abandoning ordinance that closure, vacation and abandonment is in the public interest, and that all requirements of this section and other applicable ordinances and laws are satisfied. Whenever a public right-of-way is closed, vacated and abandoned, the abandoning ordinance shall provide that the public right-of-way to be abandoned shall be sold or revert to the abutting property owners in proportion to their abutting ownership, unless such owners otherwise have released their interest in the abandoned public right-of-way as provided in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Prior to an abandonment ordinance being considered by the city council, the following shall occur: 
(1)  The director of public works shall cause the planning and zoning commission to consider the requested abandonment in accordance with the commission's usual process for hearing cases, and to issue a recommendation to the city council; and, 
(2)  A public hearing shall be held by the city council after twenty-one (21) calendar days written notice, by U.S. Mail, is given to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the requested abandonment, and such notice is published in the official newspaper of the city. 
(3)  The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission regarding the requested abandonment. 
(e)  The abandoning ordinance shall further provide that in consideration of the foregoing requirements and upon receipt from the petitioner of the fair market value of the public right-of-way to be abandoned as determined in accordance with section 16-101(g), unless a donation is allowed under Local Government Code § 272.001, such public right-of-way shall revert to the abutting property owners in proportion to their abutting ownership, unless released as provided in subsection (b) above, as shown by a title report of current date which has been paid for by the petitioner and issued by a title company acceptable to the city. The ordinance shall provide for an equitable manner of determining the division between the abutting property owners. Such ordinance shall further provide that the Mayor shall be authorized to execute a deed without warranty conveying such abandoned public right-of-way to the abutting property owners in proportion to their abutting ownership as shown in the title report and with the division between the owners in the equitable manner as specified in such ordinance. The deed without warranty shall contain all reservations and exceptions shown in the title report, and the following shall be reservations from and exceptions to the conveyance in such deeds: All restrictions, covenants, conditions, easements, rights-of-way and prescriptive rights, whether recorded or not, all recorded reservations, if any, existing utilities, zoning and other laws affecting the city property to be abandoned, and any other conditions that may be imposed by the city council. If the city council determines that it is necessary to the public interest, utility easements may be reserved over, across and under the property to be abandoned, and such reservation of easements shall be shown on the deed without warranty. If such reservation is made, an appropriate reduction will be made to the fair market value of the land to be conveyed. 
(f)  The abandoning ordinance shall further provide that in accordance with § 253.001 of the Local Government Code, the proceeds of any sale or donation of abandoned parts of public rights-of-way shall be used only for the acquisition and improvement of property for the same uses as that sold. 
(g)  The abandoning ordinance shall be recorded by the petitioner in accordance with section 16-101(b). 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-106. - Releasing or granting easements. 
(a)  A petition for releasing existing city easements, or granting new easements on public rights-of-way, shall be submitted to the director of public works, along with a non-refundable five hundred dollar ($500.00) processing fee. The director shall require the petitioner to demonstrate that the city has an interest in the public right-of-way upon which an easement is being requested for release or granting thereof. The director shall establish forms and procedures to implement this section. 
(b)  The director shall consider the request for releasing or granting an easement, and shall forward such request for action by the city council, along with the director's recommendation of approval or denial. 
(c)  If the petitioner's request is approved by the city council, the fee for releasing or granting an easement shall be the fair market value of the property burdened by the easement, appraised as if the easement did not exist, and shall be determined in accordance with subsection 16-101(g). 
(d)  The requested granting of an easement or release of an easement shall be executed by the mayor on an appropriate form provided by the city attorney, and shall set out any conditions on the release or granting of the easement that may be imposed by the city council. 
(e)  Easements shall not be granted when they are inconsistent with the city's use or planned use of the affected public right-of-way, and can only be released, granted or have the terms thereof amended by approval of the city council. 
(f)  All easements granted hereunder are revocable by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-107. - Exceptions. 
The procedures stated herein above do not apply to the sale, conveyance or exchange of land owned or held by the city, which is not made under the exemptions in § 272.001, and for which the bidding requirements of § 272.001 of the Local Government Code apply. 
(Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 16-108. - Exclusive parking for an adjoining business. 
Upon petition received from a business or commercial use, the city council may, after a public hearing, authorize the business or commercial use to mark adjoining paved public right-of-way for parking by customers of the business or commercial use only. Such authorization shall have an indefinite duration, but may be terminated by the city council at any time for any reason. Upon termination, the business or commercial use shall eliminate any markings referencing the parking privilege. There shall be no fee for the authorization. Prior to consideration of a petition, all city departments shall be consulted concerning any negative impact upon the public resulting from approval of the requested exclusive parking. The city council may impose any restrictions and conditions upon its authorization as may be appropriate for the protection of the public and any other businesses or commercial uses. The exclusive parking authorization under this section shall be limited to business, office or multi-family zoning districts (provided that only single-family and multi-family uses in a multi-family zoning district with a business or commercial use on site shall be eligible for the parking authorization in this section). The city shall have no duty or obligation to enforce the exclusive parking rights authorized herein. The business or commercial use receiving the parking privilege authorized herein indemnifies the city and its officers and employees against all loss, cost, liability or expense arising from or relating to an authorization granted herein, including the city's own negligence. No other provisions of this article apply to the authorizations granted hereunder except for [section] 16-100. 
( Ord. No. 2099 , 3-26-18)  
Secs. 16-109—16-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL EVENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1860, adopted April 12, 2010, repealed the former Art. VII, § 16-150, which pertained to parades, races, runs, walks and other organized activities in the city and derived from Ord. No. 1499, adopted May 20, 2002; Ord. No. 1669, adopted July 31, 2006; Ord. No. 1715, adopted June 4, 2007; and Ord. No. 1750-A, § 5, adopted Jan. 28, 2008.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 1932, adopted July 9, 2012, amended the Code by adding new provisions designated as § 16-150. At the editor's discretion, Art. VII has been entitled "Special Events." 
 
Sec. 16-150. - Special events sponsored by non-Alamo Heights-based organizations using city right-of-way. 
(a)  Businesses or organizations whose primary address is not located within Alamo Heights are not eligible to hold special events (i.e., parades, races, runs, walks and other organized activities) utilizing city right-of-way in Alamo Heights, unless the event was previously authorized by a valid special event permit issued prior to the adoption of this section. 
(b)  Applications for events sponsored by non-Alamo Heights-based organizations which were authorized before adoption of this section will be reviewed by staff based on the following criteria to determine whether such event qualifies for another year: 
• Whether the applicant is a non-profit or for-profit entity; 
• The impact on the neighborhood regarding traffic, trash, parking, number of participants, noise and other relevant factors; and 
• Whether the sponsoring organization is in good standing with federal and state entity requirements. 
(c)  The applicant shall follow all local, state and federal laws. 
(d)  The fee for the Alamo Heights Chamber of Commerce Holiday Parade shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and such event shall be exempt from the limitations in [subsections] (a) and (b) above. 
(e)  A report will be furnished by staff to city council about the status of non-Alamo Heights-based events. 
(f)  If an eligible non-Alamo Heights-based event is refused a permit for a subsequent year, the sponsoring entity may appeal the administrative decision to city council. 
(Ord. No. 1932, 7-9-12)  
ARTICLE VIII. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 16-151. - Administration. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the public works director ("director"), or the directors' authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-152. - Penalties. 
Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall construct, alter, repair, excavate or demolish in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with section 1-5 of this Code. Each day any violation or noncompliance shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-153. - Injunctive relief and other remedies for violation. 
Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall commit any of the acts described by this article, or be guilty of any of the omissions thereof, shall be liable to injunctive action prohibiting the violation of this article and shall be subject to being mandatorily enjoined to restore any right-of-way illegally excavated to its original form and function, and shall be liable and responsible for any and all expenses that may be incurred by the city in connection with any such action, omission or other violation, including reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-154. - Authorized hours of right-of-way construction. 
Unless approved in writing by the director, any work activity governed by this article is restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. for work preparation activities, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. for actual work activities and 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. for work cleanup activities and vacation of the site, Monday through Friday, except for city holidays (see section 2-1). 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-155. - Notice of violation. 
The director may give notice to any person who violates this article, and such person who receives such notice shall correct all violations alleged in the notice. Failure to correct any such alleged violations shall cause the person to be subject to penalties provided in 16-152 and 16-153. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-156. - Revocation, suspension or denial of permit. 
Notwithstanding other sanctions set forth in this article, if any of the provisions of this article are not complied with, a permit may be revoked or suspended by the director. If a person has not followed the terms, conditions or specifications of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional requirements may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-157. - Non-transferability of permits. 
No permit issued under this article shall not be transferable from the person or entity receiving the permit to another person or entity without the written approval of the director as permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-158. - Effect on city's liability. 
No permit or certificate of inspection shall be conclusive as against the city that the work therein referred to has been installed in conformity with the requirements; but the owner of the premises, the contractor and all other persons concerned shall be obligated to see that all matters, things and acts to which this article and such permit or certificate relate shall conform to the regulations of the city. All work installed in this city for any purpose whatever shall be kept in full compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-159. - Preserving other ordinances not in conflict. 
The provisions of this article shall take precedence over those of any other existing ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights which may contain provisions that are less restrictive than those specified in this article. However, nothing contained in this article shall mitigate, interfere with, alter or repeal any provisions of any other ordinance of the City of Alamo Heights not in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-160. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any other provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-161. - Right-of-way construction. 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction of facilities above, upon, or beneath right-of-way in the city except as provided by this article and pursuant to the directives of the director issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-162. - Adoption of City of San Antonio Utility Excavation Criteria Manual (UECM). 
The City of Alamo Heights hereby adopts by reference the most current Utility Excavation Criteria Manual (UECM), as amended, which is utilized by the City of San Antonio as general requirements and procedures for excavation in public right-of-way and shall be referred to herein as "city construction standards". 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-163. - Right-of-way permits. 
(a)  No person or entity shall perform any construction of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a right-of-way permit, except as otherwise provided by this article. The permit shall be in the name of the person who owns or will subsequently own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application shall be completed and signed by the person as permittee. 
(b)  Construction considered an emergency relating to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit from the city. However, a contractor shall notify the director's office as promptly as possible after beginning the emergency construction, but in any event no later than the next city-business day, of any emergency construction, and shall also provide within two (2) business days a reasonably detailed description of the construction performed in the right-of-way, and shall further provide within ninety (90) days from the date any facilities are reconstructed or relocated an updated map of any facilities that were affected by such emergency construction. 
(c)  A permittee shall provide the director the following information prior to the permit being issued, and such information shall be incorporated by reference into the permit: 
(1)  To whom the permit is issued; 
(2)  A description of the location of construction and facilities; 
(3)  A description of the route of all facilities to be constructed on or about the designated right-of-way; 
(4)  Location of all right-of-way easements which the permittee plans to use; 
(5)  Location of existing city and third-party facilities as required by section 16-172 (location and placement); 
(6)  Description of plans, which may be submitted as a form statement, to restore existing facilities pursuant to this article, and other right-of-way construction, and such plans shall comply with the standard construction guidelines of the city, including the city construction standards; 
(7)  Drawings of any bores, trenches, hand holes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, poles, and the such-like, including any applicable depths and heights; 
(8)  Typicals of manholes and hand holes that the permittee plans to use or access; 
(9)  The construction methods and materials to be employed by the permittee for the protection of existing facilities within, above, beneath, or adjacent to the right-of-way, all of which methods and materials are subject to approval by the director; 
(10)  Estimated dates and times that construction is scheduled to be performed; 
(11)  The base material to be used pursuant to section 16-170 (base material) of this article; 
(12)  Restoration of property pursuant to section 16-181 (restoration of property) of this article; 
(13)  Three (3) sets of construction plans which shall be on a scale not to exceed one inch equaling one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise approved by the director, and the plans shall include the dimensions from the proposed facility to permanent reference points; 
(14)  Detailed description of what the permittee proposes to construct, including but not limited to, if applicable, pipe sizes, the number of interducts, and valves; 
(15)  A complete legend of drawings submitted by the permittee, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents, but if symbols are used, the permittee shall provide the city with an accurate guide to the meaning of any symbols used; 
(16)  A written statement that proof of insurance, bond, or other financial information required under this article is current and on file with the city; and, 
(17)  A traffic control plan acceptable to the director. 
(d)  All construction in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the right-of-way permit for the facilities. The director shall be provided access to the right-of-way construction and to such further information as the director may reasonably require in order to ensure compliance with the permit or this article. 
(e)  A copy of the right-of-way permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction is occurring. 
(f)  All construction authorized by permit shall be completed in the time specified in the right-of-way permit. If the construction cannot be completed in the specified time period, a contractor may request an extension of time from the director. A contractor may continue work that has been approved by the permit during the time the request for an extension is pending, so long as the request is made prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(g)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city shall be provided by the contractor to the director upon request. 
(h)  A request for a right-of-way permit shall be submitted at least fifteen (15) city-business days before the commencement of the proposed construction unless: 
(1)  The construction is for primary service and state law or federal law requires construction time be less than fifteen (15) city-business days; or 
(2)  The director agrees to a request by the contractor for a modified submission date. 
(i)  Requests for right-of-way permits shall be promptly processed and approved or disapproved by the director but in any event no later than ten (10) city-business days after receiving all the permit information required under this article, except that, if subsection (h)(1) of this subsection shall apply, a right-of-way permit shall be processed as soon as reasonably practical. 
(j)  The director may require a pre-construction meeting with the permittee and/or the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-164. - Sidewalk and lane closure permit. 
(a)  When work on a sidewalk or lane of a thoroughfare, including an alleyway used by traffic, requires closure, the contractor shall obtain a closure permit from the director. 
(b)  The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with TXDOT rules concerning markings, flagmen, barricades and barriers, steel plate covers, whether the closure occurs on a state route or a city thoroughfare. 
(c)  The application for a closure permit shall include point of contact, date and time information regarding the closure. 
(d)  Application fees for closure permits shall be: 
(1)  Sidewalks: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of closure. 
(2)  Residential thoroughfares: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day of closure. 
(3)  Primary streets (Broadway, Austin Highway and North New Braunfels): Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day of closure. 
(e)  In addition to the permit fees, the following fees shall be charged: 
(1)  $0.0525 per square foot per day to close or block any sidewalk in the city, with a minimum charge of five dollars ($5.00) per day (2) $0.1050 per square foot per day to close a lane or portion of any street or alley in the city, with a minimum charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for a residential street or alley or for a commercial alley, and with a minimum charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for Broadway, Austin Highway or North New Braunfels. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-165. - Required inspections. 
(a)  Required inspections to verify full compliance with the right-of-way permit and all applicable codes and ordinances include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Upon installation of equipment (prior to backfill); 
(2)  Backfill (prior to surface patch); 
(3)  Final. 
(b)  The fact that an inspection has been performed does not relieve, excuse, or otherwise alleviate or minimize a contractor's obligations of otherwise complying with this article or from complying with other obligations or specifications legally imposed on a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-166. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  Permit fees include the cost for the initial inspection of completed work. When the work has been reported to the city inspector as completed and ready for inspection, and when upon such inspection the work is found to be incomplete or defective, an additional non-refundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be paid at the time of the next request for inspection. After the second failed inspection, the inspection fee for each subsequent request for inspection shall be double the previous fee. 
(b)  If the inspection requires the use of outside consultants, the non-refundable fee is the actual cost paid by the city plus a three (3) percent administrative fee. 
(c)  Unless waived by the director, inspections shall not be conducted until any and all outstanding fees owed to the city are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-167. - Right-of-way permit and fee exemptions. 
The director shall have the authority to waive fees provided for in this article for public agencies, licensees, franchisees, certificated telecommunications providers and contractors providing the city with construction or other permitted services. When deemed appropriate, the director shall also have the authority to waive the requirement for a contractor to acquire a right-of-way permit. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-168. - Failure to obtain necessary inspections. 
In the event a permit holder fails to obtain all necessary inspections, and to pass all said inspections, they shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article may be addressed by any combination of the following options: 
(1)  Refusal of the director to issue future permits to the violator until the inspections are successfully obtained; and/or 
(2)  Such actions as are permitted under the provisions of section 16-152 and section 16-153 of this Code; and 
(3)  Other such appropriate procedures and measures as might be in place in this Code at the time of the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-169. - Construction procedures. 
(a)  A contractor shall notify the director not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed and provide the name, address, and phone number of the contractor or subcontractor(s) who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual designated by the contractor or subcontractor(s) who will be available for contact by the city at all times during construction. 
(b)  A contractor shall notify adjoining property owners not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any construction unless such construction constitutes an emergency as defined and applied herein. 
(c)  Construction shall be in compliance with all applicable city codes, local, state and federal laws, and the city construction standards. 
(d)  A contractor shall place at the location where construction is to occur, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of construction, information signs measuring three (3) feet by three (3) feet, stating the identity and telephone number of the person doing the construction in the right-of-way, and the identity and telephone number of the contractor, and said information signs shall remain posted at the location during the entire time the construction is occurring. If the construction is due to an emergency as defined elsewhere in this article, the twenty-four-hour advanced placement is not required. 
(e)  The size and nature of facilities, to be in the right-of-way, including their location, depth, height, upgrades, and other particulars, shall be subject to the approval of the director unless such approval conflicts with state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-170. - Base material. 
Base material shall be constructed as designated on the right-of-way permit and as required pursuant to the city construction standards. A contractor shall notify the director not less than two (2) hours prior to the placement of base material. Failure to do so may result in the suspension of construction and the removal of any base material placed without prior approval. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-171. - Disturbance of facilities. 
(a)  A contractor's facilities shall not be allowed to disturb city facilities, in particular gravity-dependent facilities. 
(b)  The director may direct a contractor to keep a reasonable distance from facilities which are city-owned or leased. Facilities constructed shall be presumed to disturb facilities which are city-owned or leased if the existing facility, or the facility to be constructed, is within three (3) feet horizontally of such city-owned or leased facility. Nothing in this section shall diminish the authority of the director to require specific placement of particular facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-172. - Location and placement. 
(a)  Prior to commencing excavation or boring, unless otherwise excepted by this article, a contractor shall verify the horizontal and vertical location of existing city and third-party facilities within three (3) feet of the contractor's proposed construction. Prior to commencing excavation or boring, unless otherwise excepted by this article, a contractor shall verify only the horizontal location for facilities outside three (3) feet of the contractor's proposed construction and which may be reasonably anticipated to be disturbed by the contractor's proposed construction. 
(b)  Any facility constructed by a contractor shall maintain a minimum of six (6) inches vertical separation when crossing any existing facility. 
(c)  Facilities constructed by the contractor shall be constructed at a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches, except the director may require a lesser or greater depth if it is deemed necessary for the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  All bores shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches below the street gutter or edge of pavement. 
(e)  All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in operation. Locator shall place a mark at each stem with a paint dot and shall mark the depth at least at every other stem. 
(f)  Placement of all appurtenances shall be approved by the director prior to placement. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-173. - Conformance with public improvements. 
(a)  For the purpose of conforming underground or overhead facilities for public improvements, and as allowed by, or consistent with, state or federal laws governing such conformance, and if it shall be deemed necessary by the director to undertake such conformance, such conformance shall be accomplished by contractor, at the contractor's expense and direction, within ninety (90) days from receipt of notice from the city to contractor unless a longer time schedule has been approved by the director. The director will consider all reasonable and economical public improvement alternatives prior to requiring conformance. Contractor may notify the director of options other than conformance. 
(b)  Facilities that do not conform after ninety (90) days to the stated purposes set forth in the permit or within an extended schedule approved by the director, are subject to removal from the right-of-way by the city. If removal occurs, city shall not be liable for damages or other compensation to contractor, but the city shall be responsible for reasonable care of such removed facilities while such facilities are in city custody and until contractor takes possession of such removed facilities. The city shall bear no responsibility for removed facilities not repossessed by contractor within thirty (30) days after the city has taken custody of removed facilities. 
(c)  Whenever it shall be necessary to require contractor to conform its facilities within the right-of-way, such conformance shall be made without claim for reimbursement or damages against the city. It is understood and further provided, however, that the city shall not require contractor to remove its facilities entirely from the right-of-way. If the city requires contractor to conform its facilities to enable any entity or person other than the city to use, or to use with greater convenience, right-of-way, contractor shall not be required to conform its facilities until such other entity or person shall reimburse or make arrangements satisfactory to contractor to reimburse contractor for any loss and expense caused by or arising out of such conformance. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-174. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Erosion control measures, including but not limited to, backfill, silt fencing, advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades shall be in their proper locations before construction begins in the right-of-way. The contractor shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state, and federal guidelines. Requirements may include, but not be limited to, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established and wire-backed silt fencing around high erosion areas. 
(b)  A contractor may be required to show proof of plans approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and Environmental Protection Agency relating to storm water and erosion, when applicable, or in the alternative, written documentation verifying that contractor is not required to obtain such plans. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-175. - Traffic control. 
Unless an emergency exists, as that term is defined herein, traffic lane closures in the right-of-way which obstruct the flow of traffic for longer than four (4) hours at a time may be allowed only under the direction and permission of the director and in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and other applicable local, state or federal law, except that the flow of traffic on collectors or arterials cannot be obstructed for any period of time except under the direction and permission of the director and in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and other applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-176. - Street and sidewalk cuts. 
(a)  Except in the event of an emergency, when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior written approval must be obtained from the director, and all requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances must be followed. 
(b)  Prior to excavation of a street or sidewalk, a contractor shall be in compliance with all local, state, and federal laws, if applicable, including the Texas Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act, Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Ann. Art. 9033 (Vernon Supp. 1999). 
(c)  All trenches in asphalt or concrete-surfaced areas shall have a clean, straight cut through the pavement surface prior to removal of the surface, in accordance with city specifications, including the city construction standards. Any cuts in sidewalks, including those cuts required in the event of an emergency, shall be made at existing control joints. 
(d)  Except in the event of an emergency, a contractor shall notify the director not less than two (2) hours prior to commencing a street or sidewalk cut. 
(e)  A contractor shall comply with proper traffic control during a street or sidewalk cut. Traffic control shall be in conformance with the MUTCD and other applicable local, state, and federal law. 
(f)  A contractor shall be responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected facilities prior to executing any street or sidewalk cut. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-177. - Backfill. 
(a)  Backfill shall be constructed pursuant to the city construction standards. A contractor shall notify the director at least two (2) hours prior to beginning backfill operations. Failure to so notify may result in suspension of construction and removal of any unauthorized installed backfill. 
(b)  Densities may be taken to ensure compliance with standard backfill requirements. At least five (5) days prior to the commencement of the backfill operations, a contractor shall submit to the director a sample of the backfill material to be used by the contractor at the construction site. 
(c)  In excavations eighteen (18) inches or less in width, or where for any reason compaction cannot be achieved with gravel backfill, flowable concrete shall be used in place of gravel backfill in all areas within three (3) feet of the back of the curb or the edge of pavement. Flowable fill shall conform to the city construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-178. - Substandard construction. 
(a)  Any person or entity performing construction in city right-of-way shall perform such construction in a manner that complies with this article, other applicable local, state, and federal laws, and the city construction standards. 
(b)  Facilities installed after the effective date of this article shall be presumed to be improperly constructed and substandard if: 
(1)  The construction endangers, or is reasonably likely to endanger, the general public or persons using the constructed right-of-way; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet applicable city codes, state or federal law, or the city construction standards; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being reasonably located pursuant to the city construction standards, or as otherwise required by this article; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place in accordance with this article, the directives provided by the director pursuant to this article, or the city construction standards; 
(5)  The facilities are placed in an area that disturbs facilities which are city-owned or leased; or, 
(6)  Facilities constructed or to be constructed are within three (3) feet horizontally of such city-owned or leased facility. 
(7)  Substandard construction is unacceptable to the city under this article and may be ameliorated by the city or by a third party at the direction of the city, and the contractor shall be liable for the costs of such amelioration. Before amelioration is undertaken by the city or by a third party at the direction of the city, the contractor shall be provided notice and allowed ten (10) days, or a longer period of time if requested by the contractor and granted by the director, to bring the construction up to applicable standards acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-179. - Insurance requirements. 
Any contractor requesting shall carry, and provide documentation upon request, the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance covering all employees of contractor engaged in any operation covered by the permit; 
(2)  Automobile liability insurance; 
(3)  General liability insurance of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage; and 
(4)  Umbrella coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) on an occurrence basis and must include coverage for personal injury or death, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, and explosion and collapse hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-180. - Liability for damage. 
(a)  Without intending to affect or determine the legal relationship between a contractor and any third party, the permittee (as defined in subsection 16-163(a)) and the contractor shall be liable for any property damage or destruction caused by the contractor, or by any contractor or subcontractor of the contractor, as a result of the contractor or any contractor or subcontractor of the contractor constructing in the right-of-way. A designated agent or representative of the permittee and contractor shall be available to the director for contact purposes in the event of damage or destruction. 
(b)  A contractor shall notify the director upon occurrence of any damage or destruction to any facility or other property owned or leased by a third party or by the city, in connection with construction occurring in the right-of-way, if such occurrence happens during a city business day. If the occurrence happens on a day other than a city business day, notification must be given by 9:00 a.m. on the first city business day following the occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-181. - Restoration of property and pavement. 
(a)  Surface restoration shall be constructed as designated on the right-of-way permit and as required pursuant to the city construction standards. A contractor shall notify the director not less than two (2) hours prior to the placement of surface restoration material. Failure to do so may result in the suspension of construction and the removal of any surface material placed without prior approval. 
(b)  A contractor shall be responsible for having all abandoned facilities removed within seven (7) calendar days after their abandonment unless otherwise extended by the director or unless the director determines that such abandoned facilities should not be removed upon request. 
(c)  During a cessation in the construction or after completion of the construction, and in order to avoid safety hazards to vehicles and pedestrian traffic, all street and sidewalk construction shall be restored by a contractor within a reasonable period of time to be determined by the director. 
(d)  A contractor shall restore property damaged or destroyed by construction on or adjacent to the right-of-way to a condition that is as good as or better than the pre-existing condition of the right-of-way or adjacent property, as determined by the director. Streets shall be restored based on their Pavement Condition Index (PCI) prior to construction, as determined by the director during the application process, as follows: 
(1)  PCI of 0—50. Excavations in streets and/or rights of way with PCI values of 50 or less shall be deemed to be excavations in streets with nominal loss of life. The contractor shall promptly repair the trench envelope and surface in accordance with specifications set forth in the UECM. 
(2)  PCI of 51—85. In the event of an excavation in a street or right-of-way having a PCI of 51—85, the contractor shall promptly repair the trench envelope and surface, including pavement and foundation, to the same condition, or better, than existed before the commencement of the work in accordance with the specifications set forth in the UECM. In the event of failure of the repair during the guaranty period, the contractor shall reimburse the city for its pavement restoration cost. 
(3)  PCI of 86—100. Excavations in streets and/or right-of-way with PCI values of 86 or greater shall be deemed one hundred (100) percent loss of pavement life. These excavations require block to block and curb to curb pavement reconstruction. Use of a hot mix asphalt repaving process is an option with approval of the director. In the event of any trench failure in the street or right-of-way during the guaranty period, the contractor shall reimburse the city for its costs to repair the failure. Additionally, in the event of such failure, the contractor shall within forty-eight (48) hours repair the subject trench envelope if required by the director. 
(e)  Restoration shall be completed in a timely manner as specified by schedules prepared and provided by the director. Contractors of the right-of-way shall be fully responsible for the performance of all trenches or other restorative work for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months from the completion of the work and/or inspection by the director. Any trench or other restorative failures resulting from any work authorized by this article shall be immediately repaired upon notification by the city and are subject to inspection and approval by the city. 
(f)  All repairs to right-of-way of any PCI are guaranteed by the contractor making the repair and the permittee causing the repair to be made for the life of the street. The life of the street for these purposes is defined to be until such time as that certain street or right-of-way is repaved by the city or another, in the same location as the excavation, or until such time as the PCI Index of such street or right-of-way drops to below 50. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-182. - Requirement to relocate equipment for city public works projects. 
Any user of the city right-of-way shall be required to relocate and bear the cost of relocating their equipment to accommodate city public works projects. Such relocation shall be completed within thirty (30) days upon notice by the city of the requirement for such relocation. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 16-183. - Exemptions for maintenance of sewer laterals by single family residents. 
Residential customers issued permits to excavate in the right-of-way for the maintenance of sewer laterals for single family or duplex residential properties shall not be subject to any fees required by this chapter and shall only be required to restore a street or right-of-way to a maximum PCI value of 85, even if the PCI value is determined to be higher than 85. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Secs. 16-184—16-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT FOR WIRELESS NETWORK PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 16-200. - Findings and purpose; short title. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers; 
(2)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
(3)  Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-201. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 284 ("the code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-202. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in the city Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles ("the design manual") are hereby incorporated into this article and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the design manual are specifically applicable to this article: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The city uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code] ch. 284. 
City means the City of Alamo Heights, Texas or its lawful successor. 
City council means the municipal governing body of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas. 
Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 284. 
Code means the Texas Local Government Code. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances. 
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
Location means the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, or designee. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Chapter 284, [V.T.C.A.,] Utilities Code, § 51.002. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Chapter 284. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-203. - Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
Pursuant to this article and subject to the design manual and the code, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. The terms of this article shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-204. - Compliance with design manual and applicable codes. 
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this right-of-way management ordinance, city applicable codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's design manual. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-205. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the code in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-206. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 284 of the code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-of-way. 
(b)  As required by Chapter 284 of the code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought. 
(c)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than thirty (30) network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(d)  The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this chapter; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in general liability coverage. 
(e)  Exception: As provided in [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code] § 284.157, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; 
(4)  Notwithstanding subdivision (d) above, the network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of work described in this subdivision (d). 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-207. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's design manual. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-208. - Municipal review process by the city. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
(1)  For network nodes and node support poles: No later than thirty (30) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility: No later than ten (10) days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
(1)  For network nodes: no later than sixty (60) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles: No later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities: No later than twenty-one (21) days after the city receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
(1)  The applicant has thirty (30) days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(e)  Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-209. - Time of installation. 
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six (6) months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-210. - Applicable fees and rental rates to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(b)  Network nodes: 
(1)  Application fee: The application fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each network node for up to but not more than thirty (30) network nodes. 
(2)  Annual public right-of-way rate fee: The annual public right-of-way rate shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per network node installed in the city public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Public right-of-way rate adjustment: As provided in [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code] § 284.054 of the code, the city may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the consumer price index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice. 
(c)  Node support poles: 
(1)  The application fee for each network support pole shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Transfer facilities: 
(1)  The application fee for each transfer facility shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) monthly for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code] ch. 283 or cable franchise fees under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66. 
(e)  Micro network nodes: 
(1)  No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(f)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles: 
(1)  Subject to the city's pole service agreement, the collocation of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per year per service pole. 
(g)  City-owned municipal utility poles: 
(1)  A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.024, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(h)  The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-211. - Indemnity. 
As provided in [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code] § 284.302, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-212. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
Nothing in this article shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-213. - Design manual. 
The Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles ("the design manual") attached hereto is approved as an addendum to this article as an integral part of the regulations adopted herein and shall be maintained by the city secretary on the city website but shall not become a part of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-214. - Pole attachment agreement. 
The pole attachment agreement attached hereto is approved as an addendum to this article as an integral part of the regulations adopted herein and shall be maintained by the city secretary on the city website but shall not become a part of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Sec. 16-215. - Service pole collocation attachment license agreement. 
The service pole collocation attachment license agreement attached hereto is approved as an addendum to this article as an integral part of the regulations adopted herein and shall be maintained by the city secretary on the city website but shall not become a part of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2084 , §§ I, II, 8-28-17)  
Chapter 17 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 16; water and sewers, Ch. 19; zoning, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; minimum standards for subdivisions, 31 Tex. Admin. Code § 364.91. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted in the exercise of the power granted to municipalities by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. Pursuant to the authority granted therein, any subdivision plan, plat or replat must be approved by the city council of the city after review and report by the planning and zoning commission prior to the recording of any plan, plat or replat of property within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 22-2)  
Sec. 17-2. - Compliance. 
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance of the city. For the purposes of this chapter, "subdivide" and its derivations, shall mean to divide any tract of land situated within the city into two (2) or more parts, or to assemble tracts of land or portions of tracts of land into a single tract of land, for the purpose of selling, conveying, transferring or improving such tract or tracts of land. 
(Code 1965, § 22-3)  
Sec. 17-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  The city engineer shall not issue building or repair permits for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved in the manner prescribed herein and duly recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
(2)  The city public service board shall not provide permanent gas and/or electrical service to any lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved in the manner as prescribed herein. 
(b)  Public improvements and services. The city will withhold all public improvements and services of whatever nature, including the maintenance of streets, sewage facilities and water, gas and electric service, from all subdivisions which have not been approved in the manner prescribed herein, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the council. 
(c)  Revision of plat after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the council and endorsed on the plat in writing, unless such change, modification or revision is first submitted to and approved by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 22-4)  
Secs. 17-4—17-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 17-26. - General principles of acceptability. 
(a)  Provision for future subdivision. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(b)  Suitable building sites. Every lot must contain a suitable building site. 
(c)  Suitability of land use. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be used. 
(d)  Site improvements. Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other site improvements required under the provisions of this chapter to be installed in subdivisions by the subdivider shall conform to the specifications of this chapter and to the then current policies and specifications promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 22-10)  
Sec. 17-27. - Streets. 
(a)  Street layout. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing principal streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. Where streets change design in alignment and width, an appropriate transition shall be provided for safe and efficient traffic flow. 
(c)  Street jogs. Whenever possible, street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided at their intersections with primary and secondary streets. 
(d)  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
(e)  Culs-de-sac streets. In general, culs-de-sac streets shall have a turnaround of not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter in residential areas, and not less than two hundred (200) feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. The turnaround shall include at least eighteen (18) feet of paved driving surface with a minimum exterior radius of forty (40) feet for residential areas and eighty (80) feet for commercial areas. The interior of the turnaround may be landscaped as desired or paved. The council will accept or reject a plan with culs-de-sac streets other than described below based on its merits after considering density, land use, safety and convenience. 
(f)  Width and rights-of-way. Pavement width and right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet and fifty (50) feet respectively. In the event that the subdivision is completely residential and is not traversed by a major traffic artery, a forty-foot right-of-way and twenty-six-foot paved street may be approved. 
(g)  Curbs. Curbs shall be required as follows: 
(1)  On both sides of all interior streets; 
(2)  On the subdivision side of adjacent streets. 
(h)  Streetlights. Streetlights shall be provided in all subdivisions within the city. Streetlights shall be installed by the city public service board at all public street intersections with other public streets and crosswalks within the subdivision, at paved safety lane intersections with public streets, and at other locations as designated by the city engineer. The subdivider shall contract with the city public service board for payment of all costs associated with the engineering and installation of streetlighting. Such contracts must be executed prior to acceptance of the public streets for maintenance. 
(i)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within and abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be manufactured by the city. The city will erect the signs at no cost to the subdivider, but he shall pay the actual costs of all material and labor associated with the manufacture of the signs. Street name signs shall not be installed until the street has been accepted for maintenance by the city. 
(j)  Street construction. All streets shall be constructed, with respect to base, surfacing, curbs and geometric design criteria in accordance with the standards and specifications promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 22-11)  
Sec. 17-28. - Sidewalks. 
The city council in its discretion may require sidewalks in a subdivision. 
(Code 1965, § 22-12)  
Sec. 17-29. - Water. 
Water supply and distribution. All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply and distribution systems approved by the state health department and the city. The design, materials, and construction of all water supply and distribution systems in the planning area shall conform to the regulations specified in the applicable sections of the city Code. No water supply and distribution improvements shall be constructed by the subdivider until the plat has been approved. 
(Code 1965, § 22-13)  
Sec. 17-30. - Sewers. 
(a)  Connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be required. 
(b)  Extension to the existing system, if required, shall be constructed by the developer. They must be in place prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1965, § 22-14)  
Sec. 17-31. - Drainage. 
(a)  Where drainage channels, watercourses or low areas that collect water exist within a subdivision, a drainage study prepared by a registered professional engineer must accompany the request for approval of the subdivision plan, plat or replat. The study must show as a minimum that the proposed subdivision as a whole will not increase or aggravate drainage problems either upstream or downstream during construction or thereafter. The study must consider storage volumes and velocities. The study must include plans and specifications showing complete construction details including calculations showing the basis for design. The one hundred-year rainfall intensity, or the twenty-five-year ultimate development, whichever is greater, shall be used. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, subdivision plans, plats or replats in the defined floodplain must comply with all provisions of the city's current floodplain ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 22-17)  
Secs. 17-32—17-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS 
 
Sec. 17-51. - Filing. 
(a)  Generally. Any owner of land or his duly authorized agent, hereafter referred to as subdivider, applicant or developer, seeking approval of a proposed subdivision plan, plat or replat shall file with the city engineer five (5) blue or black-line copies of the subdivision plat or replat and one (1) process-linen print, and additionally the data required by sections 17-52 and 17-54. The subdivision plan, plat or replat must comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. The fee for consideration of any plan, plat or replat by the city shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus any replat fee assessed by the City of San Antonio in accordance with the "Entity/Sewer Service Contract," which shall be paid at the time of submission of the plan, plat or replat. 
(b)  Vacating plats. There shall be no filing fee for consideration of a vacating plat. Vacating plats must meet all of the requirements of procedure and specification of this chapter. They may be drawn at an appropriate scale. The owner's acknowledgement on a vacating plat shall be in the following form: 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby declares Lot(s) _____, Block _____, NCB _______ Subdivision to be vacated, and establishes the area vacated as Lot(s) _____, Block _____, NCB _______. 
	_____
	Owner's Signature 
 
(Code 1965, § 22-20; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 17-52. - Plat specifications. 
(a)  Generally. The plats shall be drawn in India ink on linen tracing cloth on sheets eighteen (18) inches wide and twenty-four (24) inches long, with a margin of two and one-half (2½) inches on the left side of the sheet, and appropriate margins on the other three (3) sides. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Where more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area to be subdivided, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
(b)  The plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Name of the subdivider; 
(2)  Name of the record owner of the land involved; 
(3)  Primary control points, or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, new city block number or county block number, and similar data on the plat shall be referred; and if specified by the city engineer, two (2) points on the perimeter of the subdivision, identified by coordinates that relate to the Texas State Plane Coordinate System; 
(4)  Trace boundary lines, the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets, easements, and other rights-of-way intersecting the boundary or streets, easements, and other rights-of-way forming the boundary of the tract being subdivided, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, area, and central angles of all curves; 
(5)  Scale, north arrow and date; 
(6)  If specified by the city engineer, final contour data at intervals as tabulated below to show drainage of the site of the proposed subdivision: 
CONTOUR INTERVALS FOR PLATS 
Average Grade 
of Site 	Maximum Contour Interval to be Used 
Up to 5% 	2 foot 
Over 5% 	5 foot 
 
(7)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way, in or adjacent to the subdivision. The right-of-way width shall be displayed by an overall dimension and by dimensions showing the division of the right-of-way between the center line of the right-of-way and the respective adjacent property line; 
(8)  Name of subdivision, legal description of property; 
(9)  Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easement of reservation; all existing and proposed utilities; and location of any high pressure oil, gas or gasoline line; 
(10)  Number to identify each lot or site; 
(11)  Front building setback lines on all lots and other sites. Side yard setback lines at street intersections and cross-walkways; 
(12)  City limits line if it traverses the subdivision; 
(13)  Location map; 
(14)  Surveyor's certificate as follows: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
	_____
	Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Public Surveyor 
 
(15)  An engineer's certificate shall be required when streets and drainage layouts are required under sections 17-27 and 17-31 and shall be in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given this plat to the matters of streets, lots and drainage layout; and to the best of my knowledge this plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision ordinance, except for those variances granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council of the city. 
	_____
	Registered Professional Engineer 
 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____
	Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas 
 
(16)  Owner's acknowledgement as follows: (If the owner authorizes an agent, he shall file a notarized letter to that effect). 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
The owner of land shown on this plat, in person or through a duly authorized agent, dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
	_____
	Owner 
	_____
	Duly Authorized Agent 
 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
Before me, the undersigned authority on this day personally appeared ___________ known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed and in the capacity therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____
	Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas 
 
(17)  Approval of the planning commission of the city as follows: 
This plat of ___________ has been submitted to and considered by the Planning Commission of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, and is hereby approved by such commission. 
Dated this _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
	BY: _____ 
	Chairman 
	BY: _____ 
	Secretary 
 
(18)  Approval of the city council of the city as follows: 
This plat of ___________ has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Alamo Heights, Texas, and the governing body of such city, and is hereby approved. 
Dated this _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
	BY: _____ 
	Mayor 
ATTEST: _____ 
City Secretary 
 
(19)  County clerk certificate of authentication: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I, ___________, county clerk of said county, do hereby certify that this plat was filed for record in my office, on the _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___ at ___.M. in the records of ___________ of said county, in book volume _____ on page _____ in testimony whereof, witness my hand and official seal of office, this _____ day of ________, A.D., 19___. 
	County Clerk, Bexar County, Texas
	BY: _____ 
	Deputy 
 
(Code 1965, § 22-21)  
Sec. 17-53. - Performance agreements. 
Performance agreements (including bonds) shall be in such form and substance as required by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 22-22)  
Sec. 17-54. - Required data. 
An application for approval of a subdivision plan, plat or replat shall include the following data: 
(1)  Streets—As required by section 17-27; 
(2)  Sidewalks—As required by section 17-28; 
(3)  Water supply—As required by section 17-29; 
(4)  Sewers—If extensions are required: 
a.  Two (2) copies of proposed plat of subdivision showing two-foot contours on sites where the average grade does not exceed five (5) percent, and five-foot contours on sites where the average grade exceeds five (5) percent, and the proposed location of all sewer lines; 
b.  Two (2) copies of plans and profiles of the proposed sewer lines showing depths and grades of the lines in accordance with specifications provided by the city engineer; 
(5)  Drainage—As required by section 17-31; and 
(6)  A plat note describing any condition which will produce a nonconforming use or structure. See section 16(F) of the zoning code. 
(Code 1965, § 22-23; Ord. No. 1246, 1-23-95)  
Sec. 17-55. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the penalty provided for in section 1-5 of this Code, the city shall be entitled to injunctive relief against any violation of this chapter and for any damages which may result to the city or the general public by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1965, § 22-24)  
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate all traffic and vehicles within the city, Art. XII, § 3; authority of city to establish speed zones and parking areas, Art. XII, § 4. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal restrictions on use of state highways, 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 25.601-25.603; municipalities may alter speed limits subject to state law requirements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(12); local ordinances concerning pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.009; municipal regulation of loads and equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 621.303. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - General duties of traffic engineer relative to traffic. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to conduct analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other traffic ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 20-2)  
Sec. 18-2. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1965, § 20-7)  
Sec. 18-3. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.501.  
Sec. 18-4. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, skateboard, roller skates or any toy vehicle, shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 20-13)  
Sec. 18-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1365, adopted Oct. 9, 1995, repealed former § 18-5, which pertained to the use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadways.  
Sec. 18-6. - Giving false information in promise to appear for traffic violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, when giving a written promise to appear, or when given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the municipal court to answer for an offense against any traffic law of this state, or any provision of this chapter or other traffic ordinance of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than the true name and the true place of his residence or address, upon the request of such officer. 
(Code 1965, § 20-21)  
Sec. 18-7. - Drivers' records to be kept. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 1965, § 20-22)  
Secs. 18-8—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Prohibiting turns at intersections. 
(a)  The city engineer is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(c)  Schedule D, indicating those intersections wherein U-turns are prohibited is set out in Article VI, this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-40)  
Sec. 18-32. - Yield right-of-way signs. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, as authorized by the city council, may install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a "Yield right-of-way" sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of such driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(c)  Schedule C, indicating the location of "Yield Right-of-Way" signs in the city is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(d)  Written notice of the proposed installation or removal of a "Yield right-of-way" sign shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the "Yield right-of-way" sign at least ten (10) days prior to the date of city council consideration of such action; except that such signs can be installed where no such control exists upon the recommendation of the police chief and the public works director, and with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 20-48; Ord. No. 1588, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 1713, 6-4-07)  
Sec. 18-33. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, as authorized by the city council, shall place and maintain signs giving notice of one-way streets and alleys, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(c)  Schedule F, designating one-way streets is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-50) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to designate one-way streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(10).  
Sec. 18-34. - Driving in sidewalk area. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1965, § 20-61)  
Sec. 18-35. - Through truck traffic prohibited on certain streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent, servant or employee, to use or permit to be used for through truck traffic any of the streets designated in section 18-155, Schedule J. Signs bearing the words "No Through Truck Traffic" or "Through Truck Traffic Prohibited" shall be displayed at each intersection of such street or streets with any street upon which through truck traffic is permitted. For purposes of this section, "truck" means a "truck tractor" and semi-trailer," or either of them, as defined in the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.001 et seq.). 
(Code 1965, § 20-67; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-93)  
Sec. 18-36. - Operation of motor vehicles on unpaved public right-of-way prohibited. 
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle onto, across, or over unpaved public right-of-way in the city except when such unpaved public right-of-way is an extension of a driveway. 
(Code 1965, § 20-68)  
Secs. 18-37—18-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate by traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 
 
Sec. 18-56. - General powers and duties of traffic engineer relative to devices. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-78, 20-79)  
Sec. 18-57. - Installation of traffic lights. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, as authorized by the city council from time to time, shall designate intersections and other locations, at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections and other locations. 
(b)  Schedule A, indicating the location of traffic lights, is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(c)  Written notice of the proposed installation or removal of an electric traffic-control signal shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the electric traffic-control signal at least ten (10) days prior to the date of city council consideration of such action. 
(Code 1965, § 20-82; Ord. No. 1588, 5-23-05)  
Sec. 18-58. - Unauthorized signs, signals. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any road, street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad signal or sign, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signals. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the city is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause them to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1965, § 20-87) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.006.  
Secs. 18-59—18-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.352; authority of municipality to alter speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356; exception for municipal speed limit regulation for emergencies, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.365. 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Certain maximum speed limits. 
(a)  Based upon the finding of engineering and traffic investigations, and subject to the provisions of state law, it is determined by the city council that the reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed on certain streets adjacent to schools in the city on school days is twenty (20) miles per hour, when appropriate signs are erected, and that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in excess of such speed between the hours posted for such streets and portions thereof designated in Article VI, Traffic Schedules, Schedule E-School Zones. 
(b)  Based upon the findings of engineering and traffic investigations, and subject to the provisions of state law, it is determined by the city council that the reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed on the Austin Highway between its intersection with Broadway and the city limits, and on Jones Maltsberger Road when appropriate signs are erected, is thirty-five (35) miles per hour, and that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in excess of such speed. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of state law, it is determined by the city council that the reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed on Broadway and North New Braunfels within the city limits when appropriate signs are erected is thirty (30) miles per hour, and that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in excess of such speed. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions of state law, it is determined by the city council that the reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed on all streets, not otherwise set in this section, is twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in excess of such speed. 
(Code 1965, § 20-99; Ord. No. 1228, 4-9-90; Ord. No. 1853, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 2054 , 7-25-16)  
Secs. 18-77—18-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-96. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  On unpaved areas of private property in all dwelling districts; 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where the street curb has been painted red by the traffic engineer; 
(15)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(16)  On unpaved public right-of-way except when such unpaved public right-of-way is an extension of a driveway; 
(17)  On extensions of driveways on public right-of-way in residential districts when such parking creates a safety or traffic hazard; 
(18)  In fire lanes on public or private property as provided in Schedule L of Article VI of this chapter; 
(19)  In or on public alleys. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area specified above or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1965, § 20-116; Ord. No. 1275, 4-13-92; Ord. No. 1295, 1-25-93)  
Sec. 18-97. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, filling with gas or oil or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1965, § 20-117)  
Sec. 18-98. - Stop intersections. 
(a)  The city council may designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the traffic engineer shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(b)  Schedule B, indicating the location of stop signs is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(c)  Written notice of the proposed installation or removal of a "stop" sign shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the "stop" sign at least ten (10) days prior to the date of city council consideration of such action; except that such signs can be installed where no such control exists upon the recommendation of the police chief and the public works director, and with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 20-119; Ord. No. 1588, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 1713, 6-4-07) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority designate stop intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8).  
Sec. 18-99. - Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall cause parking spaces to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council and he shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council. The traffic engineer shall also cause time limited parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city council. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
(b)  In areas designated as time limited parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the council, the same to be designated with clearly distinguishable markings or signs at both ends of the time limited area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limited area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(c)  Any time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the council. 
(d)  Schedule G, designating streets on which parking is prohibited or limited is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited or in a time limited parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
(f)  The City of Alamo Heights is vested with the exclusive power to control the public streets and rights-of-way in the city. By permission of the city, the Alamo Heights Independent School District is authorized to use the 100 block of East Fair Oaks Place, north and south sides, 100 block of East Castano Avenue, north and south sides, and 100 block of Vanderhoeven Drive, west side, for school parking on school days from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. The Alamo Heights Independent School District shall submit plans to the City of Alamo Heights Planning and Development Services Department for approval to mark, stripe, number and sign parking spaces on the aforementioned public streets and right-of-ways, to include any changes to previously approved plans. Such plans shall not include painting any curb or street with red paint to signify a "no parking" zone. Additionally, proposed plans may not conflict with any city code or state law regulating parking restrictions pertaining to fire lanes, fire hydrant access, cross walks, approaches to intersections, traffic control signs or signals, and restricted parking zones placed by the city and/or designated by red curbs or pavement markings. The City of Alamo Heights shall assume no responsibility for enforcing school parking regulations promulgated by the Alamo Heights Independent School District in areas authorized by this section. The use of the public streets for school parking may be terminated by the city at any time. 
(g)  The provisions set forth in subsection (f) shall apply to all streets and rights-of-way within established school zones around the Cambridge Elementary School. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-121, 20-122; Ord. No. 1416, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1937, 8-13-12)  
Sec. 18-100. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit such parking. 
(b)  The traffic engineer, with approval of the city council, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(c)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(d)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(e)  Where ninety-degree angle parking is permitted by ordinance, both front wheels must be within six (6) inches of the curb, or parking curb or if there is no curb the two (2) front wheels shall be parallel to the curbline and pulled as far past it as is practicable, so as to obstruct the street as little as possible. 
(f)  Where sixty-degree angle parking is permitted by ordinance, the right front wheel must be within six (6) inches of the street curb, or where the curb has been set back, within six (6) inches of the parking curb, and the right-hand side of the vehicle must be at an angle of sixty (60) degrees from the curb or curbline. 
(g)  Where forty-five-degree angle parking is permitted by ordinance, the right front wheel must be within six (6) inches of the parking curb, or where a saw-tooth parking curb has been installed, both front wheels shall be within six (6) inches of the parking curb, and the right-hand side of the vehicle shall be at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees from the street curb or curbline. 
(h)  Schedule H, designating those areas in which angle parking is permitted is set out in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-123)  
Sec. 18-101. - Overnight parking— Prohibited. 
Overnight parking for storage on any paved street is hereby prohibited. "Overnight parking for storage" is hereby defined as the parking or storing of cars, trucks, tractors or other vehicles on paved streets during the hours from 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m., except temporarily disabled vehicles which are protected by flares or other approved signal devices. For the purpose of this section, a "vehicle" includes a device in or by which a person or property may be transported or drawn on a public highway. 
(Code 1965, § 20-124; Ord. No. 1245, 11-12-90; Ord. No. 2049 , 4-25-16)  
Sec. 18-102. - Same—Permit to park on street. 
Any person owning or occupying premises who do not have facilities for parking passenger automobiles owned by persons occupying such premises may file a written application with the city council for special permission for a temporary permit to park passenger automobiles only on a city street. Such application shall be granted by the city council only upon its making the following findings: 
(1)  That the premises do not contain space adequate for parking passenger automobiles of the occupants of such premises off of the street; 
(2)  It would be an undue hardship on the owners or occupants of the premises to provide off-street parking for passenger automobiles owned by the occupant. To determine an undue hardship the council shall be governed by the following standards: 
a.  The cost of providing off-street parking on the premises so owned or occupied; 
b.  The cost and availability for providing for such automobile or automobiles off-street parking on other premises and the proximity of other premises that might be available to such occupants for off-street parking. 
(Code 1965, § 20-125)  
Sec. 18-103. - Same—Temporary permit to park on street. 
Any person owning or occupying residential premises may obtain a temporary overnight parking permit for visitors or persons temporarily staying in such premises upon written application made and filed with the chief of police prior to the time such automobiles or other vehicles are parked on the street. Overnight parking permits are restricted to passenger cars, vans and light trucks having a manufacturer rated carrying capacity of one (1) ton or less. No such permit shall exceed thirty (30) days, and no more than three (3) such permits may be issued for any premises during any calendar year by the chief of police. To be effective, any such permit shall be in writing and displayed on the automobile at all times when parked on the streets of the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Persons qualifying under this section and only needing a short term permit not exceeding three (3) days may be issued a permit by contacting the police administrative office or the police/fire dispatch center in person or by telephone. Such permission shall be granted by the chief of police or his representative upon a showing of the following: 
(1)  That the premises in question do not have adequate space for the parking of automobiles of persons temporarily visiting or occupying such premises. 
(2)  That the person making such application cannot without undue hardship obtain off-street parking facilities on a temporary basis for such vehicles within the vicinity of such property. In determining whether or not a hardship exists the chief of police shall be governed by the standards set out in section 18-102. 
(Code 1965, § 20-126; Ord. No. 1245, 11-12-90; Ord. No. 2049 , 4-25-16)  
Sec. 18-104. - Designation and use of curb loading zones. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable, where, in his opinion, the dimensions of the streets and sidewalks, the flow of traffic and the use of property abutting the streets are such that he finds it to be necessary for the free flow and expeditious handling of traffic and the safety of persons and property. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(d)  Loading zones shall be designated by an orange painted curb. 
(e)  Schedule I, setting out loading zones within the city appears in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-130)  
Sec. 18-105. - Designation and use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any time other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1965, § 20-131)  
Sec. 18-106. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1965, § 20-132)  
Sec. 18-107. - Parking for handicapped persons. 
(a)  The locations listed in section 18-152, Schedule G, Handicapped Parking Locations, are hereby designated as parking spaces available only to vehicles used by or for the transportation of permanently handicapped individuals, as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.001, when such vehicles display a valid "handicapped" tag provided by the state department of highways and public transportation. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is in a parking space reserved for the handicapped, and such vehicle does not have a valid "handicapped" tag affixed thereon or a temporarily handicapped person identification card placed in the lower left-hand side of the front windshield, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked illegally, and that the registered owner of such vehicle did knowingly cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked in such location. 
(Code 1965, § 20-133; Ord. No. 1231, 5-21-90)  
Sec. 18-108. - School crossing guard program. 
A school crossing guard program is hereby established to be funded: 
(1)  From the court costs added to school crossing zone offenses by state law for the funding of school crossing guard programs; and 
(2)  A special five-dollar court cost to be added to parking violations. 
The school crossing guard program shall be administered by the chief of police. The chief of police is authorized to enter into contractual arrangements with schools within the city for the implementation of the school crossing guard program, provided that such schools shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Alamo Heights against any claims arising from the furnishing of such services by such schools. An administrative cost of ten (10) percent of funds disbursed to such schools shall be retained by the city for the cost of administering the school crossing guard program. The chief of police shall monitor the use of school crossing guard program funds by such schools, which contract for such services shall assure that such funds are used only in the City of Alamo Heights and shall assure that such funds are properly expended for child safety. 
(Ord. No. 1268, 10-14-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1268, approved Oct. 14, 1991, was not specifically amendatory of the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 18-108 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 18-109. - Temporary no parking devices. 
The traffic engineer, with advice and consent of the chief of police, shall be authorized to erect or install temporary "No Parking" signs or other devices in instances where parking on the street would temporarily cause undue hardship or danger to the public or abutting property owners' reasonable use of the street or their driveways or parking pads. 
Such temporary signs or devices shall be installed as soon as possible after the city becomes aware of the hardship or danger, and a determination has been made for the need for such signs or devices. Such signs or devices shall be removed as soon as possible after the need for such signs or devices is no longer present, in the opinion of the traffic engineer and with the advice and consent of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1568, 10-11-04)  
Secs. 18-110—18-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDING OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 18-126. - Vehicles to be removed by police if illegally parked or abandoned. 
Any motor vehicle, vehicle or bicycle or other personal property that is parked on any street in the city where parking is prohibited or is parked for a period of time prohibited by ordinance, resolution or by state law or on any street or public property within the city may be removed by the police department and stored until claimed by the rightful owner or person who has the immediate right to such property, or until disposed of under the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1965, § 20-155) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority regulating unauthorized vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 684.101.  
Sec. 18-127. - Storage fees. 
A storage fee shall be assessed against the owner or person who has the right of possession of any motor vehicle so illegally parked or abandoned, and a fee shall be assessed against the owner of any bicycle or other vehicle or other personal property which has been so illegally parked or abandoned. 
(Code 1965, § 20-156)  
Sec. 18-128. - Towing charges. 
Any such vehicle so removed, impounded and stored in the space or automobile pound that has been provided for the storage of such vehicle shall be retained and held by the police department at its pound or other storage area until all charges for towing and storage against such vehicle shall have been paid to the duly authorized officer in charge of the pound or storage area for the benefit of the city to reimburse the city for the expense of towing and storing such vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 20-157)  
Sec. 18-129. - Minimum charge. 
Any motor vehicle, vehicle, bicycle, boat, or other personal property that is removed by the police department to a place of safekeeping by the city shall be subject to a minimum storage charge of one (1) day regardless of the length of time such property is stored by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-158)  
Sec. 18-130. - City to have lien. 
The city shall have a lien against such vehicle, motor vehicle, bicycle, boat, or other personal property, stored by it, as provided for by this division, until the charges have been paid. 
(Code 1965, § 20-159)  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING IN YARDS 
 
Sec. 18-131. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article only, the following words and terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Boat means a vessel for use on water propelled by oars, paddles, sail, or power, and includes the trailer upon which it is transported. 
Construction vehicle means mobile construction equipment, including but not limited to, dump trucks, graders, back-hoes, front-end loaders, skid loaders, and other similar equipment. 
Front yard: 
(1)  Interior lot means for the purposes of an interior lot only, the yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the smallest distance between the front street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than projections for normal steps, enclosed balconies or open porches. 
(2)  Corner lot means for the purposes of a corner lot only, the yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot line adjacent to an interior lot or other platted property and the side yard line (as that term is hereinafter defined) and being the smallest distance between the front street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than projections for normal steps, enclosed balconies or open porches. 
Motor vehicle means any motor driven or propelled vehicle required to be registered under the laws of the State of Texas, and includes trailers, semitrailers and house trailers as those terms are defined in of the V.T.C.A, Texas Transportation Code § 501.002. A large motor vehicle is a motor vehicle defined in the preceding sentence which is more than twenty-two (22) feet in length and/or more than seven (7) feet in height from ground level (excluding motor vehicles more than seven (7) feet in height because of adaptations specifically to accommodate disabled persons). 
Rear yard: 
(1)  Interior lot means for the purposes of an interior lot only, the yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the distance between the rear lot line and the main building or any projections thereof. 
(2)  Corner lot means for the purposes of a corner lot only, the yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot line adjacent to an interior lot or other platted property and side yard line (as that term is hereinafter defined) and being the distance between the rear lot line and the main building or any projections thereof. 
Side yard means any yard which is not a front yard or rear yard. 
Side yard line means, for corner lots only, a line extending between the front street line and the rear lot line contiguous with the street side of the main building or any projections thereof other than projections for normal steps, enclosed balconies or open porches. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 18-132. - Parking of large motor vehicles, boats and construction vehicles. 
Any motor vehicle or boat greater than twenty-two (22) feet in length or seven (7) feet in height, and all construction vehicles, must be parked in the rear yard of a residence in a residential district of the city. All motor vehicles, boats and construction vehicles shall be parked on permanently maintained parking areas constructed of concrete, asphalt or gravel with barriers or permanent curbing to define the parking area. Rear yard parking areas must be constructed in the same areas in which accessory buildings are authorized. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 18-133. - Exceptions. 
The following exceptions to the limitations imposed on the parking of large motor vehicles in section 18-132 shall apply: 
(1)  A resident may park a large motor vehicle in the front or side yard of a residence for not more than six (6) hours each time for the limited purposes of loading and unloading passengers, supplies, freight and/or merchandise. 
(2)  A bonafide guest or visitor of a resident may park a large motor vehicle in the front or side yard of a resident's residence for not more than seven (7) days during any calendar month. 
(3)  The owner of a large motor vehicle parked in the front or side yard of a residence at the date of the adoption of this ordinance may continue to park such large motor vehicle in the same location for six (6) months from the date of adoption of this ordinance. This exception shall expire upon the disposition of such large motor vehicle, the disposition of the residence by the owner of the large motor vehicle, or at the time the owner of the large motor vehicle vacates the residence, whichever event occurs first, provided that under no circumstances shall this exception continue more than six (6) months from the date of the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 18-134. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow same to be parked, any large motor vehicle, boat or construction vehicle in a residential district of the city except as authorized in sections 18-132 and 18-133 hereinabove. It shall be unlawful to use a motor vehicle or boat in a residential district of the city for dwelling, sleeping, business or entertainment purposes, or to connect a motor vehicle or boat to sanitary sewer facilities. No motor vehicle or boat may be parked within five (5) feet of the front or side curb line of a residence. No maintenance or repair work shall be performed on a large motor vehicle, boat or construction vehicle in a residential district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 18-135. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-5 of this Code. The Alamo Heights Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and impound any motor vehicle, boat or construction vehicle parked or placed in violation of this article. A motor vehicle, boat or construction vehicle impounded pursuant to this article may not be released to the owner or his agent until the expenses of removal plus storage at the rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day are paid to the city. The city may additionally seek injunctive relief as the city council deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 5-21-01)  
Secs. 18-136—18-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 18-146. - Schedule A—Traffic Signals. 
(a)  Under the provisions of section 18-57, traffic signals will be installed at the following intersections and other locations: 
Broadway with: 
Albany Street. 
Austin Highway. 
Barilla Place. 
Blue Bonnet Boulevard. 
Castano Avenue and East Castano Avenue. 
East Fair Oaks Place. 
Harrigan Court. 
Kennedy Avenue and Arcadia Place. 
Mary "D" Avenue and Elizabeth Place. 
Patterson Avenue and Terrell Road. 
Tuxedo Avenue. 
East Castano with: 
Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Jones Maltsberger Road with: 
Tuxedo Avenue. 
North New Braunfels with: 
Arcadia Place. 
Austin Highway. 
Burr Road. 
Elizabeth Place and Elizabeth Road. 
Grove Place and Garraty Road. 
Wiltshire Avenue. 
(b)  Under the provisions of state law, notices shall be posted which prohibit a right turn on a steady red signal at the following locations: 
Albany Street, northeast corner and Broadway. 
East Castano Avenue, northeast corner and Broadway. 
Elizabeth Place, southwest corner and North New Braunfels. 
(c)  Under the provisions of section 18-57, notices shall be posted which prohibit a right turn on a steady red signal at the following locations except when authorized by a green arrow: 
Broadway, southeast corner and Austin Highway. 
North New Braunfels, northwest corner and Austin Highway. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. A); Ord. No. 1533, 8-25-03)  
Sec. 18-147. - Schedule B—Stop Signs. 
Under the provisions of section 18-98: 
(1)  At the following intersections stop signs will be installed so that on the first named street, traffic will have the right-of-way; and on the second named street or group of streets, traffic will stop; 
Alamo Heights Boulevard with all streets between the north line of Castano Avenue and the south line of Normandy Avenue. 
Albany Avenue with Townsend Avenue. 
Albany Street with Henderson Street, Kokomo Street and Lafayette Avenue. 
Alta Avenue with Ciruela Street and Lajara Boulevard. 
Arbutus with Normandy. 
Arcadia Place with Cleveland Court. 
Argo Avenue with Ogden Lane and Imlay Street. 
Argyle Avenue with Morton Street. 
Ashcroft Avenue with Redwood Street. 
Austin Highway with all streets within the city limits except where traffic signals, four-way stop signs, or yield signs are installed. 
Blue Bonnet Boulevard with Kokomo Street 
Broadway with all streets within the city limits except where traffic signals, four-way stop signs, or yield signs are installed. 
Bronson Avenue with St. Dennis Avenue. 
Cambridge Oval with Estes Avenue, Morton Street, Joliet Avenue and Willim Avenue. 
Cardinal Avenue with Lajara Boulevard. 
Chichester Place with Cleveland Court. 
Cleveland Court with Barilla Place westbound. 
Cleveland Court with Marcia Place. 
College Boulevard with Lajara Boulevard, Nacogdoches Road and Columbine Street. 
Columbine Street with Abiso Avenue. 
Corona Avenue with Ciruela Street, Lajara Boulevard, Greely Street. 
Crescent Avenue with Clairborne Way. 
East Castano Avenue and Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Eaton Street with Kampmann Avenue. 
Encino Avenue with Argyle Avenue and St. Dennis Avenue. 
Encino Avenue with Mary "D" Avenue. 
Encino Avenue with Mayflower Avenue. 
Evans Avenue with Lajara Boulevard, Woodway Lane, Nacogdoches Road, Loveta Street. 
Grant Avenue with Morton Avenue. 
Imlay Street with Abiso Avenue. 
Inslee Avenue with Arbutus Street. 
Kennedy Avenue and St. Dennis Avenue. 
Lamont Avenue with Lajara Boulevard, Loveta Street and Woodway Lane. 
Montclair Avenue with Kokomo Street. 
Nacogdoches with West Elmwood. 
Nacogdoches Road with West Fair Oaks Place and West Edgewood Place. 
Nacogdoches with West Oakview. 
Normandy Avenue with Columbine Street and Greely Street. 
North New Braunfels with all streets within the city limits except where traffic signals, four-way stop signs, or yield signs are installed. 
Ogden Lane with Columbine Street. 
Olmos Drive with Crescent Street. 
Patterson Avenue with Morton Street, Bronson Avenue, Argyle Avenue and the right turn lane of Broadway. 
Patterson Avenue with Encino Avenue. 
Primrose Place with Buttercup Drive. 
St. Luke's Lane with Corona Avenue and Alta Avenue. 
Torcido Avenue with Morton Avenue. 
Townsend Avenue with Argo Avenue, Abiso Avenue and Harrison Avenue. 
Tuxedo Avenue with all streets within the city limits except where traffic signals, four-way stop signs, or yield signs are installed. 
Vanderhoeven Drive and East Edgewood Place. 
Westover Road with Morton Avenue. 
(2)  At the following intersections, four-way stop signs will be installed: 
Abiso Avenue with Arbutus Street. 
Abiso Avenue with Greely Street. 
Albany Street with Ashcroft Avenue. 
Alta Avenue with Arbutus Street. 
Alta Avenue with Columbine Street. 
Argo Avenue with Arbutus Street. 
Argo Avenue with Greely Street. 
Argo Avenue with Imlay Street. 
Castano Avenue with Nacogdoches Road. 
Castano Avenue with Woodway Lane. 
Ciruela Street with Cardinal Avenue. 
Ciruela Street with College Boulevard. 
Claywell Drive with Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Cloverleaf Avenue with Wintergreen Drive and Buttercup Drive. 
Columbine Street with Argo Avenue. 
Columbine Street with Evans Avenue. 
Columbine Street with West Fair Oaks Place. 
Corona Avenue with Arbutus Street and Imlay Street. 
Corona Avenue with Columbine Street. 
East Edgewood Place with Vanderhoeven Drive. 
East Fairoaks Place with Vanderhoeven Drive. 
East Oakview Place with Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Grandview Place with Cleveland Court. 
Grove Place with Cleveland Court. 
Harrison Avenue with Claiborne Way. 
Harrison Avenue with Acacia Street. 
Harrison Avenue with Morse Street. 
Imlay Street with Normandy Avenue. 
Inslee Avenue with Columbine Street. 
Kennedy Avenue with Mayflower Avenue. 
Lamont Avenue with Nacogdoches Road. 
Montclair Avenue with Ashcroft Avenue. 
Ogden Lane and Greely Street. 
Ogden Lane with Imlay Street and Acacia Street. 
Ogden Lane with Morse Street and Arbutus. 
Redwood Street wtih Kokomo Street. 
Rosemary Avenue with Wintergreen Drive and Buttercup Drive. 
St. Dennis Avenue with Joliet Avenue. 
Townsend Avenue with Ogden Lane. 
Tuxedo Avenue with Nacogdoches Road. 
Vanderhoeven Drive with East Elmview Place. 
Viesca with Greely Street. 
Wildrose Avenue with Wintergreen Drive and Buttercup Drive. 
(3)  At the following intersections stop signs will be installed as indicated: 
Argo Avenue and Alamo Heights Blvd., northeast corner. 
Argo Avenue and Ogden Lane, southeast and southwest corners. 
Blue Bonnet Boulevard and Kokomo Street, southwest, southeast and northeast corners. 
Cambridge Oval and Joliet Avenue, southwest corner. 
Cambridge Oval and Morse Street, northeast, northwest corners. 
Claiborne Way and Greely Street, northeast corner. 
Harrison Avenue and Crescent Avenue, southeast corner. 
Primrose Place and Wintergreen Drive, southwest, southeast and northeast corners. 
Tuxedo Avenue with Forestshire Street, northeast, northwest and southwest corners. 
West Castano Avenue and Ciruela Street, southwest, southeast and northeast corners. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. B); Ord. No. 1217, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 1280, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 1283, 7-13-92; Ord. No. 1288, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 1308, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 1312, 9-27-93; Ord. No. 1326, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1344, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 1351, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 1356, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1358, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 1361, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 1364, 10-9-95; Ord. No. 1411, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 1414, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 1419, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 1431, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 1443, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 1448, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 1454, 5-22-00; Ord. No. 1461, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 1464, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 1467, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 1471, 11-13-00; Ord. No. 1474, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 1494, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 1520, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 1532, 8-11-03; Ord. No. 1538, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 1565, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 1583, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 1604, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 1629, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 1670, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 1728, 8-27-07; Ord. No. 1775, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 1781, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 1804, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 1970, 5-28-13; Ord. No. 2045 , 3-14-16; Ord. No. 2102 , 6-11-18; Ord. No. 2104 , 7-23-18; Ord. No. 2141 , § 2, 9-23-19; Ord. No. 2150 , § 2, 1-13-20)  
Sec. 18-148. - Schedule C—Yield Signs. 
Under the provisions of section 18-32, at the following intersections, yield signs will be installed so that on the first named street traffic will have the right-of-way; and on the second named street, traffic will yield: 
Alamo Heights Boulevard, west leg with the northeast leg of Alamo Heights Boulevard. 
Albany Street with Kokomo Street southwest curve. 
Austin Highway with Kokomo Street. 
Broadway with the right turn lane of Patterson Avenue. 
Olmos Drive with turn-out lane of Crescent Street. 
(Code 1962, § 20-192(Sch. C); Ord. No. 1308, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 1583, 3-14-05)  
Sec. 18-149. - Schedule D—Prohibited U-Turns. 
Under the provisions of section 18-31, signs prohibiting U-turns will be installed at the following intersections: 
Broadway with Austin Highway. 
Broadway with Barilla Place. 
Broadway with Circle Street. 
Broadway with Kennedy Avenue and Arcadia Place. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. D); Ord. No. 1302, 5-24-93)  
Sec. 18-150. - Schedule E—School Zones. 
The following streets and portions of streets are designated as school zones pursuant to section 18-76 for those times designated in this section: 
School days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.: 
Alta Avenue between St. Luke's Lane and Ciruela Street. 
Barilla Place between North New Braunfels Avenue and Cleveland Court. 
Cardinal Avenue between St. Luke's Lane and Ciruela Street. 
Ciruela Street between Corona Avenue and College Boulevard. 
Cleveland Court between Barilla Place and Grove Place. 
Corona Avenue between St. Luke's Lane and Ciruela Street. 
Corona Avenue between St. Luke's Lane and Jones-Maltsberger Road. 
Grove Place south side from the east line of Broadway Avenue easterly for a distance of three hundred fifty-nine (359) feet. 
Jones-Maltsberger Road between Olmos Creek northwest of Corona Avenue and a point one hundred twenty (120) feet south of Corona Avenue. 
Marcia Place between North New Braunfels Avenue and Cleveland Court. 
St. Luke's Lane between Cardinal Avenue and Jones Maltsberger Road. 
School days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.: 
Abiso Avenue between Columbine Street and Townsend Avenue. 
Broadway between Elmview Place and Primrose Place. 
Broadway between Montclair Avenue and Willim Street. 
Cambridge Oval, around the northeast curve, from Bronson Avenue to Morse Street. 
East Castano Avenue between Broadway and a point three hundred (300) feet east of Vanderhoeven Drive. 
East Fair Oaks Drive between Broadway and a point three hundred (300) feet east of Vanderhoeven Drive. 
East Elmview between Broadway and Vanderhoeven. 
East Fairoaks Place between Broadway and North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Halcyon Place between Vanderhoeven Drive and a point three hundred (300) feet east of Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Harrison Avenue between Townsend Avenue and Morse Street. 
Joliet Street from Cambridge Oval southeast for a distance of three hundred (300) feet. 
Ogden Lane between Broadway and a point two hundred fifty (250) feet west of Columbine Street. 
Retama Place between Vanderhoeven Drive and a point three hundred (300) feet east of Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Townsend Avenue between Cambridge Oval and Argo Avenue. 
Vanderhoeven Drive between Elmview Place and Castano Avenue. 
Willim Street. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. E); Ord. No. 1265, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1326, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1427, 1-11-99; Ord. No. 1516A, 10-28-02; Ord. No. 1604, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 1616, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 1874, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 1986, 3-10-14; Ord. No. 2054 , 7-25-16)  
Sec. 18-151. - Schedule F—One-Way Streets. 
Under the provisions of section 18-33, the following streets are designated as one-way streets for the times indicated: 
At all times 
Ausway Street, one-way going east to west. 
Corona Avenue, one-way going west between St. Luke's Lane and Jones Maltsberger Road. 
East Fair Oaks Place, one-way going east to west between Broadway and Vanderhoeven Drive. 
St. Luke's Lane, one-way going north between Jones Maltsberger Road and Corona Avenue. 
On school days only 
Cambridge Oval, one-way going north, northwest and west from Willim Street to Morse Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Cleveland Court, one-way going south from Arcadia Place to Grove Place, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Townsend Avenue, one-way going north from Cambridge Oval to Argo Avenue, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. F); Ord. No. 1319, 11-22-93; Ord. No. 1419, 10-26-98; Ord. No. 1533, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 1545, 4-26-04; Ord. No. 1862, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2137 , § 2, 7-8-19)  
Sec. 18-152. - Schedule G—Parking Prohibited or Limited on Certain Streets. 
Under the provisions of section 18-99, parking shall be restricted on the following designated streets for the indicated time period: 
At all times 
Alamo Heights Boulevard, north side, from the intersection with Jones Maltsberger in an easterly direction for a distance of five hundred sixty-six (566) feet. 
Alamo Heights Boulevard, west side, from the intersection with La Jara Boulevard in a southerly direction to the intersection with the west leg of Alamo Heights Boulevard. 
Arcadia, north side, from the intersection with Broadway easterly for a distance of three hundred fifty (350) feet. 
Argyle Avenue, south side, from the intersection of Torcido Drive in a westerly direction to the end of such street. 
Austin Highway between Broadway and New Braunfels Avenue on both sides thereof. 
Broadway, east side, between East Castano Avenue and East Fairoaks Place. 
Broadway, east side from a point on a line with the south side of Broadway Theater Building north to Elizabeth Road. 
Broadway, east side, from the north side of the alley which is located between Burr Road and Katherine Court to the south side of the alley located between Harrigan Court and Terrell Road. 
Broadway, east side, in a northwesterly direction one hundred forty-four (144) feet from a point twenty-six (26) feet north of the intersection of Broadway and the north line of the east-west alley in Block 77, County Block 4050, and then in an easterly direction along the south line of Albany Street one hundred eight (108) feet to a point where the northern prolongation of the east property line of Lot 2, Block 77, County Block 4050, intersects the south side of Albany Street. 
Broadway, south side of the alley between the 5800 block and the 100 block of Fenimore. 
Broadway, west side, between Patterson Avenue and Katherine Court. 
Broadway, west side, between West Castano Avenue and a point midway in the block between West Elmview Place and West Edgewood Place. 
Broadway, west side, from the intersection of Alta and Broadway south for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet. 
Broadway, west side, from the intersection of Corona Avenue north for a distance of one hundred sixty-five (165) feet. 
Broadway adjacent to 4902 Broadway, the two (2) most northerly head-in parking spaces on the east side. 
East Castano Avenue, north side, between Vanderhoeven Drive and North New Braunfels. 
Elizabeth Road, north side, from the intersection of Elizabeth Road and Broadway easterly for a distance of eighty-six (86) feet. 
Elizabeth Road on the south side thereof from the east line of Broadway east for a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
Grove Place, south side, from the east line of Broadway Avenue easterly for a distance of one hundred sixty-one (161) feet. 
Harrigan Court, south side, from its intersection with Broadway in an easterly direction for a distance of two hundred eighteen (218) feet. 
Harrigan Court, north side, from its intersection with Broadway in an easterly direction for a distance of two hundred ninety three (293) feet. 
Joliet Avenue, south side, between Broadway Street and Mayflower Street. 
Joliet Avenue, north side, from Broadway Street westward for a distance of fifty (50) feet. 
Jones Maltsberger Road, east side, between Alamo Heights Blvd. and a point on the east side of Jones Maltsberger Road 880 feet north of Alamo Heights Blvd. 
Kennedy Avenue, north side, from Broadway to a point on the north side of Kennedy Avenue two hundred forty (240) feet from Broadway measured along the north and northwest line of Kennedy Avenue. 
Patterson Avenue, south side, between Broadway and Encino Avenue. 
Patterson Avenue, north side, commencing at a point which is sixty (60) feet west of the intersection of Patterson Avenue and Encino Avenue westward to Lagos Parkway. 
Primrose Place, north side, between Broadway and a point on the north side of Primrose Place three hundred twenty (320) feet east of Broadway. 
Primrose Place, north side, from a point on the west line of North New Braunfels Avenue to a point on the north side of Primrose Place one hundred sixty (160) feet from the North New Braunfels Avenue measured along the north line of Primrose Place. 
Terrell Road on the north side thereof from the east line of Broadway east for a distance of three hundred eighty-eight (388) feet. 
West Castano Avenue, across the width of the street at the dead end, and along the north curb from the dead end easterly for a distance of sixty (60) feet. 
No longer than 30 minutes, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday: 
Grove Place, south side, between a point six and one-half (6½) feet of the property line on the east side of Broadway and a point forty-two (42) feet east thereof. 
Hubbard, south side, from the intersection with Broadway westerly for a distance of two hundred twenty (220) feet. 
No longer than 1 hour, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday: 
Grove Place, south side, beginning one hundred ninety-five (195) feet from the east line of Broadway Avenue and continuing for a distance of one hundred fifteen (115) feet. 
No longer than 2 hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday: 
Arcadia Place, south side, between a point fifty-seven (57) feet east of Broadway to a point one hundred fifty-seven (157) feet east of Broadway. 
Broadway, east and west sides, between Burr Road and Austin Highway. 
Encino Avenue, east and west sides, between Patterson Avenue and Mary "D" Avenue. 
Mary "D" Avenue, north side, between the west line of Broadway and a point on the north line of Mary "D" Avenue one hundred fifty three (153) feet west of the west line of Broadway. 
Patterson Avenue, north side, between Broadway and Encino Avenue. 
Patterson Avenue, south side, from the Encino Avenue intersection westward to the east end of the drainage channel guardrail. 
Patterson Avenue, north side, from Encino Avenue westward sixty (60) feet. 
West Fairoaks, north and south sides, in the 100 block. 
Prohibited from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on any school day: 
Cambridge Oval, north side, from the southeast corner of the school property, on Cambridge Oval, in a northerly and westerly direction to the east line of Townsend Avenue. 
Townsend Avenue, east side, from the north line of Cambridge Oval to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of the southeast corner of the intersection of Townsend Avenue and Ogden Lane. 
Prohibited from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any school day: 
Cleveland Court, east or southeast side, being the side nearest St. Peter's School and St. Peter's Catholic Church from the north line of Barilla Place to the south line of Marcia Place. 
Marcia Place, south side, beginning at a point one hundred thirty (130) feet east of the curbline of Cleveland Court and continuing for a distance of seventy-two (72) feet east of such point. 
Permit parking only on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
East Elmview Place, north and south sides, in the 100 and 200 blocks. 
East Fairoaks Place, north and south sides, in the 200 block. 
Halcyon Place, north and south sides, in the west one-half (½) of the 200 block. 
Primrose Place, north and south sides, between Broadway and Wintergreen. 
Retama Place, north and south sides, in the west one-half (½) of the 200 block. 
Permits for temporary parking on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. shall be issued by the Alamo Heights Police Department to residents on the streets listed above for on-street parking for the affected residents and their invitees to display. Official vehicles shall be exempt from the requirement to display permits. The parking restrictions adopted herein in the 100 and 200 blocks of East Elmview Place, 200 block of East Fairoaks Place, 200 block of Retama Place and the 200 block of Halcyon Place shall be enforced as authorized in section 18-99 and sections 18-126 through 18-130 of this chapter. 
No longer than 2 hours, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., on any school day: 
Columbine Street, east and west sides, between its intersection with Tuxedo Avenue and West Elmview Place. 
Harrigan Court, south side, from a point two hundred eighteen (218) feet east of the intersection with Broadway in an easterly direction ending at the intersection with North New Braunfels, and north side from a point two hundred ninety-three (293) feet east of the intersection with Broadway in an easterly direction ending at the intersection with North New Braunfels. 
Tuxedo Avenue, south side, from a point four hundred sixty-six (466) feet west of the intersection with Broadway, and north side, from a point three hundred forty-seven (347) feet west of the intersection with Broadway, both continuing in a westerly direction to a point nine hundred forty (940) feet west of the intersection of Broadway. 
West Elmview Place, north and south sides in the 100 block. 
West Elmview Place, north and south sides, between its intersection with Columbine Street and Nacogdoches Road. 
West Fair Oaks Place, north and south sides, between its intersection with Columbine Street and Nacogdoches Road. 
Handicapped parking locations: 
Barilla Place, parallel parking spaces on the north side of the 100 block of Barilla Place beginning at a point one hundred sixty (160) feet east of the intersection of Barilla Place and Cleveland Court and continuing easterly a distance of eighty-four (84) feet. 
Broadway adjacent to 4902 Broadway, most northerly head-in parking space on the east side. 
Broadway adjacent to 5150 Broadway, the head-in parking space on the south side of the alley on the east side. 
Prohibited from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday—Friday: 
Joliet Avenue, north side, from Mayflower Street eastward for a distance of two hundred twenty-five (225) feet. 
Prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday—Friday: 
Burr Road, north side, between Broadway and North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Permit parking only from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday—Friday: 
Katherine Court, north and south sides, between Broadway and North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Permit parking only on weekdays between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Burr Road, north side, between Broadway and North New Braunfels Avenue. 
Permit parking only on school days from 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Ogden Lane, north side, from a point one hundred thirty-six (136) feet from the east line of Townsend Avenue in an easterly direction for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. G); Ord. No. 1223, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 1231, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 1253, 4-17-91; Ord. No. 1265, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1310, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 1351, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 1353, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 1373, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 1413, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 1416, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 1421, 2-22-98; Ord. No. 1430, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 1448, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 1520, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 1567, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 1612, 2-27-06; Ord. No. 1777, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 1839, 8-24-09; Ord. No. 1846, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 1935, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 1936, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 1940, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 1950, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 1951, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2043 , 2-22-16; Ord. No. 2052 , 5-23-16; Ord. No. 2053 , 7-25-16; Ord. No. 2123 , 3-11-19)  
Sec. 18-153. - Schedule H—Angle Parking. 
Under the provisions of section 18-100, angle parking shall be permitted as set out below: 
(1)  Ninety-degree angle parking will be permitted on: 
Blue Bonnet Boulevard, south side, between Broadway and Henderson Street where ninety (90) feet of the curb has been set back twenty-five (25) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between Blue Bonnet Boulevard and Albany Street, where fifty (50) feet of curb has been set back twenty-five (25) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, beginning at a point three hundred fifty-five (355) feet north of the north curbline of Ogden Lane and extending ninety (90) feet north where ninety (90) feet of curb has been set back a distance of eighteen (18) feet from the curbline. 
East Castano Avenue, south side, between Broadway and Vanderhoeven Drive, provided, however, that no such parking will be permitted between the east curbline of Broadway and a point three hundred thirty (330) feet east of same. 
East Fairoaks Place, south side of the 100 block. 
Mary "D" Avenue, south side, just west of Broadway where fifty-four (54) feet of curb has been set back a distance of forty (40) feet from the curbline. 
Mary "D" Avenue, north side, from a point fourteen (14) feet west of Broadway to a point seventy (70) feet west thereof, where seventy (70) feet of curb has been set back fourteen (14) feet from the street curbline. Ten (10) feet of curb just west of Broadway has been cut back which is immediately adjacent to a fire hydrant and all parking in this ten (10) feet is prohibited. 
Broadway, east side, between Montclair Avenue and Circle Street where one hundred ten (110) feet of curb has been set back thirty (30) feet from the curbline. 
Ogden Lane, north side, just west of Broadway where one hundred thirty-five (135) feet of curb has been set back twelve (12) feet from the curbline. 
(2)  Sixty-degree angle parking will be permitted on: 
Broadway, west side, between Alta Avenue and Inslee Avenue from a point ten (10) feet north of the north curbline of Alta Avenue to a point sixty (60) feet north of the curbline where fifty (50) feet of curb has been set back a distance of six (6) feet from the curbline from a point sixty (60) feet north of the north curbline of Alta Avenue to a point one hundred ten (110) feet north of the curbline where fifty (50) feet of curb has been set back a distance of eight (8) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, between Mary "D" Avenue and Poco Street from a point twenty (20) feet north of the north curbline of Mary "D" Avenue to a point one hundred thirty-four (134) feet north of the curbline, where one hundred fourteen (114) feet of curb has been set back fourteen (14) feet from the curbline; and from a point two hundred thirty-four (234) feet north of the north curbline of Mary "D" Avenue to a point two hundred eighty-four (284) feet north of same where fifty (50) feet of curb has been set back fourteen (14) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, between Ogden Lane and Albany Street where two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of curb extending two hundred forty-five (245) feet north from the north curbline of Ogden Lane has been set back six (6) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, beginning at a point four hundred ninety-five (495) feet north of the north curbline of Ogden Lane and extending forty (40) feet north where forty (40) feet of curb has been set back eight (8) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, between Poco Street and Hubbard Avenue on Sundays only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.; provided, however, that no parking whatever be permitted between the north curbline of Poco Street and a point fifteen (15) feet north thereof or between the south curbline of Hubbard Avenue and a point twenty-five (25) feet south thereof. 
Broadway, east side, between the alley south of Katherine Court and Burr Road where one hundred twenty (120) feet of curb has been set back twenty-two (22) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, between Patterson Avenue and Mary "D" Avenue where one hundred eighty (180) feet of curb has been set back a distance varying from twenty (20) feet to fifty (50) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between East Castano and Primrose Place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays only; provided, however, that no parking whatever be permitted between south curbline of East Castano Avenue and a point fifteen (15) feet south of same or between the north curbline of Primrose Place and a point thirty (30) feet north of same. 
Broadway, east side, between Cichester Place and Grandview Place where seventy-five (75) feet of curb has been set back a distance of twelve (12) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between the alley south of Grove Place and the driveway into the Post Office where sixty-five (65) feet of curb has been set back eleven (11) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between the driveway to the Post Office and Barilla Place where two hundred seventy-five (275) feet of curb has been set back a distance of sixteen (16) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between Barilla Place and Elizabeth Place where two hundred forty (240) feet of curb has been set back fifteen (15) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between Elizabeth Place and Terrell Road where sixty (60) feet of curb has been set back ten (10) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, east side, between Grandview Place and Arcadia Place where seventy-five (75) feet of curb has been set back a distance of eighteen (18) feet from the curbline. 
East Castana Avenue, north side of the 100 block, between Broadway and Vanderhoeven Drive. 
Vanderhoeven Drive, 100 block on the west side, between East Castano and East Fairoaks Place. 
Vanderhoeven Drive, between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, west side, between East Castano Avenue and East Fairoaks, Place, provided, however that no parking whatever be permitted between the north curbline of East Castano and a point fifteen (15) feet north of same or between the south curbline of East Fairoaks Place and a point thirty (30) feet south of same. 
(3)  Forty-five degree angle parking will be permitted on: 
Broadway, east side, between Grove Place and the alley south of Grove Place where one hundred forty (140) feet of curb has been set back a distance of fifteen (15) feet from the curbline. 
Broadway, west side, between Hubbard Avenue and Kennedy Avenue where saw-tooth parking curb has been provided for parking twenty-six (26) vehicles. 
Broadway, west side, between Kennedy Avenue and Joliet Avenue where one hundred ninety-five (195) feet of curb has been set back a distance of eighteen (18) feet from the street curbline. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. H); Ord. No. 1270, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 1416, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 18-154. - Schedule I—Loading Zones. 
Under the provisions of section 18-104, the following areas are designated as loading zones: 
Elizabeth Road, north side, commencing at a distance eighty-six (86) feet east of the intersection of Elizabeth Road and Broadway extending in an easterly direction twenty-four (24) feet. 
Grove Place, north side, commencing two hundred fifty-five (255) feet west of the west line of Cleveland Court and extending forty-five (45) feet west on the north side of Grove Place. 
Hubbard Street, north side, commencing at a point ninety-three (93) feet west of the west line of Broadway and extending thirty-five (35) feet west thereof. 
Ogden Lane, north side, commencing at a point approximately one hundred forty (140) feet westerly of the curb line of Broadway Street measured along the curb line of Ogden Lane, and extending to a point twenty-seven (27) feet westerly there from. 
Vanderhoeven Drive, west side, commencing at a point four hundred seventeen (417) feet north of the north line of East Castano Avenue and extending to a point sixty-four (64) feet north therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. I); Ord. No. 1650, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 1950, 10-22-12)  
Sec. 18-155. - Schedule J—Through Truck Traffic Prohibited. 
Under the provisions of section 18-35, through truck traffic is prohibited on the following streets: 
Claywell. 
Nacogdoches Road. 
Patterson Avenue. 
Tuxedo Avenue. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. J); Ord. No. 1328, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 1448, 12-13-99)  
Sec. 18-156. - Schedule K—No Passing Zones. 
Under the provisions of state law, the following streets are designated as no passing zones: 
Alamo Heights Boulevard between Tuxedo Avenue and Corona Avenue. 
Tuxedo Avenue between Nacogdoches Road and Jones Maltsberger Road. 
(Code 1965, § 20-192(Sch. K))  
Sec. 18-157. - Schedule L—Fire Lanes. 
Under the provisions of the National Fire Code adopted in section 6-26 of this Code, the following areas are designated as fire lanes: 
Alta and St. Lukes Lane intersection on the north side of the St. Lukes church driveway, along the north curbline of the driveway for three hundred twenty-four (324) feet in a westerly direction at a width of twelve (12) feet projected to the south of the north side curbline. 
Argyle Avenue, north side, between Patterson Avenue and the west end of Argyle Avenue. 
Bluebonnet Boulevard, south side, thirty-seven (37) feet in an easterly direction from a point which is ninety-three (93) feet east of the imaginary intersection of the south curbline of Bluebonnet Boulevard and an extension of the east curbline of Broadway. This fire lane includes the marked entrance ramp that begins on the above described line extending southerly ninety-nine (99) feet to the north side of the fire station bay door. 
Broadway, along the north side of the city hall building on the south side of the alley that runs between the city hall building and the Alamo Heights fire station for a distance of one hundred forty (140) feet in an easterly direction from the east curbline of Broadway at a width of fifteen (15) feet in a northerly direction from the above described line. 
Broadway, on the marked concrete ramp extending six (6) feet from the south side of the Alamo Heights fire station bay door at a width of twenty-seven (27) feet. 
Broadway, east side, from the north side of the alley, which is located between the city hall building and the Alamo Heights fire station, northerly for a distance of forty-nine (49) feet. This fire lane includes the marked concrete ramp that begins on the above described line and extends easterly eighteen (18) feet to the west side fire station bay door. 
Broadway, number 4821, on the entire curbline of the east entrance of H.E.B. for a length of one hundred ninety-five (195) feet in a north-south direction at a width of twenty (20) feet in an easterly direction from the curbline. 
Cambridge Oval, north side, commencing at a distance one hundred thirty-seven (137) feet west of the northwest corner of Willim Avenue and Cambridge Oval and extending west for a distance of one hundred thirty (130) feet. 
Ogden Lane, south side, from the southeast corner of Ogden Lane and Townsend Avenue to a point one hundred forty-two (142) feet east thereof. 
St. Lukes Lane, number 11, on the curbline of the east-west covered walkway along the north side of the St. Lukes church building, directly in front of the north chapel entrance for a length of one hundred forty-one (141) feet in an east-west direction and a width of fifteen (15) feet in a northerly direction from the curbline. 
Townsend Avenue, east side, from the southeast corner of Townsend Avenue and Ogden Lane to a point one hundred three (103) feet south thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1773, 6-9-08; Ord. No. 1950, 10-22-12)  
Secs. 18-158—18-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, AND BICYCLES EQUIPPED WITH GPS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1669, adopted July 31, 2006, renumbered Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 18-161, which pertained to use the public streets and rights-of-way for parades, races, runs, walks and other organized activities in the city. The user's attention is directed to Ch. 10, Art. VII, § 10-101.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2122 , §§ 1—8, adopted Feb. 25, 2019, enacted provisions but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. VII, §§ 18-161—18-169, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 18-161. - Definitions and exclusions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Motor-assisted scooter means a self-propelled device, not including a pocket bike or mini-motorbike, with: 
a.  At least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation; 
b.  A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
c.  A gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic centimeters; 
d.  A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and 
e.  The ability to be propelled by human power alone. 
(2)  Motor-assisted scooter with GPS has the same meaning as [subsection] (a)(2) of this section that is available for use for a fee. 
(3)  Bicycle equipped with GPS means a device that a person may ride and that is propelled by human power and has two (2) tandem wheels at least one (1) of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter, which has a global positioning system (GPS) to determine the geographic location of the bicycle. 
(4)  Dockless vehicle means a bicycle equipped with GPS, an electric bicycle, or a motor assisted scooter equipment with GPS that is available for use for a fee. 
(5)  Electric bicycle means a bicycle that: 
a.  Is designed to be propelled by an electric motor, exclusively or in combination with the application of human power; 
b.  Cannot attain a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour without the application of human power; and 
c.  Does not exceed a weight of one hundred (100) pounds. 
(6)  Permit agreement means the written agreement between the city and a person for an operating permit which authorizes the operation of a service providing dockless vehicles equipped with GPS for compensation. 
(7)  Permit holder means the person who owns the operation if a sole proprietorship, or the person providing dockless vehicles with GPS for compensation. 
(8)  Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, company, association or other legal entity. 
(9)  Fleet manager means the person responsible for the daily operations of a dockless vehicle with GPS service, who must be based in Bexar County, Texas. 
(10)  City means the City of Alamo Heights, Texas. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a moped or motorcycle; a motorized mobility device (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.009); an electric personal assistive mobility device (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.201; or a neighborhood electric vehicle (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.301). 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 1, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-162. - Dockless vehicle for hire permit agreements. 
(a)  The city will only issue an aggregate total of seventy-five (75) total permits for motor assisted scooters with GPS and bicycles equipped with GPS (dockless vehicles) which are made available by to the public by permit holders for a fee. 
(b)  A person must register and obtain a permit agreement from the City of Alamo Heights, and pay any applicable fees, prior to providing a dockless vehicle for any compensation, including but not limited to any money, thing of value, payment, consideration, donation, gratuity or profit. 
(c)  To obtain a permit agreement, a person must submit an application to the office of the chief of police on a form provided by the police chief for that purpose. The application must contain the following, including any additional information and requirements established by the police chief: 
(1)  The business name, street address, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A non-refundable business permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(3)  A non-refundable permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each dockless vehicle which are to be operated within the city limits of the City of Alamo Heights; 
(4)  The name, phone number and email address of the fleet manager. Any change in this information must be reported to the police chief's representative within twenty-four (24) hours of the change; 
(5)  A phone number for the public to report improperly parked vehicles and other violations, which must be posted on each dockless vehicle; 
(6)  The address of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation, if any, and the address of the applicant's headquarters, if different from the address of the fixed facilities; 
(7)  Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating that such insurance company has bound itself to provide the applicant with the liability insurance required by this article; 
(8)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on property within the city, if any, to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed dockless vehicle program; 
(9)  Documentary evidence from a bonding or insurance company or a bank indicating that the bonding or insurance company or bank has bound itself to provide the applicant with the performance or irrevocable letter of credit required by this article; 
(10)  The number and the types of dockless vehicles to be operated; and 
(11)  An agreement to indemnify the city. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4), an applicant or registrant shall notify the police chief, in the manner prescribed by the police chief, within ten (10) days of any change in the information contained in the application for permit agreement. If the information reported to the police chief includes an increase in the number of dockless vehicles for any single company, any additional fees due must be submitted to the police chief simultaneously with the change in information. 
(e)  A permit agreement expires one (1) year from the date it is issued. An applicant may renew a permit agreement following the process in this section. Notwithstanding the one-year permit term, the city reserves the right and prerogative to cancel or amend permit terms and fees at will as the city determines to be in the public interest based upon factors such as traffic load, permit holder needs, safety concerns and other factors selected by the city. 
(f)  A permit agreement is non-transferrable. This regulation should not be construed to impede the continuing use of trade names. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 2, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-163. - Issuance, renewal, suspension, termination and revocation of permit agreements. 
(a)  The police chief shall refuse to issue or renew a permit agreement if the applicant: 
(1)  Does not meet the requirements in the permit application, including failing to meet any requirements established by the police chief or his designee; 
(2)  Intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement as to a material matter in an application for a permit agreement; or 
(3)  Has been convicted twice within a twelve-month period for a violation of this article, or has had a permit agreement revoked within two (2) years of the date of application. 
(b)  If the police chief determines that a permit agreement should be denied, the police chief shall notify the applicant or operator in writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the specific reason or reasons for denial and a statement informing the applicant or operator of the right to, and the process for, appeal of the decision. 
(c)  The police chief shall revoke a permit agreement if the police chief or his designee determines that the permit holder has: 
(1)  Made a false statement as to a material matter in the application concerning the operating authority permit; 
(2)  Failed to maintain the insurance required by this article; 
(3)  Operated dockless vehicles in excess of the number authorized by the permit agreement; or 
(4)  Failed to pay a fee required by this article. 
(d)  After revocation of an operating authority permit, an operator is not eligible for another permit for a period of up to two (2) years, depending on the severity of the violation resulting in the revocation. 
(e)  Any person whose application for a permit agreement, or renewal of a permit agreement, is denied by the police chief, or an operator whose permit agreement has been revoked or suspended by the police chief, may file an appeal with the police chief, who shall forward the notice of appeal to the city manager or the city manager's designee: 
(1)  A hearing on the matter will be conducted within thirty (30) days of the request for the hearing unless one (1) of the parties requests a continuance for good cause. 
(2)  Every person who appeals shall have the right to appear in person or through an attorney. 
(3)  The city manager or designee shall render a decision within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(4)  The city manager or designee shall have the sole authority for upholding or overruling the action of the police chief, which was appealed. 
(5)  The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(f)  The city, for good cause, may terminate a permit agreement at any time and require that all dockless vehicles permitted under an agreement be removed from city streets and its rights-of-way within ten (10) calendar days. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 3, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-164. - Insurance. 
(a)  A permit holder shall procure and keep in full force and effect no less than the insurance coverage required by this section through a policy or policies written by insurance company that: 
(1)  Is authorized to do business in the State of Texas; 
(2)  Is acceptable to the city; and 
(3)  Does not violate the ownership or operational control prohibition described in this section. 
(b)  The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a dockless vehicle. 
(c)  A permit holder shall maintain the following insurance coverages: 
(1)  The commercial general liability insurance must provide single limits of liability for bodily injury (including death) and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence, with a two-million-dollar annual aggregate. 
(2)  If a permit holder will utilize motor vehicles in its operations, the business automotive liability insurance must cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles, with a combined single limit for bodily injury (including death) and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(3)  Worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits. 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with the following minimum limits for bodily injury by: 
a.  Accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per each accident; and 
b.  Disease, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per employee with a per policy aggregate of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(d)  Insurance required under this article must: 
(1)  Include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the police chief in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before cancelling the insurance policy (for a reason other than non-payment) or before making a reduction in coverage; 
(2)  Include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the police chief in writing not fewer than ten (10) days before cancelling for nonpayment; 
(3)  Cover all dockless vehicles during the times that the vehicles are deployed or operating in furtherance of the permit holder's business; 
(4)  Include a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every covered claim on a first-dollar basis; 
(5)  Require notice to the police chief if the policy is cancelled or if there is a reduction in coverage; and 
(6)  Comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(e)  No person who has a twenty-percent or greater ownership interest in the permit holder may have an interest in the insurance company. 
(f)  A permit holder may not be self-insured. 
(g)  Any insurance policy required by this article must be on file with and approved by the city prior to the issuance of a permit agreement, must remain in effect during the term of the permit agreement. 
(h)  In addition to the foregoing insurance requirements, if a permit holder contracts with a person or entity located in the city to assist in the operation of the permit holder's business, including juicers, such contracted person or entity shall provide commercial liability insurance with the city named as an additional insured in the minimum amount one thousand dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 4, 2-25-19; Ord. No. 2132 , § 1, 6-10-19)  
Sec. 18-165. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Permit holder covenants and agrees to fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless, the city and the elected officials, employees, officers, volunteers and representatives of the city, individually and collectively, from and against any and all costs, claims, liens, damages, losses, expenses, fees, fines, penalties, proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including but not limited to, personal or bodily injury, death and property damage (collectively "claims"), made upon the city directly or indirectly arising out of, resulting from or related to permit holder's operations in the city, including any act attributable to any agent, officer, city, representative, employee, consultant or subcontractor of permit holder, and their respective officers, agents employees, and representatives while in the exercise of the rights or performance of the duties under this contract. The indemnity provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence or intentional misconduct of city, its officers or employees. In the event permit holder and city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws for the State of Texas, without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under Texas law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under Texas law. 
(b)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the parties hereto and not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. The parties shall advise each other in writing within twenty-four (24) hours of any claim or demand against either party that it reasonably believes are covered by permit holder's indemnity obligations hereunder. The city shall have the right, at its option and at its own expense, to participate in such defense without relieving permit holder of any of its obligations under this paragraph. 
(c)  Defense counsel. Permit holder shall retain the right to select defense counsel in fulfilling its obligation hereunder to defend and indemnify city, unless city disapproves of such selection in which event city may designate a different defense counsel to be paid for by permit holder. City shall also have the right, at its option, to be represented by advisory counsel of its own selection and at its own expense. 
(d)  Employee litigation. In any and all claims against any party indemnified hereunder by permit holder, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, the indemnification obligation herein provided shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages, compensation or benefits payable by or for permit holder or any subcontractor under worker's compensation or other employee benefit acts. 
(e)  It is expressly understood and agreed that permit holder is and shall be deemed to be an independent contractor and shall be responsible to all parties for its respective acts or omissions and that city shall in no way be responsible therefor. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 5, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-166. - Dockless vehicle operations and parking or staging. 
(a)  Each dockless vehicle permitted under this article must display the emblem of the permit holder, a unique identification number, and a twenty-four-hour phone number for customers and citizens to report safety concerns, make complaints, ask questions, or request a dockless vehicle be relocated. 
(b)  The fleet manager, or a designated representative, shall be available by the phone number provided on the application, seven (7) days a week between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. to accept calls from the police chief or designee. 
(c)  Permit holders shall not attach any personal property (other than dockless vehicles), fixtures, or structures to the public right-of-way without the separate written permission of the police chief. Any permission to place items in the public right-of-way must be incorporated into the permit. 
(d)  Permit holders shall educate customers regarding the law applicable to riding, operating, and parking a dockless vehicle. A permit holder's application must provide information notifying the user that: 
(1)  The legal parking of the dockless vehicle; 
(2)  The use of helmets is encouraged for the safety of the drivers; 
(3)  Operation of dockless vehicles, including the duty to yield to pedestrians; and 
(4)  For motor-assisted scooters and electric bicycles, the areas where riding and parking are prohibited. 
(e)  Notices of violations or broken dockless vehicles: 
(1)  Permit holders shall have one (1) hour after receiving notice of a violation, from any source, to correct violations for a dockless vehicle being parked in an area prohibited under this article; for other violations, the permit holder has two (2) hours after receiving notice to correct the violation. 
(2)  Permit holders are required to lock dockless vehicles reported as broken, from any source, and must remove the dockless vehicle within two (2) hours. 
(f)  After the time for correcting a violation has expired, the city may remove and impound a dockless vehicle that is parked in violation of this article or broken at the city's designated vehicle impound location. The permit holder must pay all fees associated with the impound and storage of dockless vehicles at the rates of the impound facility. 
(g)  Parking of motor-assisted scooters equipped with GPS, electric bicycles and bicycles equipped with GPS: 
(1)  These vehicles may not be parked on streets, sidewalks or in rights-of-way, except in areas designated by the police chief or his designated representative or otherwise allowed by [subsection] (g)(2) or (g)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Motor-assisted scooters may be parked upright on sidewalks in a manner that does not impede the normal and reasonable pedestrian access on a sidewalk or in any manner that would reduce the minimum clear width of a sidewalk to less than three (3) feet, except as prohibited below in subsection (g)(3). 
(3)  Motor assisted scooters may not be parked at locations or in a manner prohibited in subsections (a)—(h): 
a.  In the area beginning at a bus stop flag pole, continuing back fifteen (15) feet in the direction from which busses arrive, for the full width of the sidewalk; 
b.  Anywhere on the historic trolley stop median located on the northwest corner of Broadway at the intersection with Patterson Avenue; 
c.  Within eight (8) feet of commercial or pedestrian loading zones, or disabled parking zones; 
d.  Within four (4) feet of street fixtures that require pedestrian access, including but not limited to benches; 
e.  Within eight (8) feet of curb ramps, entryways, and driveways; 
f.  Within eight (8) feet of a building entrance; 
g.  On any unpaved trails, creek ways, and parks, including but not limited to the Nature Trails, Hondondo Creek Trail ways, Community Garden, and Albert Earl Park; or 
h.  In a privately owned bicycle rack or on private property without authorization of the property owner. 
(4)  Electric bicycles and bicycles equipped with GPS may only be parked at a location designated by the chief of police. 
(h)  Each dockless vehicle permitted under this article may only be operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 6, 2-25-19; Ord. No. 2132 , § 2, 6-10-19)  
Sec. 18-167. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police chief and his designees shall enforce this article. 
(b)  Upon observing or confirming a report of a violation of this article, the police chief or his designees shall take necessary action to ensure effective regulation of dockless vehicles. 
(c)  The police chief or his designees may, with or without notice, inspect any dockless vehicle operating under this article to determine whether the dockless vehicle complies with this article and other applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 7, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-168. - Criminal offenses. 
(a)  The office of the chief of police shall enforce and administer this article and includes police officers, code compliance agents, or department employees designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, within the city, the person operates or causes or permits the operation of a dockless vehicle service without a valid permit agreement issued under this article. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person violates or attempts to violate a provision of this article. 
(d)  Violations of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 551, subchs. B and E as they relate to the operation of electric bicycles and motor-assisted scooters will be strictly enforced. 
(e)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs. 
(f)  Prosecution for an offense under this article does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person charged with the conduct or involved in the offense. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon adjudication or conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 7, 2-25-19)  
Sec. 18-169. - Inconsistent city Code provisions. 
This article controls over any previously enacted ordinance or provision of the city Code of Alamo Heights, Texas, to the extent there is any conflict. 
( Ord. No. 2122 , § 1, 2-25-19)  
Chapter 19 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; subdivisions, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Municipal utility systems, general powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Refusal to provide and termination of water service for violation of subdivision, building and zoning requirements. 
No water service shall be furnished to any property or structure in the city which is not in compliance with the subdivision requirements of chapter 17 of this Code, the building and certificate of occupancy requirements of chapter 5 of this Code, and the zoning and landscape requirements of the zoning code. If water service has previously been established to any property or structure which later fails to comply with the subdivision, building and zoning codes of the city, or fails to comply with any plat note on an approved plat, the city shall notify the owner or occupant of the property or structure that the water supply will be turned off ten (10) days from the date of the notice. If a city employee is sent in person to furnish such written notice, a fifteen dollar ($15.00) notification charge will be added to the water bill. If compliance is not achieved within the ten (10) day notice period, the water supply shall be turned off and an additional twenty dollar ($20.00) turn off charge shall be added to the bill. Once compliance is achieved, an additional twenty dollar ($20.00) turn on charge shall be added to the bill. 
(Ord. No. 1497, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 19-2. - Requirements. 
All customers shall be required to meet the regulatory provisions of this chapter within sixty (60) days of the initiation of a water account or the issuance of a building permit for construction with a total valuation of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 1, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 19-3. - Adoption of San Antonio Water System Construction and Material Specifications. 
The City of Alamo Heights hereby adopts by reference the most current Construction and Material Specifications developed and utilized by the San Antonio Water System (SAWS) for the installation or repair of any water and sewer facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2, 2-23-09)  
Secs. 19-4—19-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water systems in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., § 402.017. 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alamo Heights Water System shall mean and include all water wells, pumps, pump houses, water towers, distribution mains, laterals, valves, valve boxes, fire hydrants, meters, meter boxes and piping up to and including the water meters. Pipes, valves, fittings, equipment and appliances on the consumer's side of the water meter are not a part of the water system and the water department has no responsibility for maintaining them or any part of them. 
Water bill means any charge made by the city, made for water or services rendered to any person, and shall include any service charge or charges and any penalty or penalties assessed in connection with overdue accounts. 
(Code 1965, § 21-13)  
Sec. 19-27. - Deposit. 
(a)  A fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit shall be required from any property owner. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) deposit, refunded at move out, shall be required from any residential tenant who does not own the premises to which water is to be furnished. A one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) deposit shall be required from any restaurant consumer which does not own the premises to which the water is to be furnished. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit shall be required from any other business or commercial consumer who does not own the premises to which the water is to be furnished. 
(b)  Upon termination of water service to a consumer, the deposit shall be refunded if all water bills of the consumer have been paid. If the consumer discontinues water service with an unpaid water bill, the deposit shall be first applied to the unpaid water bill and the balance, if any, refunded to the consumer. 
(c)  Customers shall receive an early refund of their deposit, applied to the account as a credit payment, if they have paid twenty-four (24) consecutive bills with no disconnects or returned checks and no more than one penalty. 
(d)  Customers that have received an early refund of their deposit or would qualify for an early deposit refund, shall not be charged a deposit if they are opening a new account. 
(Code 1965, § 21-14; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 1812, § 3, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 19-28. - Service installation charge. 
On all new connections to the water system, the following service line installation charge, payable in advance of installation, will apply: 
Size of Service Line 	Charge 
5/8 ? meter 	$1,000.00 
¾? meter 	1,150.00 
1? meter 	1,250.00 
1½? meter 	1,350.00 
2? meter 	1,450.00 
3? meter and larger 	Time and materials 
 
If there is no water main immediately adjacent to the property where service is desired, there will be an additional charge, based on cost of time and material, to extend a water main to the property. 
(Code 1965, § 21-15; Ord. No. 1240, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 19-29. - Categories of users and water rates. 
(a)  Categories of users. 
(1)  Residential. Customers with a meter serving only a one-family or two-family residential dwelling. 
(2)  Multi-Family. Customers with a meter serving a structure that contains three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(3)  Commercial. Customers conducting retail, manufacturing and other business activities, including, but not limited to, restaurants, laundries, offices and stores. Includes hydrant meter consumption as described in section 19-37. 
(4)  Institutional. Customers that are churches, public and private schools and other facilities for training and educational purposes. 
(5)  Irrigation. Customers with a meter that is utilized solely for the irrigation of landscaping or other exterior uses. Irrigation meters shall be required for any irrigation systems providing coverage to more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of turf or other landscaping. 
(b)  The monthly charge for water service shall be determined by adding the base charge for meter size to the charge for water consumed. Water bills to customers, which may include other authorized charges for city services shall be rendered monthly. 
_____ 
(c)  The meter size charge shall be established as follows: 
Meter Size 	Monthly Charge 
Effective 
March 1, 2019 	Monthly Charge 
Effective 
March 1, 2020 	Monthly Charge 
Effective 
March 1, 2021 
5/8 " 	$  3.15 	$  3.31 	$  3.47 
¾" 	9.45 	9.92 	10.42 
1" 	15.75 	16.54 	17.36 
1½" 	39.38 	41.34 	43.41 
2" 	63.00 	66.15 	69.46 
3" 	157.50 	165.38 	173.64 
4" or greater 	236.25 	248.06 	260.47 
 
(d)  The water consumption charge shall be established as follows: 
Table 2 
Effective March 1, 2019 
Consumption in Cubic Feet (cf) 	Residential 
Rate per 100 cf 	Multi-family 
Rate per 100 cf 	Commercial 
Rate per 100 cf 	Institutional 
Rate per 100 cf 	Irrigation 
Rate per 100 cf 
500 or less 	$0.87 	$0.87 	$1.24 	$0.87 	$0.87 
501 to 1,000 cf 	1.19 	1.19 	1.55 	1.19 	1.19 
1,001 to 2,300 cf 	1.71 	1.71 	2.08 	1.71 	1.71 
2,301 or more 	2.90 	2.90 	3.27 	2.90 	2.90 
 
  
Effective July 1, 2020 
Consumption in Cubic Feet (cf) 	Residential 
Rate per 100 cf 	Multi-family 
Rate per 100 cf 	Commercial 
Rate per 100 cf 	Institutional 
Rate per 100 cf 	Irrigation 
Rate per 100 cf 
500 or less 	$0.92 	$0.92 	$1.30 	$0.92 	$0.92 
501 to 1,000 cf 	1.25 	1.25 	1.63 	1.25 	1.25 
1,001 to 2,300 cf 	1.80 	1.80 	2.18 	1.80 	1.80 
2,301 or more 	3.05 	3.05 	3.43 	3.05 	3.05 
 
  
Effective March 1, 2021 
Consumption in Cubic Feet (cf) 	Residential 
Rate per 100 cf 	Multi-family 
Rate per 100 cf 	Commercial 
Rate per 100 cf 	Institutional 
Rate per 100 cf 	Irrigation 
Rate per 100 cf 
500 or less 	$0.96 	$0.96 	$1.37 	$0.96 	$0.96 
501 to 1,000 cf 	1.31 	1.31 	1.71 	1.31 	1.31 
1,001 to 2,300 cf 	1.89 	1.89 	2.29 	1.89 	1.89 
2,301 or more 	3.20 	3.20 	3.61 	3.20 	3.20 
 
(Ord. No. 1683, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 1812, § 3, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 2113 , 10-22-18; Ord. No. 2157 , 4-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1683, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed the former § 19-29, and enacted a new § 19-29 as set out herein. The former § 19-29 pertained to water rates and derived from Code 1965, § 21-16; Ord. No. 1241, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 1287, adopted June 22, 1992; Ord. No. 1374, adopted May 20, 1996; Ord. No. 1536, adopted Sept. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 1558, adopted August 9, 2004; Ord. No. 1587, adopted July 12, 2005; Ord. No. 1660, adopted July 31, 2006.  
Sec. 19-30. - When bills are due and payable; late payment charge. 
(a)  All water bills are payable monthly to the city on or before the due date shown on the water bill. After the due date a ten (10) percent penalty will be added to the bill. 
(b)  If no penalty has been assessed to the account for the previous twelve (12) months, the penalty shall be waived. 
(Code 1965, § 21-17; Ord. No. 1812, § 4, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 19-31. - Termination of service. 
(a)  If any water bill is unpaid after the due date shown on the water bill, the city shall notify the consumer that the water supply shall be turned off ten (10) days from the date of the notice. If a city employee is sent in person to furnish such written notice to the consumers' premises, a fifteen dollar ($15.00) notification charge will be added to the water bill. If the water bill is not paid within the required time, the water supply shall be turned off, except in cases of bona fide emergency, and an additional twenty dollar ($20.00) turn-off charge shall be added to the bill. 
(b)  Once the water supply has been turned off, it will not be turned on again until all previous water bills, notification charges, turn-off charges, and an additional twenty dollar ($20.00) turn-on charge, are paid. 
(c)  In the event a tenant defaults in the payment of a water bill, the water will not be turned on again without payment of all notification, turn-off and turn-on charges owing on the account. 
(Code 1965, § 21-18; Ord. No. 1214, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 1222, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 19-32. - Owner to provide shut-off valve. 
Where water is supplied to any premises in the city by the city water department, the owner shall provide a valve of suitable size and the type to shut off the flow of water to the premises. In no case shall such valve be less than three-fourths-inch nominal pipe size. Such valve shall be located on the consumer's side of the water meter, outside of the meter box and not less than six (6) inches there from. It shall not be located in any public street, alley or parkway. It shall be protected by a suitable valve box or housing so that it will be accessible and operable at all times. Any key or wrench required for operating such valve shall be available on the premises at all time, such valve, box and key shall remain the property of the owner of the premises who shall be fully responsible for their maintenance and upkeep. 
Whether or not a property owner installs the prescribed shut-off valve, said property owner or consumer shall be responsible for the cost of water through their meter that is related to uncontrolled or unattended leaks on their side of the city's meter. If warranted due to the volume of water being lost or because of water scarcity, the city may, with not less than twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to the property owner or consumer, temporarily discontinue service at the city's water meter until such leaks are repaired. 
(Code 1965, § 21-19; Ord. No. 1587, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-33. - Tampering with valves. 
(a)  No person, other than an employee of the water department or of the city shall operate, open, close or tamper with the valve installed by the water department on the water main side of the meter. Such valve is reserved exclusively for the use of the water department. In case of an emergency, the water department shall be notified and they may send an employee to turn the water off or on as may be required. There shall be paid to the city a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each trip an employee of the water department makes to open or close the valve on the water main side of a water meter in the city. 
(b)  No person, other than an employee of the water department or of the city shall work on or tamper with any water meter or any meter box or operate or tamper with a water valve or fire hydrant installed on the water system of the city; providing, however, that none of the provisions herein shall apply to the members of the city fire department in performance of their duties as firemen. 
(Code 1965, § 21-20; Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 19-34. - Miscellaneous water service fees. 
(a)  Size upgrade per customer request: Direct cost of new installation, plus fifty dollar ($50.00) processing charge. 
(b)  Replace meter at customer request (charge reflects meter cost plus fifty dollar ($50.00) processing charge): 
5/8 ? meter 	$ 80.00 
¾? meter 	150.00 
1? meter 	275.00 
1½? meter 	300.00 
2? meter 	350.00 
3? meter and larger 	At cost plus $50.00 processing charge 
 
(c)  Calibrate or check meter calibration at customer request: 
Up to 2? meter 	$30.00 
3? meter and larger 	At cost 
 
(d)  Late fee for bills paid more than three (3) days past due date. 
(Ord. No. 1558, 8-9-04)  
Sec. 19-35. - Water conservation fee. 
(a)  A monthly fee shall be collected to offset charges and costs incurred for the implementation of water conservation programs and measures. Such fee shall be added to the water bill of all customers to which the city supplies water. 
(b)  The water conservation fee of $0.1024 per one hundred (100) cubic feet is established and may be increased by the city council from time to time after the date of enactment of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1660, 7-31-06; Ord. No. 1812, § 5, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 19-36. - Edwards Aquifer fee. 
(a)  A monthly fee shall be collected to offset charges and costs incurred as a result of the management fees assessed by the Edwards Aquifer Authority. Such fee shall be added to the water bill of all customers to which the city supplies water. 
(b)  The amount of the fee shall be $0.33097 per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water consumed. 
(c)  The above stated rate may be increased by the city council from time to time on account of any increase in the fees charged to the city by the Edwards Aquifer Authority, based on the amount of acre-feet of water rights held by the city, from the date of enactment of this section. 
(d)  Subject to city council approval, the Edwards Aquifer fees shall be adjusted from time to time to reflect any charges assessed by the Edwards Aquifer Authority for funding the habitat conservation plan for amelioration of habitat destruction. The city budget shall be automatically amended to reflect the collection and disbursement of such fees. 
(Ord. No. 1660, 7-31-06; Ord. No. 1933, 7-23-12)  
Sec. 19-37. - Hydrant meter service fees. 
(a)  Water used for construction projects shall not be drawn from a residential or commercial customer connection without the express permission of that customer. 
(b)  Failure to obtain said permission shall constitute theft from the customer and subject the violator to appropriate legal action. 
(c)  Construction project water shall not be drawn from city sources without the use of a city-issued hydrant meter and backflow prevention assembly. 
(d)  Use of city water without the use of a city-issued hydrant meter and backflow prevention assembly, or without receiving express permission for alternative arrangements prior to use of city water, shall be considered theft and shall be referred for appropriate action to the Alamo Heights Police Department. 
(e)  A city-issued hydrant meter and backflow prevention assembly shall be requested through the utility division of the public works department prior to use of a city water source. 
(f)  Fees for use of city water and a hydrant meter/backflow prevention assembly are as follows: 
(1)  Deposit: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) due upon application. 
(2)  Rental of meter: One hundred ninety-five dollars ($195.00) per month, prorated per calendar day, due upon return. 
(3)  Water rate: Not less than one dollar ($1.00) per hundred (100) cubic feet, depending on use and city's tier rate structure, due upon return. 
(g)  These fees may be changed from time-to-time upon the recommendation of the public works director and upon action of the city council. 
(h)  Once the hydrant meter and backflow prevention assembly have been returned, the amount of water consumed and the number of calendar days the unit was used will be determined, and the fees due the city will be computed. These fees will be deducted from the deposit originally placed with the city. Any amount of the deposit remaining shall be refunded to the applicant. Any amount still due the city will be charged to the applicant and will be immediately payable to the city. 
(i)  In the event an amount remains due the city and it is not paid by the applicant within five (5) business days of the date the bill was rendered, the city may, at its option, 1) choose to withhold further water utility service from the applicant until payment is made, 2) pursue legal remedies for theft of water, 3) revoke or suspend the applicant's registration that allows him to do business in the city, 4) terminate or issue stop work orders for all building permits associated with either the property and/or the applicant, or apply any and all of the options listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1671, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 1812, § 6, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 19-38. - Adjustments in utility bills for hidden water leaks and other water losses beyond the control of water utility customers. 
(a)  [Hidden water leak.] Any customer of water utilities provided by the City of Alamo Heights who is billed for a substantial increase in water use during any single month billing period due to a hidden water leak of which the water utility customer had no prior knowledge and of which the water utility customer would not have reasonably had knowledge, or due to other water loss beyond the control of the customer, may request an adjustment in the amount billed for utility services that is based upon water consumption during that period. 
(b)  [Notification.] Customers who have been notified by the city of a water leak on their side of the city's meter in accordance with section 19-32, and who do not subsequently and expeditiously correct the conditions causing the leak or other water loss, may not be considered for an adjustment under this section. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Excess usage means the difference in the "greatest normal usage" of water at a service location and the actual amount of water metered and billed in the billing month for which the adjustment at the service location is requested. 
Greatest normal usage means the amount of water metered at the customer's service location in the billing month of greatest consumption during the past twelve (12) consecutive months; or, if there is less than twelve (12) prior billing months, the greatest consumption during any prior billing months. When the "greatest normal usage" recorded is less than twelve (12) consecutive prior billing months, the city reserves the right to determine an estimated "greatest normal usage" for those customers by using customers in similar usage categories. The "greatest normal usage" shall not include the billed usage for the month the adjustment is requested. 
Hidden water leak means any leak of a water pipe, line or other water conveyance equipment which is the responsibility of the customer to maintain and which is caused by deterioration, corrosion, natural forces, or other similar causes, excluding damage due to construction or excavation activity on the customer's side of the meter, which is not immediately and reasonably detectable from the surface of the ground. 
Substantial increase means an increase in the amount of water metered and subsequently billed at the customer's service location which is in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the "greatest normal usage" for that customer. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  Any customer requesting an adjustment pursuant to this section shall make said request in writing to the public works director upon such form or forms as the public works director shall require. 
(2)  A request for an adjustment based upon a hidden water leak or other water loss beyond the control of water utility customer shall include the following minimum information: 
a.  Service address; 
b.  Customer name and account number; 
c.  Location of the leak or other water loss, including a location sketch or photograph if possible; 
d.  Probable cause of the leak or other water loss; 
e.  Date leak or other water loss was discovered; 
f.  Date leak or other water loss was remedied; 
g.  Name and firm [with address and telephone number] of person making the repair; and, 
h.  Legible and detailed copies of repair bill(s). 
(3)  All requests shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days of the due date on the monthly bill for which an adjustment is requested. 
(4)  Unless directed otherwise, the customer shall pay the rendered by the due date. 
a.  Payment arrangements for the amount in dispute may be available to the customer until the investigation regarding the adjustment request has been completed. 
b.  Any adjustments that are approved shall be credited to the appropriate account. 
(5)  A visual verification by appropriate city staff is required if the customer made repairs without contracted assistance and valid receipts are not available. 
(6)  The public works department shall review each of the customer's concerns in a fair and reasonable manner to determine the eligibility of such claim prior to forwarding its findings to the city manager. 
(e)  Requirements for granting an adjustment. 
(1)  Under most conditions, a request of an adjustment to a monthly bill for utility usage will be granted if it meets the following conditions: 
a.  A request in accordance with subsection (d) has been filed within the required timeframe; 
b.  The requested adjustment is for a monthly billing in which there was a substantial increase in water use resulting from a hidden water leak or other water loss beyond the control of water utility customer; and, 
c.  There has not been an adjustment made in the monthly billing for city-provided utilities at the same service location or the same customer within the previous twelve (12) months under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The administration and finance staff shall calculate the amount of the potential adjustment based on the public works department's findings forwarded to the city manager. 
(f)  Amount of adjustment. 
(1)  The adjustment shall be applied to the amount of water consumption in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the greatest normal usage used to determine the eligibility of the customer for an adjustment. 
(2)  Typical adjustment rates for consumption above the one hundred twenty-five (125) percent amount are as follows: 
a.  Underground leak+: 50%. 
b.  Under slab or in crawl space leak+: 50%. 
c.  Sprinkler (irrigation) leak+: 25%. 
d.  Vandalism—Overnight*+: 50%. 
e.  Vandalism—On vacation*+: 100%. 
f.  Water device failure+: 50%. 
g.  Repair and filling swimming pool: 0%. 
* Police report required. 
+ Legible and detailed repair bill required. 
(g)  Decision. 
(1)  Consideration of extenuating circumstances will be taken into account when determining an adjustment. 
(2)  The final decision regarding a utility bill adjustment and the amount of any such adjustment shall be the responsibility of the city manager. 
(h)  Adjustments for leaks on the customer's side of meter caused by the city or its contractors. 
(1)  Should the city or its contractors at any time cause a leak on the customer's side of a water meter, the city will use the twelve (12) months' water bills preceding the month(s) in which the leak occurred or continued to compute an average bill for the month(s) is which the leak occurred or continued. In no case shall the customer have to pay an averaged bill that would be greater than the bill rendered during the month(s) of the leak condition caused by the city or its contractors. 
(2)  Requests for adjustments, determinations of accuracy of the requests, and decisions shall be in general conformance with applicable subsections of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1692, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 1709, 4-30-07)  
Sec. 19-39. - Water impact fee. 
In an effort to offset the significant cost of constructing a new elevated water storage tank to provide additional capacity for the city's elevated water distribution system, a one-time water impact fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per additional effective water connection, as defined by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, is hereby established. The fee shall be charged to provide water service for each additional effective water connection that is created through development or redevelopment of any property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 7, 2-23-09)  
Secs. 19-40—19-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSERVATION OF GROUNDWATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1679, adopted Oct. 23, 2006, repealed the former art. III, §§ 19-50—19-58, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to conservation of water and derived from Code 1965, §§ 21-33—21-39; Ord. No. 1247, adopted Jan. 14, 1991; Ord. No. 1410, adopted May 18, 1998; Ord. No. 1455, adopted May 22, 2000; Ord. No. 1587, adopted July 12, 2005; Ord. No. 1661, adopted August 14, 2006. 
State Law reference— Public water suppliers required by rule to develop drought contingency plans, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.1272; drought contingency plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 288.20. 
 
Sec. 19-50. - Year-round allowable hours for landscape watering. 
(a)  Year-round application of ground water for landscape purposes by means of automatic or manual irrigation systems is allowed any day of the week before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Hand watering with a hand-held hose, soaker hose, drip irrigation system or bucket is allowed at any time during a day. 
(b)  All sprinkler systems installed or reworked after the effective date of this section shall be equipped with rain sensors to prevent the systems from operating during periods of rain. All sprinkler systems existing prior to the effective date of this section shall have rain sensors installed on them no later than December 31, 2007. Automatic watering during allowed hours but in periods of rain is prohibited. 
(c)  Automatic or hand watering during allowed hours in amounts sufficient to run into the streets and alleys is prohibited. 
(d)  Washing of impervious cover such as parking lots, driveways, streets or sidewalks is allowed on any day at any time, but should be done to avoid excessive run-off. 
(e)  Non-commercial washing of vehicles is allowed on any day at any time, but should be done to avoid excessive run-off. 
(f)  The use of commercial vehicle wash facilities is allowed on any day at any time. 
(g)  Any resident, person or business found to be violating the hours of irrigation, irrigating during rainfall or allowing water to run into the streets and alleys shall be notified of the first and subsequent observed violation by means of a letter from the public works department, said letter to be deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the resident, person or business at their last known address. The letter shall explain the rules and direct that the violations cease. 
(h)  The rules for groundwater use reduction during any stage of declared groundwater water use restrictions supersede the stated hours noted in paragraph 19-50(a). 
(Ord. No. 1679, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 1992, 4-28-14)  
Sec. 19-51. - Groundwater management rules for water demand reduction stages declared by the Edwards Aquifer Authority. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this document, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
2.1 Aesthetic use. The use of water for fountains, waterfalls, landscapes, lakes and ponds where such use is entirely ornamental and serves no other functional purpose. 
2.2 Agricultural irrigation. Irrigation for the purpose of growing crops commercially for human consumption or to use as feed for livestock or poultry. 
2.3 Athletic field. A sports play field used primarily for organized sports for schools, professional sports or sanctioned league play whose essential feature is a grass turf. 
2.4 Authority. The Edwards Aquifer Authority. 
2.5 Beneficial use. The use of the amount of water that is economically necessary for a purpose authorized by law, when reasonable intelligence and reasonable diligence are used in applying the water to that purpose. 
2.6 Bucket. Bucket, watering can or other container holding five (5) gallons or less, used singly by one (1) person. 
2.7 Computer controlled irrigation system (C.C.I.S.). A system comprised of a computer controller (digital operating system), software, interface modules, satellite field controllers, soil sensors, weather station, or similar devices which is capable of achieving maximum efficiency and conservation in the application of water for irrigation. A CCIS, at a minimum, should be designed to: i) prevent over watering, flooding, pooling, evaporation and run-off; and, ii) prohibit sprinkler heads from applying water at an intake rate exceeding the capability of the soil. 
2.8 Connection. Metered or un-metered delivery point to a customer or other receiver of water from an organized water distribution system. 
2.9 Conservation. Those practices, techniques and technologies that will reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses. 
2.10 Day. A twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at midnight. 
2.11 Discretionary use. Any use of groundwater that is not an essential use (compare with "essential use"). 
2.12 Domestic or livestock. The use of groundwater for: 
a.  Drinking, washing, or culinary purposes in the ordinary course of running a household; 
b.  Irrigation of a family garden or orchard the produce of which is for household consumption only; or 
c.  Watering of animals. 
2.13 Drip irrigation. An automatic water-saver irrigation system (drip, porous pipe, etc.). 
2.14 Drought. A period of shortage of precipitation of seasonal or longer duration. 
2.15 Edwards Aquifer. That portion of a belt of porous water-bearing limestone composed of the Edwards Group Limestone and Associated Formations trending from west to east to northeast through Kinney, Uvalde, Medina, Bexar, Comal and Hays counties. 
2.16 Essential use. A use of groundwater for: 
a.  The protection of public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to use for drinking, food preparation, personal hygiene, public sanitation, control or prevention of disease, and fire fighting; or 
b.  An industrial use or agricultural or military activity which directly supports gainful employment, unless the use is specifically defined in these rules as a discretionary use; or 
c.  Irrigation use (see 2.24); or 
d.  Domestic or livestock use; or 
e.  Compliance with state or federal laws. 
2.17 Existing facility. A swimming pool, hot tub or any similar facility, including residential, public and private facilities, installed during any period for which a drought has not been declared or during a drought stage which has been rescinded. This term does not include pools specifically maintained to provide habitat for aquatic life. 
2.18  Existing landscaping plant. A landscaping plant existing in an area after such period of time as to accomplish an establishment and maintenance of growth. 
2.19 Groundwater. Water within or produced, obtained, or originating from the Edwards Aquifer. Re-circulated water, reclaimed water, reused water, gray water or treated effluent are specifically excluded from this definition. 
2.20 Hand-held hose. A hose attended by one (1) person, fitted with a manual or automatic shutoff nozzle. 
2.21 Household use. The use of water, other than uses in the outdoor category, for personal needs or for household purposes, such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or cleaning, whether the use occurs in a residence or in a commercial or industrial facility. 
2.22 Impervious surface area. Any horizontal structure such as any street, driveway, sidewalk, patio or other surface area covered with brick, paving, tile or other impervious material. 
2.23 Industrial use. The use of groundwater for or in connection with commercial or industrial activities, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, bottling, brewing, food processing, scientific research and technology, recycling, production of concrete and asphalt, commercial uses of groundwater for tourism, entertainment, and hotel or motel lodging, generation of power other than hydroelectric, and other business activities. 
2.24 Irrigation use. The use of water for the irrigation of pastures and commercial crops, including orchards. 
2.25 Landscape plant. Any plant, including, but not limited to, any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species, that grows or has been planted out-of-doors and is used for landscaping purposes or for the support of intensive recreational areas such as playgrounds and playing fields. 
2.26 Landscape watering. The application of groundwater to grow or maintain plants such as flowers, ground covers, turf or grasses, shrubs, and trees, but for purposes of these rules such watering does not include: 
a.  Essential use without waste of groundwater by a commercial nursery to the extent the water is used for production rather than decorative landscaping. 
b.  Application of groundwater without waste to a non-commercial family garden or orchard, the produce of which is for household consumption only; and 
c.  Application of groundwater between 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. by means of a bucket (not to exceed five (5) gallons in capacity), hand held hose, or properly-installed drip irrigation system, immediately next to a concrete foundation solely for the purpose of preventing, and to the extent the watering is necessary to prevent, substantial damage to the foundation or the structure caused by movement of the foundation. 
2.27 Livestock. Animals, beasts, or poultry collected or raised for pleasure, recreational use, or commercial use. The term includes but is not limited to cattle, sheep, goats, swine, horses, chickens, turkeys, and zoo animals. 
2.28 MSL. Elevation above mean sea level. 
2.29 New facility. A swimming pool, hot tub or any similar facility, including residential, public and private facilities, installed during any current critical period stage. When the stage is rescinded, such new facility will be treated thereafter as an existing facility. This term does not include pools specifically maintained to provide habitat for aquatic life. 
2.30 New landscaping plant. Any plant or seed planted in or transplanted to an area within such period of time as to accomplish a reasonable establishment and maintenance of growth. 
2.31 Other outside use. The use of water outdoors for maintenance, cleaning and washing of structures and mobile equipment, including automobiles and boats, and the washing of streets, driveways, sidewalks, patios and other similar areas. 
2.32 Park. A tract of land, other than a golf course, maintained by a city, private organization, or individual, as a place of beauty or of public recreation. 
2.33 Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
2.34 Pervious surface. Any ground surface which can absorb water or other liquids. 
2.35 Power production use. The use of water for steam generation and the use of water for cooling and for replenishment of cooling reservoirs. 
2.36 Public. Municipally owned or operated, as it applies to any facility. 
2.37 Reclaimed water. Recycled or reused water as defined in 30 TAC Sec. 210. 
2.38 Re-circulated water. Water that is used by the same person two (2) or more times sometimes with partial treatment, when required, between uses. 
2.39 Stage. One (1) of four (4) designated drought stages which may be declared by the authority. 
2.40 Supplier. Any person who supplies groundwater, including but not limited to a public or private water company, water supply corporation, a municipality or water district. 
2.41 Swimming pool. Any structure, basin, chamber, or tank, including hot tubs, and which contain an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing, and having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point. 
a.  Private residential swimming pool. Any swimming pool located on private property under the control of the homeowner, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by the homeowner's family or invited guests. 
b.  Public swimming pool. Any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by persons for swimming or bathing, operated by any person as defined herein, whether owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. The term includes, but is not limited to, apartment community pools, condominium association pools and community association pools. 
2.42 Trigger conditions. Those specific conditions of rainfall amounts, Edward Aquifer water level elevations or spring flow rates which the authority monitors and uses as indicators of the occurrence of critical period conditions for purposes of declaring the various stages. 
2.43 Use for beneficial purpose. Water which is used, without regard to priority, for: 
a.  Agricultural, commercial, domestic, gardening, industrial, manufacturing, mining, municipal, pleasure, recreational or stock raising purposes; 
b.  Exploring for, producing, handling or treating oil, gas, sulfur or other minerals; or 
c.  Any other purpose that is useful and beneficial to the user. 
2.44 User. A person, public or private, who produces, distributes or uses water from an Edwards Aquifer well located within the boundaries of the Edwards Aquifer Authority. 
2.45 Variance. An authorized exception from compliance by the user with any provision of the rules granted by the authority. 
2.46 Vegetable garden. Any non-commercial garden planted primarily for household use. For this use "non-commercial" includes incidental direct selling of produce from such a vegetable garden to the public. 
2.47 Watering day. A day designated for landscape watering, limited to the morning hours from 12:01 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and the evening hours of 8:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. (i.e., if Saturday is a designated watering day, the period of time referenced is Saturday morning between 12:01 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., and Saturday evening between 8:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.). 
2.48 Waste. 
a.  The flowing or producing of groundwater from wells in the Edwards Aquifer if the water flowing or produced is not used for a beneficial purpose by any user; 
b.  The unreasonable loss of groundwater through faulty design or negligent operation of a well or water delivery or application system; or 
c.  Using quantities of groundwater for a purpose that otherwise would be considered beneficial in excess of quantities reasonably necessary for that purpose. 
2.49 Water utility use. Water used for withdrawal, treatment, transmission, and distribution by potable water system operators. 
2.50 Well level or spring flow rate. The level of water in the Index Well J-17, or the flow rates in the San Marcos Springs or the Comal Springs which are the authority's stage indicators for the San Antonio Pool. 
2.51 Zonal irrigation system. An irrigation system which segregates by station areas of shrubs, ground cover, bedding plants, or turf to accommodate a diversity of watering requirements. 
(b)  Stage indicators for groundwater use reduction program. The stage indicators for groundwater demand reduction for stages, I, II, III, and IV are set out in Table 1 below: 
Table 1 
Critical Period 
(Reduction) 
Stage* 	Index Well J-17 
Level (MSL) 	San Marcos Springs Flow (CFS) 	Comal Springs Springs Flow (CFS) 	Withdrawal Reduction - San Antonio Pool 
I 	<660 	<96 	<225 	20% 
II 	<650 	<80 	<200 	30% 
III 	<640 	N/A 	<150 	35% 
IV 	<630 	N/A 	<100 	40% 
 
*Implementation of Stage I is based on a ten-day average. A change to a critical period stage with higher withdrawal reduction percentages is triggered if the ten-day average of daily springflows at the Comal Springs or the San Marcos Springs or the ten-day average of daily aquifer levels at the J-17 Index Well drops below the lowest number of any of the trigger levels. A change to a critical period stage with lower withdrawal reduction percentages is triggered only when the ten-day average of daily springflows at the Comal Springs or the San Marcos Springs and the ten-day average of daily aquifer levels at the J-17 Index Well are all above the same stage trigger level. 
(c)  Groundwater use reduction program. 
(1)  Procedures for groundwater use reduction program. The City of Alamo Heights shall determine when conditions warrant implementation of the groundwater use reduction program. The program is declared when the Edwards Aquifer indicators fall below the trigger levels shown in Table 1. Regardless of the aquifer's level, the city may advance stages as needed to effect compliance with pumping limit goals. The various stages shall be declared as follows: 
a.  Stage I. The director of public works may declare stages I of the groundwater use reduction program when the authority declares stage I after one (1) or more of the indicators fall below the trigger levels for stage I as shown in Table 1. 
b.  Stage II. The city manager may declare stage II of the groundwater use reduction program when the authority declares stage II after one (1) or more of the indicators fall below the trigger levels for stage II as shown in Table 1. 
c.  Stage III. The mayor may declare stage III of the groundwater use reduction program when the authority declares stage III after one (1) or more of the indicators fall below the trigger levels for stage III as shown in Table 1. 
d.  Stage IV. The city council may declare stage IV of the groundwater user reduction program when the authority declares stage IV after one (1) or more of the indicators fall below the trigger levels for stage IV as shown in Table 1. 
(2)  Public notice of declaration of groundwater use reduction program stage. The declaration of a groundwater use reduction stage shall be publicly noticed by posting the declaration on the city's web site and other public notification processes deemed appropriate by the director of public works. 
(3)  Restricting the use of groundwater. 
a.  Upon the declaration of any groundwater use reduction stage by the director of public works, city manager, mayor or city council, compliance with the groundwater use reduction program measures shall be required and compliance with the voluntary measures shall be encouraged. 
b.  Groundwater use reduction measures are attached as "Appendix A" and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
c.  Groundwater use surcharges may be imposed by the city council during any groundwater use reduction stage as an additional measure to deter water use to aid in achieving pumping restriction goals. 
(4)  Public notice of end of groundwater use reduction program stage. Each declared stage of the groundwater use reduction program may be terminated or changed as follows: 
a.  The authority declares the end to each stage; or, 
b.  At the discretion of the director of public works, city manager, mayor or city council for the stages they respectively declared only after the level of Index Well J-17 has remained above its trigger level for the stage in effect for a ten-day rolling average, and after current pumping trends, current precipitation and the outlook for additional precipitation have been examined and trends determined. 
Notice of the end of each stage of the groundwater use reduction program shall be posted on the city's web site and other public notification processes deemed appropriate by the director of public works. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. Compliance may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(2)  No violation, definition or penalty under this article shall have bearing on any violation, definition or penalty under any other section of this chapter. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  During a critical period management stage, all city employees become "water conservation" inspectors and shall watch for violations of the conservation regulations. Any resident, person or business found to be violating the conservation regulations shall be notified of the first observed and documented violation by means of a letter addressed to the resident, person or business at their last known address. The letter shall explain the regulations and direct that the violations cease. The second and additional observed and documented violations thereafter may result in citations being issued by the police department. 
(2)  The citizens of the City of Alamo Heights are encouraged to assist in the enforcement of this article by reporting violations of the groundwater use reduction regulations. 
(f)  Variances 
(1)  Request for variance. 
a.  A person may file a written request for a variance from these rules for consideration by the director of public works. The request must contain the following information: 
1.  The specific nature of the variance requested; 
2.  A detailed explanation of why the person believes the variance should be granted, including any supporting documentation; 
3.  A signed statement that the facts contained in the request are true and within the person's personal knowledge. 
b.  The director of public works may request the person to provide additional information, which must be filed within ten (10) days of the request or as otherwise directed in the request. 
(2)  When variances may be granted. 
a.  The variance is necessary to avoid an unusual, direct, and substantial hardship; 
b.  There are no other reasonably available means for avoiding the hardship without a variance; 
c.  Granting the variance is consistent with the goals of this section; and 
d.  Granting the variance will not cause significant harm to any other person or group of persons or result in the city being in violation of regulatory requirements. 
(3)  Terms and conditions of variance. 
a.  The director of public works may grant a variance for such a term and in accordance with any conditions the director of public works deems appropriate. The decision of the director of public works may be appealed to the city manager. 
b.  It is a term of every variance granted that the variance may be rescinded based on changed circumstances, new information, or failure of the holder of the variance to abide by the terms and conditions of the variance or to comply with these rules or any other order or rule. 
c.  The director of public works may require a person granted a variance to file reports containing such information deemed by the director of public works to be relevant to monitoring the continuing appropriateness of the variance. 
APPENDIX A 
GROUNDWATER USE REDUCTION PROGRAM STAGE REGULATIONS 
Stage I. Restrictions. 
(1)  No resident, person or business shall waste groundwater. 
(2)  Groundwater shall only be used for residential landscape watering by means of an automatic or manual irrigation system before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. during one (1) day per week according to the last digit of a person's or business address as follows: 
Address Ending In 	Watering Day 
Each Week 
0 or 1 	Monday 
2 or 3 	Tuesday 
4 or 5 	Wednesday 
6 or 7 	Thursday 
8 or 9 	Friday 
 
Multi-family premises, schools, churches and commercial users shall use groundwater for landscape watering only on Wednesdays, and only during the same hours listed above for residential users. 
Groundwater may be used for landscape watering (see 2.26) by means of drip irrigation, soaker hose, hand-held hose, or pail during any day at any time. 
(3)  No resident, person or business shall use groundwater to wash an impervious outdoor ground covering such as a parking lot, driveway, street, or sidewalk unless for health or safety reasons. 
(4)  No resident, person or business shall allow landscape or irrigation water to escape from that person's land. 
(5)  Restaurants and other eating establishments are prohibited from serving groundwater to customers except upon request of the customer. 
(6)  Every resident, person or business that owns or has possession of a swimming pool must cover the pool with an effective evaporation cover or screen, or evaporation shields covering at least twenty-five (25) percent of the surface of the pool, when the pool is not in active use. Inflatable pool toys or floating decorations may be used to shield the water from evaporation. Active use includes necessary maintenance that requires removal of the cover, screen, or shields. Active use of public, commercial and apartment pools is whenever the pool is not officially closed. 
(7)  No resident or person shall wash an automobile at any location except on their designated watering day and during the specified times, and in no event shall groundwater used for automobile washing be allowed to run into the streets or alleys of the city. 
(8)  Charity car washes are prohibited except at a commercial car wash that recycles at least seventy-five (75) percent of the groundwater it uses or that is certified as a conservation car wash. 
(9)  The use of commercial vehicle wash facilities is allowed on any day at any time. 
(10)  No resident, person or business shall use groundwater for an ornamental outdoor fountain or similar feature, unless the water is recycled and the only additional groundwater used for the feature is to compensate for loss due to evaporation. 
Stage II. Restrictions. 
(1)  No resident, person or business shall waste groundwater. 
(2)  Groundwater shall only be used for residential landscape watering by means of an automatic or manual irrigation system between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. during one (1) day per week according to the last digit of a person's or business address as follows: 
Address Ending In 	Watering Day 
Each Week 
0 or 1 	Monday 
2 or 3 	Tuesday 
4 or 5 	Wednesday 
6 or 7 	Thursday 
8 or 9 	Friday 
 
Multi-family premises, schools, churches and commercial users shall use groundwater for landscape watering only on Wednesdays, and only during the same hours listed above for residential users. 
Groundwater may be used for landscape watering (see 2.26) by means of drip irrigation, soaker hose, hand-held hose or pail only on any day specified hereinabove but only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(3)  All prohibitions (3) through (10) in stage I shall apply to stage II. 
Stage III. Restrictions. 
(1)  No resident, person or business shall waste groundwater. 
(2)  Groundwater shall only be used for residential landscape watering by means of an automatic or manual irrigation system only on the one (1) designated watering day in every other calendar week, and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., except that landscape watering with groundwater is permitted to maintain shrubs, trees and other ornamental plants, but not grass or turf, on any day within the above prescribed hours and only by means of a bucket, hand held hose, soaker hose or drip irrigation system. 
(3)  Designated watering days. 
a.  Properties zoned "residential", in accordance with the last digit of the property address: 
Address 
Ending in 	Watering Day, 
Every Other Week 
0 or 1 	Monday 
2 or 3 	Tuesday 
4 or 5 	Wednesday 
6 or 7 	Thursday 
8 or 9 	Friday 
 
b.  Properties zoned other than "residential", without regard to address, on Wednesdays in every other calendar week, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  All prohibitions (3) through (10) in stage I apply to stage III. 
(5)  Filling of new pools or refilling of existing pools is prohibited unless at least thirty (30) percent of the water is obtained from a source other than the Edwards Aquifer. In addition, refilling is allowed only if the pool has been drained for repairs. 
(6)  Newly planted landscape may qualify for a three-week variance from the stage III one-day-every-other-week watering schedule, but only with a variance as may be granted herein by the public works director. 
Stage IV. Restrictions. 
(1)  No resident, person or business shall waste groundwater. 
(2)  All prohibitions (3) through (10) in stage I and prohibitions (2), (3), (5) and (6) in stage III shall apply to stage IV. 
(3)  When stage IV is in effect, the city council may convene emergency sessions to consider other rules that may be necessary to further restrict groundwater use or to allow special uses, such uses including, but not limited to, the following: 
Use necessary for public health or safety. Notwithstanding any provision of these rules, groundwater may be used when and to the extent it is necessary to prevent danger to public health, safety, or welfare, or to the extent required by state or federal law. 
Athletic fields. 
a.  An owner or operator of an athletic field who files with the city a groundwater conservation and reuse plan which has been approved by the city council may apply groundwater to the field in accordance with this section. Athletic fields that are not covered by an approved groundwater conservation and reuse plan must comply with all maximum allowable and specific restrictions provided in these rules. 
b.  A groundwater conservation and reuse plan for athletic fields must contain the following information: 
1.  The name, title, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator of the athletic field; 
2.  The name, title, address, and telephone number of the persons responsible for the watering of the field; 
3.  Whether the field is public or private, and the population served by the field; 
4.  The location, dimension, type of athletic field, and type of turf; 
5.  A description of the water delivery system used and how and when it is used; 
6.  A description of management practices relating to watering the field that are employed to control the amount of groundwater applied to the field; 
7.  A description of any turf areas that are not essential to the functioning of the field that are or could be watered in accordance with the specific restrictions on landscape watering contained in these rules; 
8.  A statement of what the owner or operator believes is a minimum amount of water and a minimum watering regimen during critical periods that applies only the amount of water necessary to maintain the viability of the turf without creating a safety hazard to users of the field; 
9.  A statement of the cost-effectiveness of utilizing a computer-controlled irrigation system (CCIS) to minimize groundwater use for the athletic field; 
10.  A statement of any actions or plans to obtain alternative water supplies such as gray water, and if applicable, a copy of any letter of commitment from a water purveyor regarding supplying such water to the field; 
11.  Any other information required by the city; 
12.  Any such plan filed with the city shall be considered a variance (see section 19-51(f) and shall be subject to the terms and conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1679, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 1812, § 8, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 1831, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 1833, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 1992, 4-28-14; Memo of 7-7-15)  
Sec. 19-52. - Requirement to repair water leaks upon notice. 
In the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of all residents, the city is authorized to discontinue water service if any person fails to repair a water leak in an area owned or controlled by that person after receiving: 
(a)  Thirty (30) days' written notice for a minor water leak; 
(b)  Ten (10) days' written notice for a moderate water leak; or 
(c)  Three (3) days' written notice for a major water leak. 
The director of public works or his designee shall have sole discretion to determine the whether a leak is minor, moderate or major for the purpose of administering this section. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9, 2-23-09)  
Secs. 19-53—19-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WELLS 
 
Sec. 19-76. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or otherwise construct, repair, correct, abandon or plug a well or to engage upon such work: within the city limits, or to employ anyone else to engage in such work, without first applying for and securing a permit from the city engineer. 
(b)  Such permit may be granted with the approval of the city engineer, to any person who files with the city engineer the application hereinafter provided for, and pays the fee hereinafter required, and complies with all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 21-50)  
Sec. 19-77. - Application. 
Every application for a permit for the drilling, construction, repair and correction, abandonment or plugging of a well, shall state the name and address of the owner thereof, the purpose for which the permit is desired, which shall be one (1) or more of the acts just mentioned; the definite location of the well or proposed well; its approximate depth; and if for a permit for the drilling or construction or repair and correction of a water well, the estimated amount of water to be, or which is pumped daily, monthly or annually, and the use or uses for which the water will be or is required. For a permit for the drilling or construction or for the repair and correction of a well, the proposed method of drilling or construction, or the proposed method of repair and correction, and the kind of equipment to be used, and in all cases the name of the contractor, if done through a contractor, whom the owner desires to drill or construct, repair and correct, or do the work pursuant to an abandonment of a well in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1965, § 21-51)  
Sec. 19-78. - Inspection of premises. 
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to inspect the property where any well is to be drilled, sunk, dug, or bored and to refuse the issuance of a permit to drill, sink, dig or bore a well in a place which does not meet with his approval as to drainage and other sanitary conditions. 
(Code 1965, § 21-52)  
Sec. 19-79. - Permits to be prepared in triplicate. 
All permits shall be executed in triplicate, one (1) copy to be delivered to the applicant and two (2) copies to be retained in the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 21-53)  
Sec. 19-80. - Fees. 
The fees to be paid to the city engineer for the permits required by this article shall be in accordance with the fee schedules in chapter 5 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 21-54; Ord. No. 1530, 7-14-03)  
Sec. 19-81. - Use of fees by city. 
All fees and other money collected by the city secretary by virtue of this article shall be expended by the city engineer to cover the expense of making examinations of wells within the city limits, to make or have made the necessary analyses and tests of water therefrom, to supervise the construction, repair, abandonment and plugging of wells and the operation of same, and such other expenses as may be necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 21-55)  
Sec. 19-82. - Wells not to exceed depth indicated on permit; payment of additional fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any applicant who obtains a permit to construct a well of a certain depth, to extend such well to a depth exceeding the depth provided for in such permit without first obtaining an additional permit therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 21-57)  
Sec. 19-83. - Inspection of wells. 
(a)  The city engineer shall have the power: 
(1)  To make or have made examinations of all wells within the city limits whether privately owned or otherwise. 
(2)  To make or have made at any time the necessary analyses or tests of water therefrom. 
(3)  To go upon the land and property of the owner or owners of wells for that purpose. 
(4)  To require the owner or owners to furnish all information requested concerning the wells, including in the case of new wells, complete logs of the well showing depth to and depth through all geologic formations encountered. 
(5)  To supervise the construction, repair, abandonment and plugging of wells and the operation of the same. 
(b)  The city engineer shall keep a register of all wells within the city limits, which shall show the name of the owner, the location and the date of construction of each well, its depth and diameter, the purpose for which the well was constructed, and if abandoned the date of such abandonment. 
(c)  All acts authorized to be done by the city engineer may be performed by such persons as may be authorized by the city engineer to act for him. 
(Code 1965, § 21-58)  
Sec. 19-84. - Capping wells containing salt or other injurious minerals. 
Every well whether drilled, dug or excavated, which encounters salt water or water containing mineral or other substance injurious to health or vegetation, shall be securely plugged and sealed or cased in such manner that the waters be confined to the stratum in which found, and all wells shall be so constructed and cased so that no water from one (1) stratum can by reason of the construction of the well come in contact with waters from another stratum. The casing shall be set in the top of the stratum from which water is to be taken and shall be cemented in place by suitable method to be approved by the city engineer in accordance with state requirements and regulations.  
Sec. 19-85. - Abandoned wells, defined; plugging. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, an abandoned well is: 
(1)  A defective well which, in the judgment of the city engineer, cannot be corrected to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Any well which has been continuously out of use for a period of two (2) years, or longer. Whenever any well has not been in active use for more than two (2) years, the owner or operator of the same shall report that fact to the city engineer. 
(b)  Every abandoned well shall be filled and plugged with such materials and in such manner, as in the judgment of the city engineer, and in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the state will prevent the pollution and contamination of the city's water supply or the contamination of any other well within the city limits. Such filling and plugging shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer, and at the expense of the owner of such well. 
(c)  Whenever the city engineer shall receive notice from any source of the existence of an abandoned well which has not been plugged and filled in accordance with the provisions of this article, he shall notify the owner or agent in charge of the well or of the property upon which it is situated that such well is abandoned and shall instruct him to fill and plug such well in accordance with this article, and the owner or operator of such well shall comply with such order within sixty (60) days after the date of same. Should he fail to so comply within such period or if after using reasonable diligence, should the city engineer fail to locate the owner or the agent in charge of such well or of the property upon which the well is situated, the city engineer may go on the land or property upon which the well is situated and fill and plug the same in the manner required by this article. Whenever it becomes necessary for the city engineer to fill and plug any abandoned well, the owner thereof shall be liable to the city engineer for the cost of doing such work and shall pay the same upon demand. 
(Code 1965, § 21-60)  
Sec. 19-86. - Wells contaminating city's water supply—Action by city engineer. 
Every well whether dug or drilled, now constructed or which may hereafter be constructed, which for any reason does not completely prevent the mixing of water or other liquid from above and below the source of the city's water supply with the water in the source of the city's water supply, or which for any reason would tend to pollute or contaminate any other well or the water in the source of the city's water supply, shall be considered a defective well and the city engineer on his own initiative or upon information or complaint from any source may make an examination of any well suspected of being defective and if the examination indicates in the opinion of the city engineer that the well is a probable source of contamination of the city water supply or any other well or that the water from the well is unsafe for human consumption, shall issue written instructions to the owner or his agent in charge of such well or the property upon which it is situated, for correcting the defects to comply with the provisions of this article, and prescribe a time which, in his judgment, under all the circumstances is reasonable and within which such instructions shall be complied with. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners or operators of such defective well to fail to comply with such instructions within the time limit prescribed by the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 21-61)  
Sec. 19-87. - Same—Declared nuisance; abatement. 
Any well or other opening now constructed or which may hereafter be constructed penetrating the underground water supply and which pollutes or contaminates any other well or the city's water supply, is hereby declared a nuisance and on notice to the owner of such well, or to the operator thereof or to his agent in charge of the well or of the property on which it is situated, issued by the city engineer, such nuisance shall be abated by the owner within ten (10) days from the date of such notice by filling and plugging the well or opening in the manner provided for in this article for abandoned wells. If he shall fail to abate such nuisance within the time or if after exercising reasonable diligence, the city engineer is unable to locate the owner or his agent, the city engineer shall have the right to go on the land or property upon which the well is situated and abate the nuisance in the manner provided and the owner thereof shall be liable to the city engineer for the cost of such work and shall pay same upon demand. 
(Code 1965, § 21-62)  
Sec. 19-88. - Failure to comply with city engineer's orders constitutes a violation of this article. 
It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any order of the city engineer made in conformity with and under the authority of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 21-63)  
Secs. 19-89—19-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power regarding sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.002. 
 
Sec. 19-106. - Dumping oil, harmful substances, into sewer system prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly deposit, place or put or permit the depositing, placing or putting into the city sewer system any grease, oil, chemicals or any other substance that might be detrimental to the sewer system or the treatment plant where such sewage is treated. 
(Code 1965, § 21-74)  
Sec. 19-107. - Toilet must be connected to sewer system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or use any toilet in the city unless it is connected with a water type sewer system. The term "toilet" shall mean a small room or compartment fitted with a seat over a hopper for the reception of human excrement, and any other structure used for such purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 21-75)  
Sec. 19-108. - Water closets required on construction jobs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, rebuild or build any house, building, or other structure where a person is working for a period of fifteen (15) days or longer without first constructing and maintaining an adequate water closet on the premises where the building, repairing, or construction work is being done; provided however, where repair work is being done on premises that has a water closet on such premises and permission is given by the owner or tenant of such premises for the use of such water closet by the persons working on the job, it shall not be necessary to construct and maintain an additional water closet. 
(b)  The term "water closet" shall mean a small room or compartment fitted with a seat over a hopper for the reception of human excrement that is subsequently removed by flushing the hopper with water and which is connected with the general sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 21-76)  
Sec. 19-109. - Connection to sewer system required; privies prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to dispose of sewage from any premises within the city in any way except into the city sewer system. 
(b)  Sewage disposal systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with specifications promulgated by the city engineer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct privies within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 21-77; Ord. No. 1325, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1854, § 1, 1-25-10) 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to require connection to city sewer system, Art. VII, § 3(c).  
Sec. 19-110. - Fee. 
A waste treatment fee shall be paid to the city by any user of the city sewer system. The sewer fee shall be added to the monthly water bills issued by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 21-78)  
Sec. 19-111. - Categories of user and sewer rates. 
(a)  Categories of users: 
(1)  Residential. Customers with a meter serving only a one-family or two-family residential dwelling. 
(2)  Multi-Family. Customers with a meter serving a structure that contains three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(3)  Commercial. Customers conducting retail, manufacturing and other business activities, including, but not limited to, restaurants, laundries, offices and stores. Includes hydrant meter consumption as described in section 19-37. 
(4)  Institutional. Customers that are churches, public and private schools and other facilities for training and educational purposes. 
(5)  Irrigation. Customers with a meter that is utilized solely for the irrigation of landscaping or other exterior uses. 
(b)  The sewer fee shall be collected as follows: 
(1)  One and two-family residential dwellings shall pay a sewer fee based on the average metered water consumption per month during three (3) complete consecutive billing periods commencing on or after November 15 of each year and terminating upon the completion of three (3) full billing periods ending no later than March of each year. 
(2)  Public, private or parochial elementary and secondary school shall pay a sewer fee based upon seventy (70) percent of current monthly metered water consumption if meter measures water used for both irrigation and non-irrigation purposes, or one hundred (100) percent of current monthly metered water consumption if the meter measures water used solely for non-irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1683, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 1812, § 10, 2-23-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1683, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed the former § 19-111, and enacted a new § 19-111 as set out herein. The former § 19-111 pertained to rates and derived from Code 1965, § 21-79; Ord. No. 1253, adopted April 17, 1991; Ord. No. 1269, adopted Dec. 9, 1991; Ord. No. 1294, adopted Jan. 25, 1993; Ord. No. 1336, adopted August 8, 1994; Ord. No. 1536, adopted Sept. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 1558, adopted August 9, 2004; Ord. No. 1660, adopted July 31, 2006.  
Sec. 19-112. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  The monthly charge for sewer service based on the average consumption established by section 19-111(a)(1) and the following rates: 
Table 1 
Effective March 1, 2019 
Consumption 
in Cubic Feet 	Residential 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Institutional 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 
Base Rate 500 cf or less 	$21.39 	$21.39 	$21.39 
501 cf or more 	3.57 	3.57 	3.57 
 
Effective July 1, 2020 
Consumption 
in Cubic Feet 	Residential 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Institutional 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 
Base Rate 500 cf or less 	$23.53 	$23.53 	$23.53 
501 cf or more 	3.93 	3.93 	3.93 
 
Effective March 1, 2021 
Consumption 
in Cubic Feet 	Residential 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 	Institutional 
Standard Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet 
Base Rate 500 cf or less 	$25.88 	$25.88 	$25.88 
501 cf or more 	4.32 	4.32 	4.32 
 
(b)  In addition to the charges in paragraph (a) above, certain users of the sanitary sewer system (such as, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, laundromats, washaterias, seafood and meat establishments, and bakeries) shall pay a monthly surcharge based on the biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids emitted by such users of the city's sanitary sewer system. The surcharges shall be determined by the appropriate divisions of the San Antonio Water System (SAWS). 
(c)  Pass-through of third party charges. The above stated sewer surcharges for the affected users of the city's sewer system shall be increased or decreased automatically as the result of any increase or decrease in charges by SAWS. 
(Ord. No. 1683, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 1966, 4-8-13; Ord. No. 2026 , 7-27-15; Ord. No. 2072 , 3-13-17; Ord. No. 2096 , 1-22-18; Ord. No. 2113 , 10-22-18; Ord. No. 2157 , 4-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1683, adopted Nov. 13, 2006, repealed the former § 19-112, and enacted a new § 19-112 as set out herein. The former § 19-112 pertained to categories of users and derived from Code 1965, § 21-80; Ord. No. 1587, adopted July 12, 2005.  
Sec. 19-113. - Termination of service. 
The sewer fees authorized herein shall be due and payable at the same time as and in addition to the water charges provided in article II hereof and late payment shall be subject to the same penalties provided in section 19-30 of this chapter. Failure to pay applicable sewer fees after the due date thereof shall result in termination of water service as provided in section 19-31 of this chapter. Water service shall not be resumed until applicable sewer fees are paid. 
(Code 1965, § 21-81)  
Sec. 19-114. - Installation, repair, maintenance, relocation and removal of sewer laterals. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, the cost of installation, repair, maintenance, relocation and removal of laterals and service lines for connection to the city sewer system shall be borne entirely by users of the city sewer system. "Sewer laterals" for the purposes of this section shall refer to sewer service lines for the transportation of sanitary sewage from a structure to a sewer main owned or operated by the city. 
(b)  Upon notification by a user of a potential sewer lateral failure, the city shall conduct an inspection of the adjacent sewer main at no cost to the user to determine if the sewer main has caused a failure of the user's sewer lateral. 
(c)  If a sewer lateral failure is determined by the city to have been caused by a failure of the sewer main, the city shall repair the main by whatever means deemed most appropriate by the city to restore service. 
(d)  If a sewer lateral failure is determined to be located outside of a user's private property and the sewer lateral serves a single-family or two-family residential structure, the city shall repair the lateral by whatever means deemed most appropriate by the city to restore service. 
(e)  Prior to the performance of any work by the city, a single-family or two-family residential user must: 
(1)  Provide the city with evidence acceptable to the city that the sewer lateral has failed; 
(2)  Provide the city with evidence acceptable to the city that the failure is located outside of the customer's private property; 
(3)  Clearly mark on the ground surface the location of the sewer lateral failure; and 
(4)  Sign a release waiving liability or warranty for any and all work performed by city to repair the sewer lateral. 
(Ord. No. 1854, § 2, 1-25-10)  
Secs. 19-115—19-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 
 
Sec. 19-200. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all non-domestic generators and users connected to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), as defined in section 19-201 of this article. 
(b)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(c)  Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section 19-201 of this article. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, schools, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(d)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system so as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or so as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1578, 2-9-05)  
Sec. 19-201. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq. 
City means the City of Alamo Heights, and includes its component departments, employees and agents. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means organic compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules, and being those substances which are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are also referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Generator means any person who, or facility which, owns or operates a grease trap or interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste. 
Grease trap or interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the grease trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also referred to herein as "grease traps or interceptors." 
Grease trap waste means material collected in and from an grease trap/interceptor located in the sanitary sewer service line that connects to the sanitary sewer collection system of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source. 
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW's operation, treatment processes or sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit. 
POTW or publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by Section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. For the purpose of this article, the POTW referenced is that maintained and operated by the San Antonio Water System (SAWS). 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code Section 312.142. 
User means any person who, or facility which, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, that contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater containing fats, oils and greases into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
(Ord. No. 1578, 2-9-05)  
Sec. 19-202. - Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Installations: 
(1)  New facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap or interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps or interceptors shall be installed and inspected by the city prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
(2)  Design and sizing. Grease traps or interceptors shall be either designed by a licensed professional engineer or sized per city Code. 
a.  An engineer may be retained to design an interceptor or grease trap. The design and structural integrity shall conform or exceed the standards outlined in the Codes adopted by the City of Alamo Heights. A professional engineer may design for specific operational requirements; however, the plans must be sealed by the designing professional engineer when submitted for approval. 
b.  Table 1003.3.4.1 of the 2000 International Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Alamo Heights, shall be used for sizing purposes in the event an engineered design is not used. 
(3)  Existing facilities. 
a.  Existing grease traps or interceptors in place at the time of the adoption of this article, even if not properly designed or sized, shall be permitted to have their use continued as long as they are operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, or original design, and in general accordance with these standards and TCEQ Standards, unless otherwise specified in writing and approved by the POTW. 
b.  Existing grease traps or interceptors that are not properly designed or sized shall be replaced in accordance with current Codes and ordinances when either: 
1.  A new permit is issued for work on plumbing or sewerage that handles fats, oils or greases at a facility, as defined in section 19-200, requiring a grease trap or interceptor; or, 
2.  Upon a change of ownership of the facility, as defined in section 19-200, requiring a grease trap or interceptor. 
c.  In the event of a change of ownership, a new Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the new grease trap or interceptor is in place and a copy of the appropriate final inspection is included with the Certificate of Occupancy application. 
d.  Replacements for existing grease traps or interceptors shall be required to meet all provisions of this article. 
(4)  [Disposal.] All grease trap or interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulations. 
(b)  Cleaning and maintenance: 
(1)  Grease traps or interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. 
(2)  Each grease trap or interceptor pumped shall be fully evacuated unless its volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck, in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the grease trap or interceptor is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code Section 312.143. 
(c)  Self-cleaning: 
(1)  Grease trap or interceptor self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s) or interceptor(s) located inside a building, provided: 
a.  The grease trap or interceptor is no more than fifty (50) gallons in liquid/operating capacity; 
b.  Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash); 
C.  The local solid waste authority allows such practices; 
d.  Grease trap or interceptor waste is placed in (a) leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and 
e.  Detailed records on these activities are maintained. 
(2)  Grease trap or interceptor self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request annually to the POTW for approval. The written request shall include the following information: 
a.  Business name and street address; 
b.  Grease trap or interceptor operator name, title, and phone number; 
c.  Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap or interceptor; and 
d.  Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
(3)  Self-cleaning operators must adhere to all the requirements, procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application to ensure compliance with this article. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  Date the grease trap or interceptor was serviced; 
a.  Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap or interceptor; 
c.  Waste disposal method used; 
d.  Gallons of grease removed and disposed of; 
e.  Waste oil added to grease trap or interceptor waste; and 
f.  Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap or interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and in an operable condition. 
(4)  Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaning operators will be subject to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program. 
(d)  Cleaning schedules: 
(1)  Grease traps and interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate so as to impair the efficiency of the grease trap or interceptor to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits and to ensure that no visible grease is observed in discharge. 
(2)  Grease traps and interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every ninety (90) days, or more frequently when: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or 
b.  The discharge exceeds pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
c.  If there is a history of non-compliance. 
(3)  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap or interceptor may submit a request to the city in writing for an exception to the ninety (90) day pumping frequency of their grease trap or interceptor. The city engineer may grant an extension for the required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
a.  The grease trap or interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated that the specific grease trap or interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, that is in consistent compliance with established local discharge limit parameters as determined by the POTW, or 
b.  Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases 
(4)  In any event, a grease trap or interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. 
(e)  Manifest requirements: 
(1)  Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
(2)  Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
a.  Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter; 
b.  Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
c.  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
d.  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste; 
e.  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
f.  Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
g.  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received. 
(3)  Manifests shall be divided into five (5) parts and records shall be maintained as follows. 
a.  One (1) part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
b.  The volume of the grease waste received; and a consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
c.  The remaining four (4) parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
d.  One (1) part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
e.  One (1) part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
f.  One (1) copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within fifteen (15) calendar days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
g.  One (1) part of the manifest shall go to the local authority. 
(4)  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five (5) years and be readily available for review by the POTW or the city. 
(5)  A copy of the manifest and verification of the pump-out shall be sent to the city engineer's office - utility manager within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the pump-out. 
(f)  Alternative treatment: 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the sanitary sewer collection system, and include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of section 19-202(f)(1) if the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
(3)  Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing, which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used, has verified that: 
a.  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160 degrees F (71 degrees C) or greater. 
b.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer collection system. 
c.  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer collection system. 
d.  The effluent, based on defensible analytical results, discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media remains in consistent compliance with established local discharge limit parameters which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. 
(4)  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in section 19-202(f)(3) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine compliance with established local discharge limit parameters shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the EPA and TCEQ, and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or Title 30, Texas Administrative Code Section 319.11. 
(5)  Testing shall be open to inspection by the city and the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
(Ord. No. 1578, 2-9-05)  
Sec. 19-203. - Implementation. 
(a)  New commercial construction and new commercial remodeling that would be subject to the provisions of this article and that would directly alter the sanitary sewer service line of a generator, and for which a permit is issued after the effective date of the enabling ordinance, shall immediately comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the new commercial construction or new commercial remodeling work received a building permit prior to the effective date of the enabling ordinance, then that generator shall be subject to the provisions of section 19-203(c). 
(c)  All other existing generators subject to the provisions of this article shall comply therewith within one (1) calendar year from the effective date of the enabling ordinance in which to come into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1578, 2-9-05)  
Sec. 19-204. - Schedule of penalties. 
If the city determines that a user, generator or a person is responsible for a blockage of a sanitary sewer collection system line due to violation(s) of the provisions of this article, that user, generator or person shall owe the city a civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the first violation, three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) for a second violation, and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per calendar day of violation per incident and may also result in termination of services. 
Further, any user, generator or person that violates any of the provisions of this article or that fails to comply therewith or commits any act in violation of any code adopted by reference, and from which no appeal is taken, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. Each day any violation or non-compliance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties of this article and section 1-5 of this Code, the city shall have the right of injunction to prevent or correct any violation or non-compliance of this article. Any user, generator or person against whom an injunction is obtained shall pay the reasonable attorney's fees of the city in connection with such proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1578, 2-9-05)  
ARTICLE VII. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-205. - Scope. 
This article applies to all water service customers within the City of Alamo Heights where water service or the associated plumbing has been altered or newly installed, where the possibility of unprotected cross-connections may exist, or where an existing backflow prevention assembly is installed. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-206. - Purpose. 
(a)  To protect the public water supply of the City of Alamo Heights from cross-contamination or pollution by separating potential contaminants from flowing into the public water supply systems; and, 
(b)  To prevent unprotected cross-connections by ensuring that all potential sources of contamination shall be separated from the public water supply system by an air-gap or an appropriate backflow prevention device; and, 
(c)  To establish backflow prevention and customer service inspection programs which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the City of Alamo Heights potable water supply system; and, 
(d)  To follow the guidelines set forth in the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-207. - Authority. 
The City of Alamo Heights, and all designated representatives, will be considered the authority having jurisdiction. The Public Works Department of the City of Alamo Heights is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies consistent with respect to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Secs. 19-208—19-211. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
[Sec. 19-212. - Definitions.] 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Altered" means any material improvement, relocation of or addition to the water supply system which does not include replacement of fixtures. 
(2)  "Backflow" means any unwanted flow of used, non-potable water or chemical substance from any piping system into the public water supply system. 
(3)  "Backpressure" means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
(4)  "Backsiphonage" means a form of backflow due to a deduction in system pressure which causes a sub atmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
(5)  "Cross-connection" means any unprotected water supply connection, actual or potential, between the City of Alamo Heights water supply system and any other source through which it is possible to introduce any used water, or chemical substance into the public water supply system; By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
(6)  "Health hazard" means a potential contamination hazard involving any substance that may cause death, illness, or spread of disease if introduced into the public water supply. 
(7)  "Non-health hazard" means a potential contamination hazard involving any substance that constitutes a nuisance, or may be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the public water supply. 
(8)  "Non-residential". Includes all properties except one- and two-family dwellings. 
(9)  "Potential source". Includes, but is not limited to, any lavatory, sink, or vessel which could provide the potential for backpressure and/or backsiphonage to occur thereby contaminating the potable water supply system. 
(10)  "Residential". Includes only one- and two-family dwellings. 
(11)  "Water purveyor" means the operator, herein referred to as the City of Alamo Heights, of the public water system which supplies potable water to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
DIVISION 3. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 19-213. - Required. 
(a)  No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with state regulations for public water systems and this article. The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained, and tested in accordance with state regulations and this article. 
(b)  All types of backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed according to the hazards table inset below. 
(1)  Table 1 reflects types of property uses, their corresponding hazard classification and recommended backflow assemblies. 
(2)  Table 2 reflects different types of cross-connections, their corresponding hazard classifications and recommended backflow assemblies. 
The following table lists many common hazards. It is not an all-inclusive list of the hazards which may be found connected to public water systems. 
Table 1 
Premises Isolation—Description of Premises 	Assessment 
of 
Hazard 	Required 
Assembly 
Aircraft and other missile plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Animal feedlots 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Automotive plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Breweries 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Commercial car wash facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Commercial laundries 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Cold storage facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Connection to sewer pipe 	AG 	
Dairies 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Docks and dockside facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Dye works 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Food and beverage processing plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Hospitals, morgues, mortuaries, medical clinics, dental clinics, veterinary clinics, autopsy facilities, sanitariums, and medical labs 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabrication plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Microchip fabrication facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Paper and paper products plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Petroleum processing or storage facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Photo and film processing labs 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Plants using radioactive material 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Plating or chemical plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Pleasure-boat marinas 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Private/Individual/Unmonitored Wells 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Reclaimed water systems 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Rubber plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Sewage lift stations 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Sewage treatment plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Slaughter houses 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Steam Plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Tall buildings or elevation differences where the highest outlet is 80 feet or more above the meter 	Nonhealth 	DCVA 
 
Table 2 
Internal Protection—Description of Cross 
Connection 	Assessment 
of 
Hazard 	Required 
Assembly 
Aspirators 	Nonhealth* 	AVB 
Aspirator (medical) 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Autoclaves 	Health 	RPBA 
Autopsy and mortuary equipment 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Bedpan washers 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Connection to industrial fluid systems 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to plating tanks 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to salt-water cooling systems 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to sewer pipe 	Health 	AG 
Cooling towers with chemical additives 	Health 	AG 
Cuspidors 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Degreasing equipment 	Nonhealth* 	DCVA 
Domestic space-heating boiler 	Nonhealth* 	RPBA 
Dye vats or machines 	Health 	RPBA 
Fire-fighting system (toxic liquid foam concentrates) 	Health 	RPBA 
Flexible shower heads 	Nonhealth* 	AVB or PVB 
Heating equipment 		
Commercial 	Nonhealth* 	RPBA 
Domestic 	Nonhealth* 	DCVA 
Hose bibbs 	Nonhealth* 	AVB 
Irrigation Systems 		
 with chemical additives 	Health 	RPBA 
 without chemical additives 	Nonhealth* 	DCVA, AVB, or PVB 
Kitchen equipment—Commercial 	Nonhealth* 	AVB 
Lab bench equipment 	Health or Nonhealth* 	AVB or PVB 
Ornamental fountains 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Swimming pools 		
 Private 	Nonhealth* 	PVB or AG 
 Public 	Nonhealth* 	RPBA or AG 
Sewage pump 	Health 	AG 
Sewage ejectors 	Health 	AG 
Shampoo basins 	Nonhealth* 	AVB 
Specimen tanks 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Steam generators 	Nonhealth* 	RPBA 
Steam tables 	Nonhealth* 	AVB 
Sterilizers 	Health 	RPBA 
Tank vats or other vessels containing toxic substances 	Health 	RPBA 
Trap primers 	Health 	AG 
Vending machines 	Nonhealth* 	RPBA or PVB 
Watering troughs 	Health 	AG or PVB 
 
NOTE: AG = air gap; AVB = atmospheric vacuum breaker; DCVA = double check valve backflow prevention assembly; PVB = pressure vacuum breaker; RPBA = reduced = pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
+ AVBs and PVBs may be used to isolate health hazards under certain conditions, that is, backsiphonage situations. Additional area of premises may be required. 
* Where a greater hazard exists (due to toxicity or other potential health impact) additional area protection with RPBA is required. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07) 
_____ 
Sec. 19-214. - Assembly testing and maintenance. 
(a)  All backflow prevention assemblies, independent of the hazard identified, shall be tested upon installation by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested annually and certified to be operating within specifications. The City of Alamo Heights will provide written notification to the property owners thirty (30) days in advance stating when the annual test of their backflow prevention assembly is required. Results of all testing must be forwarded to the City of Alamo Heights Public Works Department by the date of expiration. Failure to receive notification does not relieve property owners of the responsibility of annual testing for each assembly. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual 14, current edition) or the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control (current edition), and the regulations set forth by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(c)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the water customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the City of Alamo Heights within five (5) business days of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(d)  All existing backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet current state regulations but were approved devices at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, may, except for the testing and maintenance requirements under subsections (a) through (c), continue in use until the assembly can not meet all minimum annual testing performance standards. The City of Alamo Heights may require the assembly be replaced in the event that it is determined that the continued use of the assembly constitutes a health hazard. 
(e)  No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the City of Alamo Heights. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be placed with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this chapter. 
(f)  Gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually. The original calibration form shall be submitted to the City of Alamo Heights within five (5) business days after calibration. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-215. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the water customer where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed and repairs completed (if necessary) by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. Tests and repairs shall be at the expense of the water user. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Secs. 19-216—19-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTIONS PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 19-221. - Required. 
A customer service inspection report shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, alteration, or addition to the private water distribution facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-222. - Authority to perform customer service inspections. 
(a)  Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners certified plumbing inspectors and licensed plumbers with the water supply protection specialist endorsement may perform customer service inspections. 
(b)  Certified waterworks operators and members of other water related professional groups who have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission may perform customer service inspections. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-223. - Completion of customer service inspections. 
All required customer service inspections associated with a plumbing permit shall be included in the plumbing final inspection by the city's designated plumbing inspector. All additional customer service inspections will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-224. - Minimum standards of a customer service inspection. 
(a)  The customer service inspection must certify that: 
(1)  No direct connection between the public water supply and a potential source of contamination shall be permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water supply by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  No cross-connection between the public drinking water supply and a private water system exists. Where an actual air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. 
(3)  No connection exists which would allow the return of water used for condensing, cooling or industrial processes back to the public water supply. 
(4)  No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than eight (8.0) percent lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection which provides water for human use. Lead tests have been performed as required. 
(5)  No solder or flux which contains more than two-tenths (0.2) percent lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection which provides water for human use. Lead tests have been performed as required. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Secs. 19-225—19-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REPEAL AND SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 19-230. - Repeal. 
That all ordinances that are in conflict with the provisions of this article be, and the same are hereby repealed and all other ordinances of the City of Alamo Heights not in conflict with the provisions of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-231. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council of the City of Alamo Heights that the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this article are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not effect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of the article. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Secs. 19-232—19-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 19-236. - Authority having jurisdiction. 
The City of Alamo Heights Public Works Department shall have the responsibility for maintenance of the backflow prevention and customer service inspections programs. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-237. - Statement of violation. 
Any person who violates this article is guilty of a public health misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that one (1) or more of the provisions in this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-238. - Authority to disconnect service. 
If a person violates this article the City of Alamo Heights shall, upon due notice to the water customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violation(s) occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 19-239. - Reconnection. 
Upon request to open or reconstitute water service at a location previously discontinued due to violation(s) of this article, proof of a current customer service inspection as described in sections 19-130 through 19-133 shall be provided. Services disconnected under such circumstances shall be restored only upon receipt of the inspection report indicating that the previous violation(s) have been remedied and received payment of a reconnection charge, consistent with the fee and charge schedule found in section 19-1, and any other costs incurred by the City of Alamo Heights in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the City of Alamo Heights that the same violation shall not be repeated while this article is in effect. Compliance with this chapter may also be sought through injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1735, 10-8-07) 
