7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/430
City of Borger
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 13
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included as enacted through Ordinance
O-009-18 adopted 11/6/18.
HOME RULE CHARTER
SECTION 1. NAME, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS OF CITY.
The City of Borger, Hutchinson County, Texas, as the boundaries of said City are herein established, or may
hereafter be established, shall be a body politic, incorporated under and known by the name and style of the
“City of Borger”, with such powers, rights and duties herein provided. The boundary and limits of said
corporation shall be as follows:
“BEGINNING at a point at the Southwest corner of Section Eighteen, Block “Y”, M. & C. Survey,
Hutchinson County, Texas, thence North along the West lines of Sections Eighteen, Nineteen and
Twenty said block and survey to the Northwest corner of the southwest one quarter (1/4) of Section
Twenty said block and survey;
THENCE east through the center of Section Twenty of said block and survey crossing the East line of
said Section Twenty and continuing to the center of Section Thirteen said block and survey;
THENCE south to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter (SW 1/4) of same section Thirteen in
said block and survey;
THENCE west to the common corner of sections fourteen, nineteen, twenty, and thirteen in said
block and survey;
THENCE south along the east line of sections nineteen and eighteen said block and survey to the
southeast corner of said section eighteen;
THENCE west to the southwest corner of said section eighteen, in said block and survey to the point
of beginning all being situated in the County of Hutchinson, State of Texas.”
The City of Borger as such shall have perpetual succession; right of local self government; may use a corporate
seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property in fee simple or lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift,
devise, appropriation, lease or lease with the privilege to purchase for any municipal purpose; may sell, lease,
hold, manage and control such real, personal and mixed property, and make any and all rules and regulations by
ordinance or resolution which may be required to carry out fully all the provisions of any conveyance, deed, or
will, in relation to any gift or bequest, or the provisions of any lease by which it may acquire property; may
acquire, construct, own, lease and operate and regulate public utilities, and impound, manufacture and otherwise
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/430
acquire all such commodities and things as may be necessary or desirable for use or distribution in the operation
of public utilities, may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all the subjects or
objects which the city may lawfully tax, including the right to assess the franchise of any public corporation
using and occupying its streets or grounds separate from its tangible property; may borrow money on the faith
and credit of the city by the issue or sale of bonds or notes of the city in the manner and of the amount permitted
by the Constitution of the State; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may create,
provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature of public works and improvements; may
levy and collect assessments for local improvements and create and cause to be created improvement district as
now or shall be hereafter authorized by the laws of Texas, and may exercise all powers and shall have all rights
in reference thereto that now or may hereafter be authorized and permitted by law; may license and regulate
persons, corporations and associations engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade, as well as all
things and matters pertaining to sanitation or health; may define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things
detrimental to the health, morals, comforts, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and all
nuisances and causes thereof; may levy and collect from those who keep or permit to be kept or maintained
within the city anything whatever which may be or become productive of filth, disagreeable to the senses, or
dangerous to health, such taxes as may be deemed reasonably necessary to prevent or correct the evils caused
thereby; may establish a municipal court and prescribe its jurisdiction; may regulate the construction, height, and
the material used in all buildings, and the maintenance and occupancy thereof; may regulate and control the
platting and laying out and the use, for whatever purposes, of the streets and other public places; may create,
establish, abolish and organize offices and fix salaries and compensations of all officers and employees, may
make and enforce local police, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such ordinances as may be
expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good government, health and welfare of the city, and for the
government of the functions thereof.
State law references–Powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.S. art. 1175; general powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.
SECTION 2. OTHER POWERS.
The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition
to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and
may exercise all other powers which are now or which may hereafter be conferred on municipalities by the
Constitution and laws of Texas. And it is hereby expressly provided that it shall have all the powers that are
granted to cities of more than five thousand inhabitants by Chapter 13 Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of The
State of Texas, Revision of 1925 and all Amendments thereto.
SECTION 3. EXTENSION OF BOUNDARIES.
The extension of city boundaries shall be made in the manner as prescribed by law. (Amended 1/23/45;
Ordinance of 2/18/92, ratified 5/2/92)
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.; municipal annexation,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
43.021.
SECTION 4. [EXEMPTION FROM] EXECUTION [AND] GARNISHMENT.
No public or other property of any character held or owned by the City shall be subject to seizure or sale under
execution of any kind or nature, nor shall the City be subject to garnishment in any cause, nor shall it ever be
required to answer any garnishment proceedings; and any judgment taken against it in such proceeding shall be
void.
State law reference–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
101.023.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/430
SECTION 5. NOTICE [OF] CLAIM BEFORE SUIT.
The City shall not be liable on account of any claim for damages to any person or property, unless the person
asserting such claim, or some one for such person, shall give to the City written notice of such claim and of the
facts upon which it is based, within thirty days from the time it is claimed that such damages were inflicted, and
no suit shall be instituted or maintained on any such claim, until the expiration of ninety days from the time such
notice shall have been given.
State law references–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101; notice procedures, V.T.C.A., Civil
Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.101; liability for damages, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.077.
SECTION 6. COUNCIL-MANAGER PLAN.
The form of government provided in this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager Plan” and shall
consist of a Council of five persons who shall be elected at large in the manner hereinafter provided, one of
whom shall by a majority vote of the Council be designated as Mayor, and of a City Manager who shall be
employed by the Council and said Council and City Manager shall have and exercise the powers and discharge
the duties hereinafter specified. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. II, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
Editor's note–Ordinance 1969-2, ratified April 1, 1969, changed the form of government from the Commission-Manager Plan to the
Council-Manager Plan.
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
SECTION 7. ELECTION LAWS.
All elections held under the provisions of this Charter shall be in conformity with the then existing state election
laws; however, ballots used for the election of Councilmembers shall be without party designation. (Ordinance
1969-2, art. III, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
State law reference–Provisions regarding elections generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code.
SECTION 8. VACANCIES.
Vacancies in the Office of Mayor and in the Council shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the
unexpired term except as herein otherwise provided but any vacancies resulting from a recall election shall be
filled in the manner provided in such cases.
In the event as many as three members of the City Council shall resign within the time contained in three
consecutive days, a municipal election shall be called by the remaining Councilmembers and shall be held
within thirty days thereafter in the manner provided by this Charter for the holding of municipal elections for the
purpose of filling the vacancies caused by such resignation.
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
SECTION 9. QUALIFICATIONS.
Each Councilmember shall be a resident citizen of the City of Borger, and have the qualifications of electors
therein, and shall have resided in the City of Borger at least one year preceding their election. The
Councilmembers and other officers and employees shall not hold any other public office of emolument and shall
not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the municipality or
interested in the sale to the city of any supplies, equipment, material or articles purchased; nor shall either of
them be the owner of stock in any public utility or public service corporation within the city, nor in the employ
of any owner of stock in any public utility or public service corporation. Any officer or employee of the city who
shall cease to possess any of the qualifications herein required shall forfeit their office or position and any
contract in which any officer or employee shall or may become interested, may be declared void by the Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/430
No officer or employee of the city shall accept any frank, free tickets, passes or service, or anything of value,
directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation, upon terms more favorable than are granted to the
public, and any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, such office or
employment shall be forfeited. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence requirements for
home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003; candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 143.
SECTION 10. ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
The elective officers of the city shall consist of five Councilmembers, each of whom shall be qualified electors
and each shall have resided in the City of Borger for one year next preceding their election and in all elections
held hereunder whether from the election of five or a less number of Councilmembers, the candidate or
candidates receiving the greatest number of votes of the qualified voters of the city at large voting at said
election shall be declared elected.
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence requirements for
home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003; candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 143.
SECTION 11. ELECTION RESULTS.
The Council shall, on the first Monday after each regular and special election, or, if for any cause the same
cannot be done on the first Monday, then as soon thereafter as practicable, canvass the returns, and declare the
result of such elections.
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
SECTION 12. TERM OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
(1) An election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May for the election of City Councilmembers.
At the election for Councilmembers to be held on April 1, 1969, the two (2) candidates receiving the greatest
number of votes of qualified voters of said election shall be elected for a term of three (3) years; the two (2)
candidates who receive the next greatest number of votes of the qualified voters shall be elected for a term of
two (2) years. The candidate receiving the next greatest number of votes of the qualified voter shall be elected
for a one year term.
(2) Following such initial election, each Councilmember thereafter elected shall be elected for a three-year
term, however, any appointment of a Councilmember as authorized by the Charter shall be only until the next
annual election. If a Councilmember is to be elected for an unexpired term, the Candidate seeking such position
shall so designate in their application.
(3) If an election should be necessary under Section 8 hereof, the candidates in their application shall state the
term remaining unexpired they desire to seek.
(Ordinance 1969-2, art. III, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69; election of 5/7/88)
State constitution reference–Term of office exceeding two years but not to exceed four years, vacancies, Texas Constitution, art. 11,
sec. 11.
State law references–Date for election of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.042; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, ch. 41; election by plurality, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.001 et seq.
SECTIONS 13–18. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Sections 13 through 18 were repealed April 1, 1969, at an election held pursuant to Ordinance 1969-2, art. III, adopted
February 18, 1969. The subject matter of the repealed sections is as follows: sec. 13, nomination of candidates; sec. 14, nominating
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/430
petition; sec. 15, form of nominating petition; sec. 16, filing with clerk; sec. 17, form of ballot; sec. 18, rotation of names on ballot.
SECTION 19. RECALL ELECTIONS.
The Mayor and any and all of the Councilmembers may be removed from office by the electors. The procedure
to effect such removal shall be as follows:
A petition demanding that the question of removing any such officer be submitted to the electors
shall be filed with the City Secretary.
Each such petition shall outline in detail specific allegations of official misconduct, incompetency,
willful violation of any municipal ordinance, conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
or felony while in office, or other reasons relating to the performance of official duties regarding the
one (1) officer whose removal is sought.
Such petition for the recall of any or all of the Councilmembers or the Mayor shall be signed by a
number of registered voters residing within the City equal to thirty (30) percent of the votes cast at
the last regular municipal election; but in no event shall fewer than five hundred (500) signatures be
required.
The signatures to such petitions need not be appended to any one paper.
(Election of 5/7/88)
SECTION 20. PETITION FOR RECALL.
Petition papers shall be procured from the City Secretary, who shall keep a sufficient number of such blank
petitions on file for distribution as herein provided. Prior to the insurance [issuance] of such petition papers an
affidavit shall be made by one or more qualified electors and filed with the City Secretary, stating the name and
office of the officer or officers sought to be removed. The City Secretary upon issuing any such petition papers
to an elector, shall enter in a record, to be kept in such office, the name of the elector to whom issued, the date of
such issuance and the number of papers issued, and shall certify on such papers the name of the elector to whom
issued and the date issued. No petition papers so issued shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears
such certificate of the City Secretary and unless it be filed as provided herein.
SECTION 21. RECALL PETITION SIGNATURES.
Each signer of a recall petition shall sign their name in ink or indelible pencil and shall place thereon after their
name, their place of residence by street and number, voter registration number, date of signing and their printed
name. The provisions of Charter [Chapter] 141, Subchapter C, Texas Election Code, as amended, shall apply to
any recall petition and to the signatures obtained in support thereof. (Election of 5/7/88)
SECTION 22. TIME [FOR] FILING WITH CITY SECRETARY.
All papers comprising a recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one instrument
within twenty (20) days after the filing with the City Secretary of the affidavit stating the name and office of the
officer sought to be removed.
At the time of filing such recall petition, an individual or any group of individuals seeking the recall of any
officer shall file with the City Secretary a cash or surety bond in an amount to be determined by the City
Secretary sufficient to pay the expenses of such recall election. The costs of an unsuccessful recall election shall
be paid from the bond.
(Election of 5/7/88)
SECTION 23. ELECTION ON RECALL.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/430
The City Secretary shall inspect each petition presented seeking the recall of a City officer, in order to determine
whether it contains the required number of valid signatures and complies with the other requirements of this
charter and state law, within fifteen (15) business days after the filing of each such petition and bond. Upon
verification that the petition presented contains the required number of valid signatures and conforms to the
requirements of this charter and state law, the City Secretary shall at once notify the officer sought to be recalled,
and shall submit the recall petition to the Council within thirty (30) days after its filing. If the official whose
removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after such notice, the Council shall thereupon order and
fix a day for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held not less than forty-five (45) days nor more
than seventy-five (75) days after the petition has been presented to the Council at the same time if any general
election is held within such period; but is [if] no such election be held within such period, the Council shall call
a special recall election to be held within the time aforesaid.
Before any such recall election for the removal of Mayor or Councilmembers shall be set, there shall be
nominated candidates to fill the vacancy or vacancies. Such nominations shall be made by petition; petitions for
each such candidate shall be signed by at least five (5) percent of the number of voters of the City of Borger
voting at the last regular municipal election, and shall be filed with the City Secretary of the City of Borger not
less than fifteen (15) days after the filing of the recall petition. The form and requirements for said petition and
acceptance by candidates shall be the same as provided in this charter in the case of election of Mayor and
Councilmembers.
(Election of 5/7/88)
SECTION 24. RECALL BALLOT.
The ballots at such recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted, “Shall (name of
person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?”
Immediately following each such question there shall be printed on the ballots the two propositions,
in the order set forth:
For the removal of (name of person).
Against the removal of (name of person).
In voting said ballot the voters shall indicate their vote by placing an X in the square beside the
statement indicating the way they wish to vote.
Under said questions shall be placed the names of candidates to fill the vacancy or vacancies. The
name of the officer or officers whose removal is sought shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate
or candidates to succeed themselves.
(Election of 5/7/88)
SECTION 25. RESULTS [OF] RECALL ELECTION.
Should a majority of the votes cast at a recall election be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot,
such officer shall continue in office for the remainder of such officer's unexpired term, subject to recall as
before. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot,
the officer shall be deemed removed from office, and the replacement candidate receiving the highest number of
votes shall replace the officer so removed for the remainder of his or her unexpired therm [term]. (Election of
5/7/88)
SECTION 26. TIME [OF] SECOND RECALL.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/430
No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor, or City Council Members within two (2) months after each
takes their office, nor in case of an officer re-elected in a recall election, until two (2) months after that election.
SECTION 27. INITIATIVE[,] REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Council by petition signed by at least thirty (30) percent of the
number of voters of the City of Borger voting at the last regular municipal election. All petition papers circulated
with respect to any proposed ordinance, shall be uniform in character and shall contain the proposed ordinance
in full, and have printed or written thereon the names and addresses of at least five electors who shall be
officially regarded as filing the petition and shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the purpose
hereinafter named. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 28. INITIATIVE [OR] REFERENDUM PETITION.
Each signer of a petition shall sign their name in ink or indelible pencil and shall place on the petition paper after
their name, their place of residence by street and number. The signature to any such petition paper need not all
be appended to one paper but to each such paper there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof,
stating the number of signers to such part of the petition and that each signature appended to the paper is the
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and was made in the presence of affiant.
SECTION 29. FILING WITH CITY SECRETARY.
All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one instrument, and
when so filed, the City Secretary shall submit the proposed ordinance to the Council within thirty (30) days from
the date of its filing. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 30. SUBMIT TO COUNCIL.
The Council shall at once proceed to consider it and shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from
the date of submission. If the Council rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a form different from that
set forth in the petition, the committee may then require that it be submitted to a vote of the electors in its
original form, or that it be submitted to a vote of the electors with any proposed change, addition, or amendment.
(Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 31. [WHEN CERTIFIED].
When an ordinance proposed by petition is to be submitted to a vote of the electors, the committee of the
petitioners shall certify that fact and the proposed ordinance to the City Secretary within ten (10) days after the
final action on such proposed ordinance by the Council.
SECTION 32. TIME [FOR] CALLING ELECTION.
Upon receipt of the certificate and certified copy of the proposed ordinance, the Secretary shall certify the fact to
the Council at its next regular meeting. The proposed ordinance shall be submitted to vote of the electors at the
next uniform election date as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., Art. 2.01(b) Election Code, however, if such
uniform election date is less than forty-five (45) days subsequent to the receipt of the Secretary's certificate by
the Council, then the election shall be held on the next uniform election date after the end of the forty-five (45)
day period. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Date for election of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.042; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, ch. 41.
SECTION 33. FORM OF BALLOT.
The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed ordinance shall state the title of the ordinance to be voted
on, and below it the two propositions, “For the Ordinance”, and “Against the Ordinance”, and in voting said
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/430
ballot, the voters shall indicate their vote by placing an X in the square beside the statement indicating the way
they wish to vote. If a majority of the electors voting on any such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof,
it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the city. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 34. VOTE TO REPEAL ORDINANCE.
Proposed ordinances for repealing any existing ordinance or ordinances, in whole or in part, may be submitted to
the Council as provided in the preceding sections for initiating ordinances, and if rejected by the Council, then to
a vote of the electors, as provided in Section 30. Initiated ordinances adopted by the electors shall be published
and may be amended or repealed as in the case of other ordinances, providing that no ordinance initiated by the
electors shall be amended or repealed sooner than three months after its enactment; nor shall any ordinance
repealed by the electors be re-enacted sooner than three months after such repeal.
SECTION 35. WHEN TO FILE OBJECTIONS.
No ordinance passed or franchise granted by the Council shall go into effect sooner than ten (10) days after its
final passage by the Council. If, at any time before becoming effective, thirty (30) percent of the number of
voters of the City of Borger voting at the last regular municipal election shall file with the City Secretary
objections to said ordinance or franchise, and a petition requesting that said ordinance or franchise be submitted
to a vote of the electors for their approval or rejection, it shall not become operative until voted thereon.
(Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 36. [WHEN SUBMITTED TO VOTE.]
The City Secretary shall deliver such petition to the Council which shall proceed to reconsider the ordinance, or
franchise, as the case may be. If, upon such reconsideration, the ordinance or franchise be not entirely repealed,
the Council shall provide for submitting it to a vote of the electors, and in so doing the Council shall be
governed by the provisions of Section 31, 32, and 33, hereof, respecting the time of submission and the manner
of voting on ordinances proposed to the Council by petition. If, when submitted to a vote of the electors, any
such ordinance be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall be deemed repealed.
SECTION 37. REFERENDUM VOTE.
Referendum petitions need not contain the text of the ordinances, the repeal of which is sought, hut [but] shall be
subject in all other respects to the requirements for petitions submitting proposed ordinances to the Council.
Ballots used in referendum elections shall conform in all respects to those provided for in Section 33 of this
Charter.
SECTION 38. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
If the provisions of two or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict, the ordinance
receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.
SECTION 39. EMERGENCY MEASURE.
Ordinances passed as emergency measures shall be subject to referendum in like manner as other ordinances,
except that they shall go into effect at the time indicated in such ordinances. If, when submitted to a vote of the
electors, an emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall be considered
repealed as regards any further action thereunder; but such measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient
authority for payment in accordance with the ordinance, or any expense incurred previous to the time of filing
petitions for a referendum vote thereon.
SECTION 40. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 40, pertaining to the officers of elections, was repealed April 1, 1969, at an election held pursuant to Ordinance
1969-2, art. III, adopted February 18, 1969.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/430
SECTION 41. ELECTION OF MAYOR.
The Council shall, at its first meeting after their election and qualification, or as soon thereafter as possible, by
ballot elect from their own membership one person, having in view their special qualifications for such position,
who shall be Mayor, and who shall have the power and discharge the duties specified and required by this
Charter. A majority vote of the entire Council shall be necessary to elect said Mayor. The Mayor shall hold his
office at the will of the Council, a majority vote of the Council being necessary to remove, and be subject to
recall by the electors as herein provided.
The Mayor shall be ex officio chairperson of the Council, and shall preside at their meetings. The Mayor shall be
recognized as the Official head of the City for ceremonial purposes, and by the Courts for the purpose of serving
civil process, and by the Governor for military purposes. During the absence or disability of the Mayor, the
Mayor's duties shall be performed by another member appointed by the Council.
SECTION 42. CITY MANAGER.
The Council shall employ a City Manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government and
shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all Departments. The City Manager shall be appointed
with the sole view of fitness for the position and without regard to political or religious affiliations. The City
Manager may or [may] not be a resident of the City of Borger, when appointed and the City Manager shall hold
the office at the will of the Council; provided the Council may at any time discontinue the City Manager's
employment.
SECTION 43. DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be:
(a) To see that the law and ordinances are enforced.
(b) To appoint all appointive officers or employees of the City subject to the approval of the Board
of Councilmembers, and, except as herein provided remove all or any appointed officers and
employees in the service of the City; all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone, all
removals to be for good cause only to be judged by the City Manager subject to the right of appeal to
the Council whose decisions shall be final. The members of the Board of Equalization excepted; such
appointments to be made by the Council. (Election of 4/7/84)
(c) To exercise control over all Departments and Divisions created herein or that may be hereafter
created by the Council.
(d) To attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the discussion but having no
vote.
(e) To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as the City Manager may deem
necessary or expedient.
(f) To keep the Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City.
(g) To prepare and submit the annual budget on the basis of estimate made by the Officers of the
various Departments.
(h) To require a monthly report on blanks to be prepared and furnished by the City Manager for
that purpose from the officers of all departments reporting activities of the department for the
preceding month. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. IV, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
(i) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required of the City
Manager by ordinance or by the Council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/430
SECTION 44. CITY MANAGER-ADMINISTRATIVE–INDEPENDENCE OF.
It shall be unlawful for the City Council or any of its members to attempt to dictate the appointment of any
person to office or employment by the City Manager, the Council having only the right to approve or disapprove
the appointment made by the City Manager, and when disapproved by the Council the Manager shall make
another appointment immediately, and submit the same to the Council for their approval or disapproval and shall
submit appointments to the Council until some person is approved by the Council. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager,
and neither the Council nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City
Manager, either publicly or privately.
SECTION 45. INVESTIGATIONS BY THE CITY MANAGER.
The City Manager may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or
employee to be examined. Any person or persons appointed by the City Manager to examine the affairs of any
Department or the conduct of any officer or employee shall have the power to require the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books and papers and other evidence.
SECTION 46. BOND [OF] CITY MANAGER.
The City Manager shall give an official bond in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or a
greater amount to be determined by the Council. Such bond shall be payable to the City of Borger and shall be
conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of such City Manager, and for the faithful accounting for all
monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such City Manager. Such bond shall be procured
from some regularly accredited Surety Company, authorized to do business under the Laws of the State of Texas,
and the Premium to such Surety Company shall be paid by the City of Borger. The City Manager shall have the
right to require official bonds from other appointive offices of the City in such amounts and conditions as the
Board of Councilmen may deem best for the efficiency of the public service.
All official bonds shall be approved by the Council and filed and recorded with the person exercising the duty of
the City Secretary.
(Election of 4/7/84)
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
SECTION 47. OATH OF OFFICE.
Every officer of the City, before entering upon the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe to the oath
prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas for County Officials.
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
SECTION 48. PAYING OUT MONEY.
No money shall be paid, nor warrant or voucher issued for any sum whatsoever, until after the City Council shall
have approved a claim therefor, and ordered the payment thereof, and before any warrant or voucher shall be
paid the same shall be signed by the City Secretary, attested with the seal of the City, and countersigned by the
City Manager.
SECTION 49. CONTRACTS BY CITY MANAGER.
Contracts for all expenditures, purchases or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, public printing, public
improvements or public works shall be let on written, sealed, competitive bids in the manner prescribed by law.
The City Council shall by ordinance establish procedures for the prompt payment of vouchers and expenditures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/430
made for such purposes. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. IV, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69; election of 4/7/84; Ordinance of
2/18/92, ratified 5/2/92)
State law reference–Purchasing and contracting authority of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chs. 252, 271.
SECTION 50. DUTIES OF COUNCIL.
The Council shall levy all taxes, apportion all funds of the City among the various departments[,] establish
special funds for special purposes, order election, canvass the returns and declare the result, enact all ordinances
of both civil and criminal nature, provide penalties for their violation, grant all franchises which they deem
proper, and have general power over the City finances, subject to the conditions and limitations imposed by this
Charter.
SECTION 51. WHAT CONSTITUTES QUORUM.
A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business except as
in this Charter otherwise provided.
SECTION 52. MEETINGS [OF] COUNCIL.
All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and its proceedings shall be recorded in the journal which
shall be open to the inspection of all the citizens of the City. All votes on ordinances, franchises, resolutions and
awarding contracts for any purpose shall be taken by “Yea” and “Nay” and entered upon the journal. At the
request of any member, all votes upon any other question shall be likewise recorded.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
SECTION 53. [TIME OF] MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday afternoons of each month, and
special meetings shall be held when requested by the City Manager and two Councilmembers, or when
requested by three Councilmembers. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. V, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
SECTION 54. REPORTS BY CITY MANAGER.
The City Manager shall monthly submit reports to the Council at a regular meeting of the work done in the
various departments for the preceding month, which report shall briefly and concisely show the work done, the
cost thereof, and the state of the various funds of the City. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. IV, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
SECTION 55. APPOINTMENT OF AUDITOR.
The Council shall as often as it deems advisable, and not less often than once each fiscal year, cause an audit to
be made of the books of accounts of the city. The audit is to be performed by a Certified Public Accountant,
licensed in the State of Texas. Such auditor shall furnish to the Council financial statements and reports as
recommended by the Municipal Finance Officers Association and as requested by the Council. A condensed
statement of such report of audit shall be published at least once each year. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
SECTION 56. ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.
Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form, and shall not contain more
than one subject, which shall be clearly stated in the title; but general appropriation ordinances may contain the
various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated. The enacting clause of all ordinances
passed by the Council shall be: “Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Borger.” The enacting clause
of all ordinances submitted by the initiative shall be: “Be it ordained by the people of the City of Borger.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/430
No ordinance, unless it be declared an emergency measure, shall be passed on the day on which it shall have
been introduced.
When any proposed ordinance, resolution or other thing duly presented for the action of the City Council shall
be finally acted upon and disposed of by the body before which it shall be pending, such action shall be binding
as the final action of the city thereupon, until the same shall be amended or repealed in some legal manner
authorized and provided by this Charter.
(Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 57. EMERGENCY MEASURE.
All ordinances and resolutions shall be in effect from and after ten (10) days from the date of their passage by
the Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The Council may, by an affirmative vote of all
members present, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein. An emergency measure
shall consist only of ordinances or resolutions for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property,
health, or safety, or providing for the usual daily operation of a municipal department, in which the emergency is
set forth and defined in a preamble thereto. Ordinances appropriating money may be passed as emergency
measures, but no measure making a grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or
regulating rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be passed as an emergency measure.
(Ordinance 1969-2, art. VI, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
SECTION 58. INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL.
The Council may investigate the financial transactions of any office or department of the City Government and
the official acts and conduct of any city official, and by similar investigations may secure information upon any
matter. In conducting such investigations the Council, or any committee thereof may compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or
attachments which shall be signed by the Chairman of the Council, which may be served and executed by any
officer authorized by law to serve subpoenas and other process. If any witnesses shall refuse to testify to any
facts within their knowledge or to produce any papers or books in their possession, or under their control,
relating to the matter under inquiry, before the Council, the Council shall have power to cause the witness to be
punished as for contempt. No witness shall be excused from testifying to their knowledge of the matter under
investigation in any such inquiry, but such testimony shall not be used against them in any criminal prosecution
except for perjury committed upon such inquiry. The Chairman of the Council shall have power to administer all
oaths to witnesses called to testify in such investigations.
SECTION 59. CHANGING DEPARTMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS THEREOF.
The Council shall create and consolidate such appointive offices and may divide the administration of the City's
affairs into such departments, as they may deem advisable, and may discontinue any such appointive office or
department except the office of City Manager.
SECTION 60. PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
A descriptive caption of all ordinances carrying a penalty shall be published once a week for two consecutive
weeks in some newspaper published in the City of Borger, and no such ordinance shall become effective until
ten days after the date of its last publication, provided that emergency measures shall take effect according to
their terms. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. VI, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013
SECTION 61. RECORDING OF ORDINANCES.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/430
Every ordinance, or resolution, upon its becoming effective shall be recorded in a permanently bound book kept
for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and the person exercising the duties of
City Secretary.
SECTION 62. NEPOTISM.
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, to the Mayor,
or to either of the Councilmembers, or to the City Manager, shall be appointed to any office, position, clerkship
or service of the City.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
SECTION 63. SALARIES - ATTENDANCE - NECESSARY EXPENSES.
The compensation of the Mayor and each Councilman shall be $25.00 per meeting attended, but not to exceed
$50.00 per month; provided, further that the Mayor and Councilmen may be allowed their actual and necessary
expenses incurred while on business out of the city on matters pertaining to the city affairs and then only upon
the filing of an itemized account of the same with the Treasurer properly verified and allowed by the Council.
(Ordinance 1969-2, art. V, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
State law reference–Compensation of officers in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.004.
SECTION 64. MUNICIPAL COURT.
There is hereby created, established and adopted in said City, a court to be known as the Municipal Court in said
City, which court shall have the jurisdiction and organization hereinafter prescribed.
Said court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of said City in all criminal cases arising under the
ordinances of said City now in force or hereafter to be passed and shall have jurisdiction concurrently with any
Justice of the Peace, Hutchinson County, Texas, in all criminal cases arising under the laws of the State of Texas
in which the punishment is by fine only, and arising within the territorial limits of said City. Fines shall be
assessed in accordance with the Borger City Code and the laws of the State of Texas, but shall not exceed the
maximum allowed by state law.
(Election of 5/7/88)
State law references–Municipal courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.001 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts,
V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003.
SECTION 65. SELECTION OF JUDGE OR RECORDER [MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE].
Such court shall be presided over by a judge in such City who shall be selected in the manner and under the
respective provisions of this Charter concerning the selection of officers other than the elective officers, and all
such provisions are hereby made applicable to the Judge herein provided for. Such Judge shall hold office for the
same length of time and under the same terms and provisions as other appointed officers of the City and shall be
subject to removal in the same manner and by the same procedure provided by this Charter for other appointive
officers. Such Judge shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the proper officers of the City
under the provisions of this Charter relative to the compensation of appointive officers.
The Council is authorized to appoint one or more Acting Judges who shall have the same authority as granted to
the regular Judge by this Charter and the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ordinance 1969-2, art. VII, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004; reference in state law to “recorder” means
“judge of the municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004(d); term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A., Government
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/430
Code, sec. 29.005.
SECTION 66. CLERK OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
The City Secretary of said City shall be ex officio clerk of said court and may be authorized to appoint a deputy,
who shall have the same powers as the City Secretary when acting as the Clerk of said court. It shall be the duty
of said Clerk to keep a record of the proceedings of said court; to issue all process and generally to do and
perform all the duties of a clerk of a court as prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas for the Clerk of the
County Court insofar as such provisions may be applicable.
State law reference–Municipal court clerk, generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
SECTION 67. TRIAL BY JURY.
Every person charged with a misdemeanor in said court shall be entitled, if they shall demand, to be tried by a
jury of six (6) legal residents of said City, who shall be summoned, empaneled and qualified as jurors in Justice
Courts under the laws of the State of Texas. For all jurors summoned, the City shall pay the sum of $10.00, and
for all jurors who serve the City shall pay the sum of $15.00 in each case. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. VIII, 2/18/69,
ratified 4/1/69; election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Right to trial by jury inviolate, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 1.12; trial before the jury, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch.
36; jury pay and expenses for jurors, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 104.001.
SECTION 68. PLEADING, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.
All rules of pleading, practice and procedure now established for the County Court by the laws of the State of
Texas shall apply in said Municipal Court insofar as the same are applicable except that the proceedings in such
court shall be commended [commenced] by complaint in the manner and under the regulations now provided by
law in criminal cases prosecuted before the Justice of the Peace of the State of Texas and except that the
Recorder [Municipal Court Judge] need not charge the jury except upon charges requested in writing by the
defendant or the defendant's attorney, which such charges the Recorder [Municipal Court Judge] shall have the
power to give or refuse under the same rules and regulations now applicable to the granting or refusing of such
charges by the County Judge in criminal cases under the Statutes of said State. Complaints before such court
hereby created and established may be sworn to before the Recorder [Municipal Court Judge], Clerk of said
court or the clerk's deputy, or the City Attorney or the City Attorney's assistant, each and all of which officers for
that purpose shall have power to administer oaths; or it may be sworn to before any other officer authorized by
law to administer oaths.
State law reference–Procedures for processing cases within criminal jurisdiction of municipal court, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch. 45.
SECTION 69. SEAL OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
The said Municipal Court shall have a seal having engraved thereon a star of five points in the center and the
words “Municipal Court of Borger, Texas” the impress of which shall be attached to all proceedings except
subpoenas issued out of said court and shall be used to authenticate the official acts of the Clerk and of the
Recorder [Municipal Court Judge] where they are authorized or required to use the seal of office.
SECTION 70. COMMENCEMENT AND TRIAL OF CAUSES.
In all prosecution in said court where under an ordinance or under the provisions of the Penal Code of the State
of Texas, the complaint shall commence “In the name and by the authority of the State of Texas” and shall
conclude “against the peace and dignity of the State”; and where an offense is covered by an ordinance the
complaint may also conclude “contrary to said ordinance;” and all prosecution in said court shall be conducted
by the City Attorney of said City or by the City Attorney's assistant; but the County Attorney of Hutchinson
County, Texas, if such person so desires, may also represent the State of Texas in such prosecution.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/430
State law references–Requisites of complaint, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 1.23; municipal prosecutions by city attorney or deputy city
attorney, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.201.
SECTION 71. RULES FOR COLLECTING FEES AND COSTS - PRACTICE.
The City shall have power by means of ordinances to be ordained and established in the manner provided by this
Charter for ordaining and establishing other ordinances from time to time to prescribe such rules not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas as may be deemed proper to enforce by
execution against the property of the defendant or by imprisonment of the defendant the collection of all costs
and fees imposed by such court and shall also have the power to adopt such rules and regulations concerning the
practice and procedure in such court as may be deemed proper by the legislative body of said city not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter nor the laws of the State of Texas. Until the passage of such
ordinance all rules and regulations of said City now in force concerning the Municipal Court therein and the
enforcement of collection of fees and costs imposed by said Court shall be applicable to the court hereby created
and established.
State law reference–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203.
SECTION 72. PAYMENT OF FEES AND COSTS.
All costs and fees imposed by said Court in any prosecution therein shall be paid into the City Treasury of said
City for the use and benefit of the City.
State law reference–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203.
SECTION 73. [MAXIMUM COSTS.]
There shall be taxed against and collected from each defendant in case of the defendant's conviction before said
court such costs as may be provided by the ordinances of the City; but in no case shall there be prescribed the
collection of greater costs than are prescribed by the law of the State of Texas to be collected from defendants
convicted before Justices of the Peace.
State law references–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203; costs paid by defendants,
Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch. 102.
SECTION 74. WITNESS FEES: ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES.
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the State of Texas regulating the amount and collection of
witness fees and for enforcing the attendance of witnesses in criminal cases tried before the Justices of the Peace
of the State shall as far as applicable govern and be applicable to the trial of cases before said court.
State law reference–Witness fees paid by defendant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.002.
SECTION 75. PUNISHMENT FOR CONTEMPT; BAIL.
The Judge of said Municipal Court shall have the power to punish for contempt to the same extent and under the
same circumstances as County Judges under the laws of the State of Texas may punish for contempt of the
County Court. The Judge shall have the power to take recognizances, admit to bail and forfeit recognizances and
bail bond under the same rules and regulations as now govern the taking and forfeiture of the same in the County
Court under the laws of Texas.
State law reference–Contempt of court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 21.002.
SECTION 76. PROCESS: HOW SERVED.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/430
All process issued out of said Municipal Court shall be served by the Chief of Police or any police officer of the
City under the same rules and regulations as are provided by the laws of Texas for the service by sheriffs and
constables of process issued out of the County Court so far as the same are applicable.
State law reference–Service of process, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 45.202.
SECTION 77. WRITS MAY BE EXECUTED ANYWHERE IN COUNTY.
Writs issued out of said court or by the Clerk thereof for offenses against the law may be executed and the
accused person arrested by the Chief of Police or any police officer of the City anywhere within the territorial
limits of Hutchinson County.
State law reference–Service of process, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 45.202.
SECTION 78. PEACE BOND: PROCEDURE CONCERNING.
Whenever any person has been required by the Recorder [Municipal Court Judge] to give a peace bond or a
bond for good behavior or any similar bond which may be legally required and has complied with said order to
give such bond and has been guilty of the violation or infraction of said bond and the same is proved or
established to the satisfaction of the court in any trial or complaint, such party so offending may be fined in the
sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and the City in its corporate name may sue in any court having
jurisdiction for the recovery of the penalty of such bond.
SECTION 79. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
In all cases the fines imposed on appeal together with the costs imposed in the Municipal Court and the Court to
which the appeal is taken shall be collected from the defendant and the defendant's bondsmen and such fines and
the costs of the Municipal Court shall, when collected, be paid into the treasury of the City. When the defendant
in such cases is committed to custody, the defendant shall be committed to the custody of the Chief of Police of
the City to be held by the Chief of Police in accordance with ordinances of the City providing for the custody of
prisoners convicted before said court; and said City shall be liable to the officers of the court to which the appeal
is taken for the costs due them when such defendant has fully discharged such fines and costs. Said Municipal
Court shall hold no terms and shall be at all times open for the transaction of business.
SECTION 80. APPEALS: APPELLATE PROCEDURE.
Appeals from judgments rendered by said Municipal Court shall be heard by the County Court of Hutchinson
County, and in all such appeals to said County Court the trial shall be de novo, the same as if the prosecution had
been originally commenced in that court. Said appeals shall be governed by the rules and practice for appeals
from the Justices' Courts to the County Court of the State, as far as the same may be applicable.
State law reference–Appeal procedures, bond, etc., Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.042 et seq.
SECTION 81. PRESENT MUNICIPAL COURT VALIDATED UNTIL ORGANIZATION
HEREUNDER.
Until the due and legal organization of the said court as herein provided for, the Municipal Court in said City as
now established shall continue to exercise its powers and jurisdiction.
SECTION 82. CITY ATTORNEY: QUALIFICATIONS, SALARY, POWERS AND DUTY.
The City Attorney shall be a regularly licensed and practicing attorney-at-law. The City Attorney shall receive
for services rendered such compensation as may be fixed by the Council, and shall hold the office until a
successor is appointed and qualified. The City Attorney shall represent the City in all litigation and
controversies, and it shall be the City Attorney's duty to approve in writing all proposed ordinances of the City
before they are adopted, or to file with the City Council in writing legal objections thereto. It shall be the City
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/430
Attorney's duty to draft or pass upon all proposed ordinances granting franchises of any kind, and in the event of
the City Attorney's disapproval of any such ordinance it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to file with the
City Council written legal objections thereto. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to inspect and pass upon
all papers, documents, contracts and other instruments in which the City may be interested. The City Attorney
shall be the legal adviser of the Mayor, City Manager, of the superintendents of the different departments, and of
the City Council, or any committee thereof, and of all city officers and employees, with respect to any legal
question involving any official duty or any other matter pertaining to the affairs of the City of Borger. The City
Attorney shall perform such other duties as the City Council shall direct. Whenever it shall be brought to the
City Attorney's knowledge through the affidavit of ten credible persons or otherwise, that any person, firm or
corporation, exercising and enjoying any franchise or privilege from the City of Borger, has been guilty of a
breach of any condition of such franchise or privilege [or] has failed to comply in any material manner with the
terms and stipulations thereof, it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to report the same to the City Council,
together with all facts bearing upon the same which may be brought to his attention. If the City Council shall
determine that said complaints are well founded, it shall be its duty to take such action as may be necessary, and
to cause the City Attorney to carry out its instructions thereon; and in the event the offending corporation, person
or firm, shall fail or refuse to conform to the orders of the Council with respect thereto, it shall be the duty of the
Council to direct the City Attorney to institute suit in the Court having jurisdiction thereof against such
corporation, firm or person, for a judgment or forfeiture of such franchise or privilege, or any other judgment
proper under the premises. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see that all penal ordinances of the city are
impartially enforced. (Amended 1/23/45)
SECTION 83. ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY: HOW APPOINTED, QUALIFICATIONS, SALARY,
POWERS AND DUTIES.
The City Manager may appoint an Assistant City Attorney, if in the City Manager's judgment it is necessary to
the proper administration of the office of City Attorney; and the City Attorney and the Assistant City Attorney
shall have authority to administer oaths and affidavits. The qualifications of the Assistant City Attorney shall be
the same as those prescribed for City Attorney, and the Assistant City Attorney shall receive such compensations
as may be prescribed by the City Council. The Assistant City Attorney's duties shall be such as may be
prescribed by the City Council.
SECTION 84. CITY SECRETARY: QUALIFICATIONS, SALARY, POWERS AND DUTIES.
The City Secretary shall receive for services rendered such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. It
shall be the duty of the City Secretary to attend all meetings of the City Council and to keep accurate books
provided for that purpose; to preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records and files of the
Council; to countersign all documents, papers and licenses authorized by the Council; to keep a record of all
such, and to countersign all warrants drawn by the Treasurer or other proper officer of the City. The City
Secretary shall perform such other and further duties as may be required either by law or by the City Council or
by ordinance or otherwise. The City Secretary shall have custody of all ordinances of the city and of all papers
and records of the City Council, and of the seal of the corporation, and shall affix the same to only such
documents and obligations of the city as the City Secretary may be legally authorized so to do. (Amended
1/23/45; Ordinance 1969-2, art. IX, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
SECTION 85. TAX ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR; SALARY, BOND, POWER AND DUTIES.
The City Assessor and Collector shall receive for services rendered, such compensation as may be fixed by the
City Council. The City Assessor and Collector shall give bond in such amount as may be prescribed by the City
Council, with good and sufficient sureties, said bond to be payable to the Mayor and the Mayor's successors in
office. The Council may require a new bond of him at any time, if in its opinion the existing bond is insufficient,
and whenever such new bond is required, the City Assessor and Collector shall perform no official act until such
new bond shall be given and approved. The City Assessor and Collector shall assess or cause to be assessed all
taxable property in such manner and within such time as the Council may prescribe. The City Assessor and
Collector shall make duplicate assessment rolls, and on their completion and approval the City Assessor and
Collector shall deliver one copy to the City Manager and retain one for use in making collections. The City
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/430
Assessor and Collector shall cause property holders to render their property for taxation in the manner
prescribed by law and ordinance, and for this purpose the City Assessor and Collector is empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations. The City Assessor and Collector shall collect all taxes due the city, whether
the same be general, special, occupation, license or otherwise, and shall pay the same over to the City Treasurer
within six days of their collections, taking duplicate receipts therefor, one of which the City Assessor and
Collector shall retain, and the other the City Assessor and Collector shall turn over to the City Manager;
provided, however, the City Assessor and Collector shall not be entitled to keep on hand a sum exceeding
$1,000.00. The City Assessor and Collector shall monthly or oftener if required make a detailed report to the
City Council of all collections made by the City Assessor and Collector. The City Assessor and Collector shall
be vigilant and see that no business is carried on, unless the license or occupation tax due thereon shall have first
been paid. The City Assessor and Collector shall have such deputies as may be given by the Council. The Tax-
Assessor Collector and Board of Equalization shall comply with all state laws regulating tax assessing and
collecting. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 86. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 86, pertaining to penalties for default of duty of the Tax Assessor and Collector, was repealed in the election of
April 7, 1984.
SECTION 87. DEPOSITORY.
The City Council shall designate a bank or banks in the City of Borger as the City Depository or depositories
which shall be selected for a period of two years, and the bank or banks in the City of Borger which shall offer,
in a bid, services of the greatest net value to the city shall be selected. The Council shall have the right to reject
any and all bids offered as City Depository. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. X, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69; election of
4/7/84)
State law reference–Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 105.
SECTION 88. CHIEF OF POLICE; QUALIFICATIONS, SALARY, POWERS AND DUTIES, BOND.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief police officer of the City. The Chief of Police shall receive for services
such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. The Chief of Police shall either in person or by deputy
attend Municipal Court while in session, and upon request of the City Manager or the City Council, attend City
Council meetings while in session, and shall promptly and faithfully execute all writs and process issued to the
Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall have like power with the Sheriff of the County to execute the writ of
search warrant. The Chief of Police shall be active in quieting riots, disorders and disturbances of the peace
within the limits of the City, and shall take into custody all persons so offending against the peace of the City,
and shall have the authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearance before the Municipal Court of
any person charged with an offense against the ordinances or laws of the City or the State of Texas. It shall be
the duty of the Chief of Police to arrest without warrant all violations of the public peace, and all who obstruct or
interfere with the Chief of Police in the execution of the duties of that office, or who shall be guilty of any
disorderly conduct or disturbances whatever in the presence of the Chief of Police or upon complaint of any
citizen. To prevent a breach of the peace or preserve quiet and good order, the Chief of Police shall have the
authority to close any theater, drinking house or any other place or building of public resort; and in the
prosecution and suppression of crime and arrest of offenders the Chief of Police shall have, possess and exercise
like power, authority and jurisdiction as the Sheriff of the County, under the laws of the State. The Chief of
Police shall give a bond payable to the City of Borger in the sum of not less than $2,500.00 or such other greater
sum as the City Council may require by ordinance. The Chief of Police shall perform such other duties, and
possess such other powers, rights and authority as the Council may by ordinance require or confer. (Election of
4/7/84)
SECTION 89. RIGHT OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/430
Said city shall have the right of eminent domain and the power to appropriate private property for public
purposes whenever the governing authority deems it necessary; and to take any private property, within or
without the city limits, for any of the following purposes, to wit: City Halls, Fire Stations, Police Stations, Jails,
Calaboose, Fire Alarm Systems, Libraries, Hospitals, Sanitariums, Auditoriums, Market Houses, Reformatories,
Abattoirs, Streets, Avenues, Alleys, Parks, Highways, Playgrounds, Sewer Systems, Storm Sewers, Sewage
Disposal Plants, Filtering Beds and Emptying Grounds for Sewer Systems, Drainage, Water Supply Sources,
Wells, Water and Electric Light and Power Systems, Street Car Systems, Telephone and Telegraph Systems, Gas
Plants or Gas Systems, Cemeteries, Prison Farms, Pest Houses, and for any other municipal purpose that may be
deemed advisable. The power herein granted for the purpose of acquiring private property shall include the
power of improvement and enlargement of water works, including water supply, riparian rights, standpipes,
watersheds and the construction of supply reservoirs. In all cases wherein the city exercises the power of
eminent domain, it shall be controlled as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of
property by railroad corporation in the State; the City taking the position of the railroad corporation in such case.
The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the governing authority when so
expressed, to take the fee in the land so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to
condemn public property for such purposes.
State law references–Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch. 21; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, ch. 251.
SECTION 90. OWNERSHIP OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
Said City shall have the power to buy, own or construct, and to maintain and operate within or without the city
limits, complete water system or systems, gas or electric lighting power plant or plants, telephone or telegraph
systems, street railways, sewer systems, sewage plants, fertilizing plants, abattoirs, municipal railway terminals,
or any other public service utility, and to demand and receive compensation for services furnished by the city for
private purposes or otherwise, and to have the power to regulate, by ordinance, the collection of compensation
for such services. Said city shall have the power to acquire by lease, purchase or condemnation, the property of
any person, firm or corporation now or hereafter conducting any such business, for the purpose of operating such
public utility or utilities and for the purpose of distributing such service within or without the city, or any portion
thereof.
State law references–Municipal home-rule powers to regulate public utilities and franchises using streets, etc., V.A.C.S., art. 1175;
municipal utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 402.001 et seq.; authority for municipal public services and utility systems
in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 402.002; municipal jurisdiction over electric utility, V.T.C.A.,
Utilities Code, ch. 33; municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations and services, V.T.C.A., Water Code, sec.
13.042; municipal jurisdiction over rates, operations and services of gas utility, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 103; Public Utility
Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 11 et seq.; miscellaneous powers and duties of utilities, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 181.
SECTION 91. FUNDS FOR ACQUISITION OF ANY PUBLIC UTILITY: SECURITY FOR SAME,
ETC.
Should the City determine to acquire any public utility by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, as herein
provided, said city shall have the power to obtain funds for the purpose of acquiring said public utility and
paying the compensation therefor, by issuing bonds or notes, or other evidence of indebtedness and may secure
the same by fixing a lien upon the property constituting the public utility so acquired, and said security shall
apply alone to said property so acquired.
State law reference–Municipal home-rule powers to regulate public utilities and franchises using streets, etc., V.A.C.S., art. 1175.
SECTION 92. MANUFACTURE OR PURCHASE OF PUBLIC UTILITY PRODUCTS.
Said city shall have the authority to manufacture its own electricity, gas or anything else that may be needed or
used by it or the public; to make contract with any person, firm or corporation for the purchase of gas, water,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/430
electricity or any other commodity or article used by it or the public, and to sell the same to the public as may be
determined by the governing authority.
State law reference–Authority for municipal public services and utility systems in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 402.002.
SECTION 93. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 93, which pertained to the right to operate and maintain public utilities which had been acquired by the city and
to the exclusivity of the right to operate and maintain said utilities, was repealed June 1, 1935.
SECTION 94. RIGHT TO REGULATE CHARGES, ETC., OF HOLDER OF FRANCHISE OR
PRIVILEGE.
Said city shall have the power to determine, fix, and regulate charges, fares and rates of any person, firm or
corporation now exercising, or that may hereafter exercise, any right of franchise or public privilege in said city,
and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished and the equipment to be used, and the manner in which the
service shall be rendered, and to change such regulations from time to time. In order to ascertain all of the facts
necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be reasonable rate or regulation, the governing
authority shall have full power to inspect the books and other records of such persons, firms or corporations and
compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose; providing that in adopting such regulations and in fixing or
changing such compensations, no stocks or bonds authorized or issued by any person, firm or corporation
exercising such franchise or privilege shall be considered, unless proof be made, that the same have been
actually issued by such person, firm or corporation for money, or its equivalent, paid and used for the purchase
and development of the property under investigation.
State law references–Franchise to use streets in municipality, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.071 et seq.; authority to grant
franchise to use or occupy public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 282.003; municipal home-rule powers to regulate
public utilities and franchises using streets, etc., V.A.C.S., art. 1175.
SECTION 95. STREET POWERS.
The powers, terms and provisions of an act passed by the First Called Session of the Fortieth Legislature of the
State of Texas and entitled:
“An Act to authorize incorporated cities, towns and villages incorporated under either general or
special law, including those operating under a special charter or amendments of charter adopted
pursuant to the Home Rule provisions of the constitution to cause to be improved streets, avenues,
alleys, highways, boulevards, drives, public places, squares, or any portion or portions thereof, and to
assess part of the cost thereof against abutting property and owners thereof, and against railroads,
street railroads or interurbans and owners thereof occupying, using or crossing streets, avenues,
alleys, highways, boulevards, drives, public places or squares improved, and to provide for the
enforcement and collection of such assessments and providing the powers, terms and provisions of
this Act shall not repeal any charter provision or law, general or special, but shall exist as alternative
powers, terms and provisions, and providing that any city which shall adopt or amend its own charter
under the Home Rule provisions of the Constitution may provide therein for any of the powers, terms
and provisions thereof, as part of, in lieu of, or as alternative to any charter provision, and providing
the necessary matters and things incidental to and necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of
this Act, and providing this Act shall not apply in any city, town or village not having more than one
thousand inhabitants, and declaring an emergency”,
are hereby embraced in and made a part of this charter, and the City of Borger and its governing body shall have,
possess and may exercise all of the terms, powers and provisions herein contained.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/430
State law reference–Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000 inhabitants, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, ch. 313.
SECTION 96. CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
Said city shall have the power to provide for the construction and building of sidewalks and curbs and to charge
the entire cost of the construction of said sidewalks, including the curb, against the owner of the abutting
property and make a special charge against the owner for such cost, and to provide by special assessment, a lien
against such property for such cost.
State law reference–Assessment for construction of sidewalks and curbs, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.093.
SECTION 97. IMPROVEMENT OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
Said city shall have the power to provide for the construction, improvement or repair of any sidewalk or curb by
penal ordinance, and to declare defective sidewalks or curbs public nuisances.
State law reference–Authority over sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.004.
SECTION 98. FRANCHISES FOR USE OF STREETS.
Said city shall have the power and authority to grant franchises for the use and occupancy of streets, avenues,
alleys and any and all public grounds belonging to or under the control of the city. No telegraph, telephone,
electric light or power, street railway, interurban railway, steam railway, gas company, waterworks water
systems, or any other character of public utility, shall be granted any franchise or permitted the use of any street,
avenue, alley, highway, or grounds of the city without first making application to, and obtaining the consent of,
the governing authority thereto, expressed by ordinance and upon paying such compensation as may be
prescribed and upon such condition as may be provided for by such ordinance, and before such ordinance
proposing to make any grant or franchise or privilege to any applicant to use or occupy any street, avenue, alley,
or any other public ground belonging to or under the control of the city, shall become effective, publication of
said ordinance, as finally proposed to be passed, shall be made in a newspaper published in the City of Borger,
once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks; which publication shall be made at the expense of the applicant
desiring said grant and said proposed ordinance shall not be thereafter changed unless republished as in the first
instance, nor shall any such ordinance take effect or become a law or contract or vest any rights in the applicant
therefor, until after the expiration of thirty days from the last publication of said ordinance as aforesaid.
Pending the time such ordinance may become effective it is hereby made the duty of the governing authority of
the city to order an election if requested so to do by written petition, signed by at least ten (10) percent of the
legally qualified voters, as determined by the number of votes cast in the last regular municipal election, at
which election the qualified voters of said city shall vote for or against the proposed grant, as set forth in detail
by the ordinance conferring the right and privileges upon the applicant therefor. Such election shall be ordered
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date of filing said petition, and if at said
election the majority of the votes cast shall be for the granting of such franchise or privilege, said ordinance and
the making of said proposed grant shall thereupon become effective, but if a majority of the votes cast at said
election shall be against granting of such franchise or privilege such ordinance shall be ineffective and the
making of such proposed grant be null and void.
No franchise shall ever be granted by the City Council other than an indeterminate franchise or a franchise for a
period of years not exceeding twenty, except in cases where an election is held, as above provided, to determine
whether or not a franchise shall be granted, and no franchise granted as the result of any election shall ever be
for a period of time exceeding forty years.
State law references–Franchise to use streets in municipality, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.071 et seq.; authority to grant
franchise to use or occupy public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 282.003; municipal home-rule powers to regulate
public utilities and franchises using streets, etc., V.A.C.S., art. 1175.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/430
SECTION 99. PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS.
Said city shall have the power to open, extend, straighten or widen any public street, avenue or alley and for
such purpose to acquire the necessary land by purchase or condemnation, and to provide that the cost of
improving any such street, avenue or alley by opening, extending, straightening or widening the same shall be
paid for by the owner of the property lying in the territory of such improvement and which is specially benefited
thereby and to provide that the cost shall be charged by special assessment against such owner and made a lien
against the owner's said property for the amount due by the owner. Three (3) Special Commissioners shall be
appointed by the County Judge of Hutchinson County, Texas, for the purpose of condemning said land and
apportioning said cost, and such apportionment shall be specially assessed by the governing authority of said
city against the owners and their property lying in the territory so found by said Special Commissioners to be
specially benefited in enhanced value, and said city may issue assignable certificates for the payment of any
such cost against such property owner and the owner's property and may provide for the payment thereof in
deferred payments, which deferred payments shall bear interest at the rate not exceeding eight (8) percent per
annum. Said city shall pay such proportion of such cost as may be determined by said Special Commissioners to
be due by it; provided the cost to be paid by the city shall never exceed one-third (1/3) of the cost of such
improvements. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000 inhabitants, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, ch. 313; authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
311.001; assessment for street improvements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.091; assessment of costs of improvements on
abutting properties, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 313.041 et seq.
SECTION 100. ALTERING STREETS, OBSTRUCTIONS, ENCROACHMENTS, ETC.
Said city shall have the power to control, regulate and remove all obstructions, encroachments and
encumbrances on any public street, avenue, or alley and to narrow, alter, widen, straighten, vacate, abandon, and
close same, to provide for sprinkling and cleaning same, and to regulate and control the moving of buildings,
and structures of every kind and character upon and along same.
State law references–Municipal regulation of obstructions on streets, etc., V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 311; authority of homerule
municipality to regulate movement of building on streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.005; closing of street or alley,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.007.
SECTION 101. PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, ETC.
Said city shall have exclusive control over all city parks and municipal playgrounds and the right to control,
regulate and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon; and to provide for raising,
grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening, erecting buildings, providing amusements therein, for
establishing walks and paving driveways around, in and through said parks, playgrounds and other public
grounds.
SECTION 102. CITIES, TOWNS AND VILLAGES: ASSESSMENTS FOR STREET WIDENING
AND OPENING PAYABLE [IN] INSTALLMENTS.
The powers, terms and provisions of an act passed by the Regular Session of the Fortieth Legislature of the State
of Texas and entitled:
“An Act to amend Chapter 17, Title 28; cities, towns and villages, Article 1213 of the Revised Civil
Statutes of Texas of 1925, so that the assessments for street widening and street opening may be
made payable in not exceeding sixteen annual payments, and declaring an emergency”,
are hereby embraced and made a part of this charter and the City of Borger and its governing body shall have,
possess and may exercise all of the terms, powers, and provisions therein contained.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/430
State law reference–Assessment for highway improvements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs. 314.046 and 314.049.
SECTION 102-A. CITY ZONING LAW: AUTHORIZING CITIES AND INCORPORATED
VILLAGES TO PASS ZONING REGULATIONS.
The powers, terms and provisions of an Act passed by the Regular Session of the Fortieth Legislature of the
State of Texas entitled:
“An Act enabling cities and incorporated villages to pass zoning regulations, granting full power to
said cities and incorporated villages, providing for the creation of districts, declaring purposes in
view, providing for the method of procedure, providing for certain changes, providing for a
commission, providing for a board of adjustment, providing for its powers and duties, providing
certain methods of enforcement and remedies, providing certain exemptions, providing the method to
be followed in case of conflict with other laws, providing for the validity for all parts of the law not
declared unconstitutional, and declaring an emergency”,
are hereby embraced in and made a part of this charter and the City of Borger and its governing body shall have,
possess and may exercise all of the terms, powers and provisions therein contained.
State law reference–Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 211.
SECTION 103. TAXATION.
The City shall have the power and is hereby authorized annually, to levy and collect taxes at a rate of not to
exceed Two Dollars and Fifty Cents ($2.50) on the One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) of the assessed valuation of
all real and personal property within the City Limits, not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of
the State. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Texas Property Tax Code supersedes municipal charter, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.02; tax liens and personal
liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32; property taxes authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.001; tax collection powers, V.T.C.A, Tax
Code, sec. 302.102.
SECTION 104. LICENSE TAX.
The City shall authorize the granting and issuing of licenses and shall direct the manner of issuing and
registering the same and fix the fees thereof but no license shall be issued for a longer period than one (1) year,
and shall not be assignable except by permission of the governing authorities of the city.
State law reference–Occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.101.
SECTION 105. FRANCHISE TAX.
The City shall have the power, annually, to levy and collect a franchise tax against any person, firm or
corporation using and occupying the public streets, alleys or grounds of the City separately from the tangible
property of such person, firm or corporation, and to levy and collect same annually upon the property of all such
persons, firms or corporations as the same are now and may be assessed under the State Laws, and thereunder
and shall have full power to enforce the collection of such taxes.
SECTION 106. REGULATE ASSESSMENTS.
The City shall have the power to regulate the manner and mode of making out tax lists, inventories and
appraisement of property therein, and to prescribe the oath that shall be administered to each person rendering
property for taxation and to prescribe how, when, where property shall be rendered and to prescribe the number
of, and forms of assessment, rolls and to adopt such measures as may be deemed advisable to secure the
assessment of all properties within the City Limits and to collect taxes thereon and may provide a fine and
penalty upon all persons failing, neglecting or refusing to render their property for taxation, and to do all things
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/430
necessary or proper to render effectual the collection of money by taxation, and provide methods of enforcing
same by attachment, sequestration or otherwise.
SECTION 107. UNRENDERED PROPERTY.
The City shall have power to provide for the rendition and assessment of unrendered property for taxation and
levy and assess taxes thereon, annually and to provide for the rendition, levy, and assessment of taxes for
previous years on property omitted from taxation, and to provide interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum
for such unrendered or omitted property and to change and provide correction and assessment of property
erroneously assessed.
SECTION 108. TIME [OF] TAX LEVY.
All real, personal or mixed property held, owned or situated in the City of Borger shall be liable for all municipal
taxes, due by the owner thereof, including taxes on real estate, franchises, personal and mixed property. Such
municipal taxes are hereby declared to be a lien, charge and incumbrance upon the property so taxed and shall be
a prior lien to all other claims, sales assignments, transfers, gifts and judicial writs. Said lien, shall exist on the
first day of January of each year until all such taxes have been paid and against any real estate which, for any
cause has failed to be assessed for one or more years, and such lien shall be good and effective for every year for
which assessments have failed. Personal property of all persons, firms or corporations owing any taxes to the
City of Borger, is hereby made liable for all of such taxes, whether the same be upon personal or real property or
upon both. The governing authority of the City, at its first meeting in June of each year or as soon thereafter as
practicable shall levy the annual tax for each year, but special taxes or assessments allowed by this Charter may
be levied, assessed and collected at such time as the governing authorities may provide; provided that should the
governing authorities fail or neglect to levy the annual tax herein provided for any one year the annual tax levy
for the preceding year last made by said governing authority shall and will be considered in force and effective
as the tax levy for the year for which no annual tax levy was made.
SECTION 109. COLLECTION [OF] TAX.
The said City shall have full power to provide for the collection, by suit or otherwise, [of] taxes assessed, levied
and imposed, and is hereby authorized, and to that end shall have full power and authority to sell, or cause to be
sold all kinds of property, real and personal as provided herein, or by the revised Statutes of this State, and shall
make such rules and regulations and enact all such ordinances as are deemed necessary for the collection of any
taxes provided in this Charter.
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City shall be a party, for any bond,
undertaking or security to be executed in the behalf of the City.
The City shall have the power to control and manage the finances of the City; to provide its fiscal year and fiscal
arrangements.
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
SECTION 110. DIFFERENT FUNDS.
All money arising from the collection of taxes by the City shall be divided into funds and designated as “General
Fund”, “Interest and Sinking Fund”, and “Hotel/Motel Room Occupancy Tax Fund”, and such other funds as
may be authorized by ordinance of the City Council.
No irregularities in the time and manner of making or returning the City Assessment Rolls or the approval of
such Rolls shall invalidate any assessment.
(Election of 4/7/84)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/430
SECTION 111. BOARD OF EQUALIZATION - QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP - HOW AND
WHEN APPOINTED - POWERS AND DUTIES.
There shall be a Board of Equalization, consisting of three members. The members of said Board shall be
elected by the City Council upon nomination of any member thereof. Each member of said Board shall be a
qualified voter of the City of Borger, and shall have resided within the City at least one year next preceding said
member's appointment, and shall be at least twenty-five years of age, and an owner of taxable real estate within
the City of Borger. Said Board shall be appointed not later than the first day of May of each year, and shall sit as
a Board of Equalization to equalize the taxes assessed on the rolls of the Tax Assessor and Collector. In addition
to the powers granted by this Act, it shall have the powers and perform the same duties as the Court of County
Commissioners in regard to the assessment of property for taxation and the equalization thereof, and shall be
governed in its procedure and acts in this respect by the same rules and laws of the State of Texas that said
County Commissioners Court is governed by while sitting as a Board of Equalization. Said Board shall meet for
business as soon as the City Tax Assessor and Collector has compiled all or any one of the assessment rolls of
the City for its action, and shall carefully examine said roll or rolls and properly and equitably adjust and
equalize the taxable values thereon, and thus continue until it has adjusted and equalized the valuations of all the
property on said rolls provided, however, that the said Board shall not receive pay for more than five days in
performing its duties each year. Said Board shall also be governed by such rules and regulations as may be
prescribed by the City Council by ordinance, and upon the completion of its work it shall make due report of its
action to the City Council. The members of said Board shall each receive such compensation as may be
prescribed by ordinance, not to exceed $10.00 per day. The first Board appointed under this charter shall hold
office as follows: One for one year and two for two years, and thereafter the appointment shall be for a term of
three years.
In case of dissatisfaction with the decision of said Board of Equalization by any taxpayer, an appeal from the
decision of said Board may be had to the City Council, and such appeal must be by written petition specifically
stating the things complained of and be filed within thirty days after said Board has made its final report to the
City Council. The decision of the City Council in all cases of appeal from the decision of the Board of
Equalization shall be final, and no appeal shall lie therefrom.
(Ordinance 1969-2, art. XI, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
SECTION 112. BONDS.
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary thereto, the City of Borger shall have the
power to borrow money on the credit of the City for any public purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds,
funding and refunding bonds, time warrants, certificates of obligation and other evidence of indebtedness as now
authorized or as may hereafter be authorized to be issued by any City under and in accordance with the
restrictions, conditions and laws of the State of Texas. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law references–Public Security Procedures Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1201; bond elections generally, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, ch. 1251; municipal bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1331; authority of municipality to issue bonds,
V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 1331.052.
SECTION 113. INTEREST AND SINKING FUNDS.
It shall be the duty of the Council to levy an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on and provide the necessary
sinking fund required by law on all outstanding general obligation bonds, time warrants, and certificates of
obligation of the City. The interest and sinking fund shall be deposited in a separate account and shall not be
diverted to or used for any other purpose than to pay the interest and principal on all such bonds, time warrants,
and certificates of obligation issued by the City of Borger. The sinking fund maintained for the redemption of
any debt may be invested in any interest bearing security authorized by the laws of this State. Investments of all
sinking funds for interest shall mature at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of payment due on bonds issued
by the City of Borger. The Council may also invest any other City funds in any state or national chartered bank
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/430
in interest-bearing certificates of deposit secured by pledged securities as required by State law for City deposits.
(Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 114. SALE OF BONDS.
No bonds issued by the City of Borger shall be invalid because they are sold for less than par value and accrued
interest. The Council shall have the right to reject any or all bids. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 115. REVENUE BONDS.
The City shall have power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending
or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or facilities for any other self-liquidating municipal function
not now or hereafter prohibited by any general laws of the State, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the
obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties or interest
therein acquired and the income therefrom, and shall never be a debt of the City. All revenue bonds issued by the
City shall be in accordance with State law. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 116. EXECUTION AND REGISTRATION OF OBLIGATIONS.
All bonds, warrants and certificates of obligation shall be signed by the Mayor, countersigned by the City
Secretary and sealed with the seal of the City in the manner provided by general law, and shall be payable at
such times and place or places as may be fixed therein. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, when such bonds are
issued, to forward the same to the Attorney General of the State of Texas for approval and for registration by the
Comptroller of Public Accounts. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 116-A. BOND REGISTER.
The Director of Finance or other officer of the City designated by the City Manager shall keep, or cause to be
kept, for and on behalf of the City a complete bond registry and books showing all bonds, warrants, and
certificates of obligation issued, the date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, maturity and other information
pertinent thereto, of all bonds or other indebtedness surrendered and all other transactions of the Council having
reference to the refunding of the indebtedness of said City. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment
or cancellation shall be noted in said registry. The books shall be safely kept among the records of the City.
(Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 117. CITY HEALTH OFFICER: QUALIFICATIONS, HOW APPOINTED.
The City Health Officer shall be a qualified voter of the City of Borger, and shall have resided in said city for at
least one year next preceding appointment. The City Health Officer shall receive for services rendered such
compensation as may be fixed by the City Council. The City Health Officer shall be a competent physician,
legally qualified to practice medicine within this State, of reputable professional standing. The City Health
Officer's appointment shall be made by the City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council. After
appointment, the City Health Officer shall take and subscribe to the official oath, and shall file a copy of such
oath and a copy of this appointment with the Texas State Board of Health, and shall not be deemed to be legally
qualified until said copies have been so filed.
State law references–Health authorities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 121.021 et seq.; health authority in municipality
without organized local public health department or district, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 121.028 et seq.
SECTION 118. DUTIES.
The City Health Officer shall perform such duties as may be required of that office by general law and city
ordinances with regard to the general health and sanitation of the City of Borger, and perform such other duties
as shall be legally required of the City Health Officer by the City Manager or the ordinances of the City of
Borger. The City Health Officer shall discharge and perform such duties as may be prescribed for such
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/430
individual under the directions, rules, regulations and requirements of the State Board of Health and the
president thereof. The City Health Officer shall be required to aid and assist the State Board of Health in all
matters of quarantine, vital and mortuary statistics, inspection, disease prevention and suppression and sanitation
within the City of Borger. The City Health Officer shall at all times report to the State Board of Health in such
manner and form as said board may prescribe, the presence of all contagious, infectious and epidemic diseases
within the City Health Officer's jurisdiction, and shall make such other and further reports in such manner and
form, and at such times as said state board shall direct, touching all such matters as may be proper for said board
to direct, and the City Health Officer shall aid such said state board at all times in the enforcement of proper
rules, regulations and requirements in the enforcement of all sanitary laws, regulations and vital statistics
collection and to perform such other duties as said state board shall direct.
SECTIONS 119, 120. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 119, pertaining to the board of public charities, was repealed April 1, 1969, by an election held pursuant to
Ordinance 1969-2, art. XIII, adopted February 18, 1969. Section 120, pertaining to board of public library, was repealed April 1, 1969,
by the same election held pursuant to Ordinance 1969-2, art. XIV.
SECTION 121. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 121, providing for a board of city development, its membership, powers and duties and a tax assessment for the
raising of money for its operations, was repealed June 1, 1935. See section 136 of this Charter.
SECTION 122. RESERVED.
Editor's note–Section 122, pertaining to the segregation of Negroes and whites in cities, was repealed at an election held April 1,
1969, pursuant to Ordinance 1969-2, art. XV, adopted February 18, 1969.
SECTION 123. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
No warrant for the payment of any claim shall be issued by the City, unless such claim shall be evidenced by an
itemized account, under oath and approved by the City Manager, and audited and allowed by the City Council at
a regular or special meeting, and all warrants shall be signed by the City Manager and countersigned by the City
Secretary and/or their deputies. (Election of 4/7/84)
SECTION 124. OIL OR GAS WELL DRILLING PROHIBITED.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hereafter drill for oil or gas, within
three hundred feet of any church, public school, private residence or building where business is carried on
therein, within the corporate limits of the City of Borger as the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
dangerous to life and property, caused by the gas, noise, offensive odors and danger of fire explosion, and the
City Council is hereby directed and empowered to pass all ordinances necessary to enforce the restrictions
contained herein and provide penalties for the violation thereof.
State law references–Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, chs. 52, 81 et seq.; municipal regulation of exploration and
development of mineral interests, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, sec. 92.007.
SECTION 125. POLICEMEN.
There shall be appointed such number of policemen as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager for the
safety and protection of the citizens of Borger and their property. The appointments to be made by the City
Manager by and with the consent of the City Council and they shall receive such compensation as may be agreed
upon by the City Manager and the City Council and shall be under the immediate supervision of the Chief of
Police and shall be his Deputies in office. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law reference–Police force in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 341.003.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/430
SECTION 126. FIRE CHIEF; QUALIFICATIONS, SALARY, DUTIES.
The City Manager may appoint a Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall receive for services rendered such
compensation as may be agreed upon by the City Manager and the City Council. Such individual shall perform
such duties as fire chief as may be required of him by ordinance. (Election of 4/7/84)
State law reference–Fire department in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.011.
SECTION 127. CITY ENGINEER: QUALIFICATIONS, SALARIES, DUTIES.
The City Manager may appoint a City Engineer. The City Engineer shall receive for services rendered such
compensation as may be fixed by the Manager and approved by the Council. Such individual shall perform such
duties as City Engineer as may be required of such person by the Manager and City Council.
SECTION 128. AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER.
Amendments to this Charter may be submitted to the electors of the City by a majority vote of the Council and
shall be submitted by the council when a petition signed by thirty (30) percent of the electors of the city, setting
forth any such proposed amendment when same shall have been filed with the City Secretary in the manner and
form prescribed herein for the submission of ordinances by initiative petition. The amendment shall be
submitted to the electors at the next regular municipal election, if one shall occur, not less than 40 days nor more
than 60 days after said amendment is ordered submitted by the Council; otherwise, the City Council shall
provide for the submission of the amendment at a special election to be called and held within the time
aforesaid, not less than thirty days prior to such election the City Secretary shall cause a copy of the proposed
amendment to be published in the Official Newspaper of the City. If such proposed amendment be approved by
a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon it shall become a part of the Charter at the time fixed therein.
State constitution reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, Texas Constitution, art. 11, sec. 5.
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
SECTION 129. OTHER POWERS OF CITY.
All powers vested in Cities exceeding one thousand population by the provision of Title 22, or other provisions
of the Revised Statutes of the State of Texas, are hereby retained and are cumulative of the powers vested by this
Charter of the City of Borger, and the enumeration of the powers made in this Charter shall never be construed
to preclude by implication or otherwise, the city from exercising all powers incident to the enjoyment of local
self government and from doing any and all things not inhibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas.
SECTION 130. UNCONSTITUTIONAL PARTS.
Should any provision or portion of this Charter be declared unconstitutional by the Courts of this State, the
remainder thereof shall be unimpaired by such holding and shall be in full force and effect, until amended or
repealed, or held unconstitutional by the courts as herein provided.
SECTION 131. WHEN CHARTER EFFECTIVE.
For the purpose of electing officers and exercising the powers of the city as provided herein, this Charter shall
take effect from the time of its approval by a majority of the electors of the City of Borger.
SECTION 132. WHEN EFFECTIVE FOR OFFICIAL ACTS.
For the purpose of establishing departments, divisions and offices, and distributing the functions thereof, and for
all other purposes, this Charter shall take effect forthwith upon the qualification of the officers who shall be
elected at the first election of officers held hereunder.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/430
SECTION 133. VOTE ON PROPOSED CHARTER; MANNER, ETC.
This charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city of Borger for adoption or rejection, on the
fourth Tuesday in June, 1930, the same being the 24th day thereof at which election of a majority of the
qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, then it shall become the
Charter of the City of Borger until amended or repealed. It being impracticable to submit this charter by sections,
it is hereby prescribed that the form of the ballot to be used in such election shall be as follows, to wit:
OFFICIAL BALLOT
Special Charter Election held in the city of Borger, Texas, June 24, 1930.
FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER
AGAINST THE ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER
In voting said Ballot the voter shall indicate his vote “For the Adoption of the Charter” by scratching or running
a line through the words “Against the Adoption of the Charter”, and shall indicate his vote “Against the
Adoption of the Charter” by scratching or running a line through the words “For the Adoption of the Charter.”
The place of holding said election shall be at the City Hall in the City of Borger, and the polls shall open and
close and said election shall be conducted and returns made, and results declared, as provided by the laws of the
State of Texas, governing municipal elections, and in the event a majority of the votes cast at such election shall
be in favor of the Adoption of such Charter then an official order shall be entered upon the records of said city,
by the City Council of Borger, declaring the same adopted, and the person exercising the duties of the City
Secretary shall record, at length, upon the records of the city, in a separate book to be kept in his office for such
purpose such charter so adopted, and such Secretary shall furnish to the Mayor, a copy of such charter, so
adopted, authenticated by his signature and the seal of the city, which copy of the charter shall be, by the Mayor,
forwarded to the Secretary of State, and which said copy shall show the approval of such charter by a majority
vote of the qualified voters of the City of Borger, Texas.
SECTION 134. ELECTION OF [FIRST COUNCIL MEMBERS].
An election is hereby called for the 24th day of June, 1930, for the election of five Councilmembers to serve as
such until the first Tuesday in April, 1931, as provided by the terms and provisions of this Charter, and the five
persons receiving the greatest number of votes of the qualified electors voting at said election are hereby
declared, and by the terms and provisions of this charter are declared elected as such Councilmembers of the
City of Borger. Any candidate desiring to submit their name to be printed upon the official ballot for said office
shall file or cause to be filed with the City Secretary of the City of Borger, a petition requesting that their name
appear on said official ballot signed by not less than five percent of the qualified electors voting at the last
general municipal election on or before ten (10) days prior to the date of the election, as provided for herein. The
said election or elections to be held under the direction and supervision of the City Council, according to the
laws of the State of Texas regulating Municipal elections, and the City Council is respectfully urged to do all
things necessary to be done by them for the holding of a legal election.
Within five (5) days after the election of all the Councilmembers they shall each take the oath of office and
qualify as Councilmembers, and shall hold their respective offices until the First Tuesday in April, 1931, as
aforesaid, and until their successors are elected and qualified, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this
Charter. In the event the qualified electors voting upon the adoption or rejection of the Charter, by a majority
vote, reject the Charter, the election of officials as herein provided shall be of no effect.
SECTION 135. [SUBDIVISION REGULATION.]
Buildings for residential purposes may be constructed only on land properly platted and subdivided into
residential areas or lots and served by streets and/or public rights-of-way set apart and dedicated to public use.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/430
Should any property lying within or adjacent to the City Limits as established by the charter be hereinafter
platted into blocks and lots, the owners of said property shall plat and lay out the same so as to conform to the
streets and alleys abutting on same, and shall file with the mayor a correct map thereof; providing, that in no
case shall the City of Borger be required to pay for any of said streets or alleys at whatever date opened and
when opened by reason of the platting of said property, at whatever date platted, they shall become by such act
the property of the City of Borger for use as public highways. (Added 6/29/53)
State law reference–Regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 212.
SECTION 136. [APPOINTMENT OF BOARD OF CITY DEVELOPMENT.]
The City Council shall have the authority to appoint what shall be known and designated as “A Board of City
Development” which shall be composed of not exceeding fifteen members who shall serve without
compensation, and may prescribe the qualifications and duties of such board and their term of office, and may
appropriate not exceeding two mills on the One Dollar valuation on the taxable property in the City of Borger,
from the general fund of said City, to support the work of such Board. (Added 6/29/53)
SECTION 137. [DISCHARGE OF DUTIES UPON REFUSAL OF INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM OR
RECALL BY AUTHORITIES.]
In case the governing authorities of the City shall fail or refuse any initiative, referendum or recall petition
provided for in this charter, or order such initiative, referendum or recall election, or discharge any other duties
with reference to such initiative, referendum or recall, the District Judge of Hutchinson County, Texas, shall
discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the governing authorities of said City. (Added
6/29/53)
SECTION 138. EMPLOYMENT.
No qualified person shall be denied employment by the City on the grounds that at the time of such person's
employment he or she is not a resident and qualified voter of the City. All provisions of the Charter in conflict
with this section are hereby repealed. (Ordinance 1969-2, art. XII, 2/18/69, ratified 4/1/69)
State law reference–Residency requirements for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 150.021.
Upon their qualification the Councilmembers elected shall be and constitute the governing body and authority of
the City of Borger, and shall, thereafter, administer its affairs agreeable to the provisions of this charter.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Borger, Texas, as compiled, edited and published
by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/430
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Borger, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
(a) Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction,
definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
(b) Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and
phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.
(c) In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City, municipal corporation, municipality and town. Each means the City of Borger, Texas.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Borger, Texas.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Borger, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Hutchinson, Texas.
Easement. The term “easement” shall mean a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the
owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by
reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general
property interest in the owner.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males.
Highway. The term “highway” shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge,
viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/430
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Officer, office, employee, commission, or department. References to an officer, office, employee, commission or
department refer to an officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. The word “property” means and includes real and personal property.
Real property. The term “real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/430
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
(a) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance,
the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication
of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
(b) No suit, proceeding, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under
any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly
provided.
(c) The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or
revive any ordinance which has been previously repealed.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/430
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
articles or sections inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00). However, a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation
that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated
as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition
to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive
relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(b) The imposition of any such fine for any such violation shall not stop any other relief against any such
violation available at law or equity.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Penalty for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Fiscal year
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 the following year.
(1998 Code, sec. 30.02)
State law references–General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year,
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
Sec. 1.02.002 Bond of officers and employees
All officers and employees of the city, when required by the city manager or city council, shall execute a bond to
the city, for such amount and for such sureties as are approved by the council, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of such officers and employees. The premium for such bond shall be paid by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 30.03)
Charter references–Bond of city manager, sec. 46; bond of tax assessor and collector, sec. 85; bond of chief of police, sec. 88.
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
Sec. 1.02.003 Defaulters not eligible for office
No person who is in debt to the city for any sum of money, other than current utility bills, shall be eligible for
any elective or appointive city office. (1998 Code, sec. 30.04)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/430
Secs. 1.02.004–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.031 Notice required
(a) The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such
personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf or, in the
event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury shall, within the time limits established in charter section 5 for good cause shown from the date
the damage was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property
was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date it is
presented.
(7) In case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to
the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury of any part
thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was
submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the
damage or any part thereof.
(b) No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff
therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city
council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the
city council refused.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.032 Filing of notice
All notices required by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following
location: 600 N. Main, Borger, Texas 79007. All such notices shall be effective only when actually received in
the office of the person named above. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.033 Exceptions in cases of actual notice
(a) The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or
property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual
knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the
authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/430
(b) Notice requirements shall likewise be waived in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause or
civil rights violations.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.034 Notice to be sworn to
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries
or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall
not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as
a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.02.035–1.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Records Management*
Sec. 1.02.061 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tapes,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this division or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. The term does not include:
(1) Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by
officers or employees of the local government;
(2) Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the local
government for the officer's or employee's personal convenience;
(3) Blank forms;
(4) Stocks of publications;
(5) Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; or
(6) Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are
entitled under chapter 424, Acts of the 63rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1973 (V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, ch. 201 et seq.), or other state law.
(Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 1)
Sec. 1.02.062 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/430
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.02.065 of this division.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.02.066 of this division.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 2; Ordinance O-002-16 adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 1.02.063 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.02.061 of this division are hereby declared to be the property of the city.
No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files,
or use of such records is prohibited. (Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 3)
Sec. 1.02.064 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 4)
Sec. 1.02.065 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary and the successive holders of said office shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library within thirty days of initial designation of taking up the office, as applicable.
Sec. 1.02.066 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to
the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those
records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this section effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or records keeping requirements of a department
head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/430
division and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a
basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance O-002-16 adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 1.02.067 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for
each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city.
(7) Monitor records retention and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives
commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules
are in compliance with state regulations;
(8) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
and the requirements of state law;
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(11) Report annually to the city council of the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (10); and
(12) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 8; Ordinance O-002-16 adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 1.02.068 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/430
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this division;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this division.
(Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 9)
Sec. 1.02.069 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department by department basis listing all records series created or received by the department
and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information
regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. (Ordinance O-002-16
adopted 3/1/16)
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city. (Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 12)
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the city council.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If the schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedule to the
director and librarian.
(e) Appropriate records control schedules issued by the state library and archives commission shall be adopted
by the records management officer for use by the city as provided by law. Any destruction of records of the city
will be in accordance with these schedules and the Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance O-002-16 adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 1.02.070 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.02.069
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management
plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record; the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit;
or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period of time.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city council.
(Ordinance O-002-16 adopted 3/1/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/430
Sec. 1.02.071 Destruction of unscheduled records
(a) A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its
destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the
records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved
destruction authorization request.
(b) Material that is not included in the definition of a local government record and is described by section
1.02.070 may be disposed of at the discretion of the custodian or the creator of the document, as applicable.
(Ordinance adopted 4/17/90, sec. 14)
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 1.03.001 Meetings
(a) The mayor shall preside over all meetings of the city council. At the hour of the meeting, the mayor shall
take the chair and call the council to order and the minutes of the previous meeting shall be read, corrected, if
need be, and adopted.
(b) If the mayor is absent at the hour of meeting, the mayor pro tempore shall take the chair and preside over
the meeting and the business shall be proceeded with as indicated above.
(c) All regular meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. The chief of police may be called upon
to act as sergeant-at-arms and shall insure the orderly behavior of the public in attendance.
(d) No one except a member of the city council, and officers in the discharge of their official duties, shall be
allowed to address the council or be permitted to participate in the proceedings, except by consent of the council.
(1998 Code, sec. 30.15)
Charter references–Meetings of the council generally, sec. 52; time of meetings, sec. 53.
Sec. 1.03.002 Decorum at debate
The session of the city council shall be conducted in a businesslike manner. No councilmember shall speak
while the mayor is addressing the council, and not more than one councilmember shall speak at a time. When a
councilmember desires to speak, he shall address the mayor, and, when two councilmembers address the chair at
the same time, the mayor shall decide who shall hold the floor. (1998 Code, sec. 30.16)
Sec. 1.03.003 Resolutions must be in writing; putting motions in writing
Every resolution must be in writing, and every motion shall be in writing if any member of the city council shall
require it. (1998 Code, sec. 30.17)
Sec. 1.03.004 Place system for election of members
The city hereby adopts the place system for the election of city council members. Each office of the city council
shall be assigned a place number, so that hereafter each such office shall bear its own separate designation, such
as City Council Member, Place No. 1; City Council Member, Place No. 2; City Council Member, Place No. 3;
City Council Member, Place No. 4; City Council Member, Place No. 5. As terms of incumbent city council
members expire, each candidate for the office of city council shall file his/her application for a specific place on
the city council. In such election the ballot shall show each office of the city council as a separate office by place
number, with the name of each candidate printed thereon under the specific office for which he/she is a
candidate. (1998 Code, sec. 30.18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/430
ARTICLE 1.04 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission†
Sec. 1.04.031 Definition
For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Commission. The planning and zoning commission created by this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.20)
Sec. 1.04.032 Created
There is hereby created and established within and for the city a planning and zoning commission. (1998 Code,
sec. 31.21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.033 Members
(a) Number. The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven members.
(b) Qualifications. The members of the commission shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters
of the city.
(c) Appointment. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.22)
(d) Terms. The members of the commission shall be appointed to serve for staggered terms of three years.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.034 Filling of vacancies
All vacancies occurring for any reason within the membership of the commission shall be filled by appointment
made by the city council and shall be for the unexpired term. (1998 Code, sec. 31.23)
Sec. 1.04.035 Powers and duties
(a) General powers. The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and authority to adopt bylaws
for its own government and to perform the duties hereby vested upon it and to determine the times and places for
meeting of the commission. (1998 Code, sec. 31.24; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Employment of personnel. The commission shall make recommendations to the city manager for the
appointment and employment of such officers and personnel as the commission may deem necessary for the
proper conduct and undertaking of the implementation, maintenance, and continued research and development
of planning and zoning within the city and adjacent territory. The city manager may, with the approval of the city
council, employ such persons as may be necessary to achieve the purposes and goals of this division, and
prescribe their duties and the compensation to be received by such employees.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/430
(c) Comprehensive plan for city. The commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and
recommend for adoption a comprehensive plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and
redevelopment of the city and its environs, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a
comprehensive plan and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code chapters 211
and 213.
(d) Other duties. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the provisions of
this code, state law or city ordinance.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.24)
Secs. 1.04.036–1.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Hutchinson County Joint Airport Zoning Board*
Sec. 1.04.061 Created and composition
(a) Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners court of the county, by proper order, duly
promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code section
241.001 et seq., there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Hutchinson County Joint
Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in Tex. Local Gov't Code
section 241.001 et seq.
(b) The Hutchinson County Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five members, two of whom shall be
appointed by the city council and two of whom shall be appointed by the commissioners court of the county. The
fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and the fifth member shall serve as
chairperson of the joint airport zoning board.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.35)
Sec. 1.04.062 Duties of building inspector
The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to undertake and perform the respective duties,
responsibilities, and functions as are delegated to such office under an ordinance known as the Hutchinson
County Airport Zoning Ordinance; provided that the building inspector shall maintain a separate set of records
pertaining to his official functions as required of him under the ordinance above mentioned. (1998 Code, sec.
31.36)
Sec. 1.04.063 Duties of board of adjustment
The city board of adjustment is authorized and directed to exercise the duties, responsibilities, and functions as
delegated to it under an ordinance designated as the Hutchinson County Airport Zoning Ordinance; provided,
such board shall keep a separate set of records as to its functions under the ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 31.37)
Sec. 1.04.064 Duties of planning and zoning commission
The city planning and zoning commission is authorized and directed to exercise the duties, responsibilities, and
functions as delegated to it under an ordinance designated as the Hutchinson County Airport Zoning Ordinance;
provided, such commission shall keep a separate set of records as to its functions under the ordinance. (1998
Code, sec. 31.38)
Sec. 1.04.065 Discharge of duties
The building inspector, the board of adjustment, and the planning and zoning commission shall continue to
discharge the functions as delegated to their respective offices under the provisions of the Hutchinson County
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/430
Airport Zoning Ordinance and sections 1.04.062 through 1.04.064 without further action from time to time by
the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 31.39)
ARTICLE 1.05 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.05.001 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor.
(Ordinance O-003-03, sec. 1, adopted 4/1/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for
execution; however, responsibility shall remain with the director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance O-003-03, sec. 1, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.002 Powers and duties of director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this division. Such proclamation, regulation, or directive shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/430
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which
could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418 of the Government
Code).
(Ordinance O-003-03, sec. 2, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this division. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance O-003-03, sec.
3, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in
the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county, and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a
countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. (Ordinance O-003-
03, sec. 4, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.005 Exemptions from liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part
or parts of such real estate or premises, for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or
practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be
civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/430
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance O-003-03,
sec. 5, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.006 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance O-003-03, sec. 6, adopted 4/1/03)
Sec. 1.05.007 Conflicts with state or federal law or military regulations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or
naval order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance O-003-03, sec. 8, adopted 4/1/03)
ARTICLE 1.06 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.06.001–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Alyn Rogers Memorial RV Park
Sec. 1.06.031 Definitions
Recreational vehicle (RV). A recreational vehicle is a self-propelled or permanently towed mobile living unit
built on a single chassis. The unit is typically four hundred (400) square feet or less and used for temporary
human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence. A recreational vehicle as described under
this section is one that contains permanently installed sleeping facilities or human sanitary treatment or disposal
facilities or both. For purposes of this article, the term includes motor homes, tour buses, campers, cab-over
campers, and travel trailers.
Sec. 1.06.032 Use of RV parking facilities
(a) Residents and nonresidents may utilize the RV park camping spaces, hookups, utilities, and services
connected therewith for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours in any seven-day period.
(b) Residents and nonresidents may not utilize the RV park camping spaces, hookups, utilities, and services
connected therewith for any period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours in any seven-day period without a
written permit issued by the city marshal or his authorized designee.
(c) Utilization of RV park camping spaces, hookups, utilities, and services connected therewith for a period in
excess of seventy-two (72) hours without a written permit or for any period in excess of the time granted by a
written permit shall be a violation of this section. A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine as
provided in section 1.01.009.
Sec. 1.06.033 RV park rules
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/430
(a) Cab-over campers may not be removed from the vehicle and placed on the ground.
(b) Tent camping, sleeping in cars, or sleeping outside of the recreational vehicle are prohibited.
(c) Storage of personal items under or around vehicles or RV's is prohibited with the exception of no more
than two storage totes that are fully closable. Gasoline cans of any size and external propane tanks in excess of
seven (7) gallon capacity are strictly prohibited.
(d) All RV's and personal vehicles must be capable of being moved with twenty-four (24) hours' notice; and
must be moved within twenty-four (24) hours, if requested by the city marshal or his designee. Mechanical work
on vehicles or RV's including work on interior flooring, walls, or large appliances is prohibited.
(e) Quiet time will be observed from 10:30 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. each and every day.
(Ordinance O-002-17 adopted 6/20/17)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a safe and healthy environment within the city for both
people and animals with the recognition that while persons may own and keep animals within the city, the
conduct of those animals should be controlled for public safety and the conditions in which they are kept should
be appropriate so as to protect the animals and avoid infringement on the peace and enjoyment of surrounding
property, homes, and property owners.
Sec. 2.01.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
below, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abuse. To mistreat through intent to abuse, or the knowing or reckless neglect of any animal in a manner that
causes or is likely to cause physical injury or significant physical stress to the animal.
Adoptable. An animal that exhibits sound aggression-free and inordinate temperaments, is in good health, copes
medically and behaviorally with the shelter environment, and is old enough for vaccination protection but will
typically be under the age of six years.
Adoption. The acquisition of a dog, cat or other animal from the city's animal shelter in accord with the
provisions of this chapter.
Adult dog/cat. Any dog or cat that is one (1) year or older.
Altered or sterilized. See spayed or neutered.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/430
Animal. Any living creature other than hominids. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, the term shall include
livestock, fowl, reptiles, amphibians and wildlife as well as dogs, cats and other creatures commonly owned as
pets.
Animal control authority. The chief of police of the city and, as necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and the laws of the state pertaining to animal control and protection, those animal control officers,
animal control technicians, animal control veterinary technicians, peace officers and any such other persons as
may be duly designated by the chief of police of the city.
Animal shelter. The city's animal shelter and any facility designated and operated by the city for the purpose of
keeping or impounding stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected, abused or seized animals and caring
for all animals held under the authority of this chapter.
Animal welfare organization. An association, organization or nonprofit corporation which has as one of its
purposes the humane care for and protection of animals of any kind.
Bite. Puncturing or tearing of human or animal skin by an animal's teeth.
Bodily injury. Any injury other than “serious bodily injury,” including but not limited to physical pain, illness, or
any impairment of physical condition.
Breeder. A facility, kennel or residence in which one or more specific breeds of dogs or cats are bred and raised
for sale on a routine basis.
Cat. The male and female of any domesticated member of the family Felidae (felis catus).
Cattery. See kennel or cattery.
City. The City of Borger, Texas.
City limits. The corporate city limits of the City of Borger, Texas.
Commercial animal enterprise. As permitted by the zoning regulations of the city, an activity or venture, with a
commercial purpose, where animals are raised, trained, boarded, harbored, maintained, groomed, displayed
and/or offered for sale and shall include, but is not limited to, kennels, pet shops, grooming shops, animal
clinics, animal hospitals, animal research centers, zoological parks, petting zoos, livestock auctions, guard dog
or obedience training centers, horse stables or riding facilities, farms or ranches, or performing animal
exhibitions as defined in this chapter.
Commercial purpose. Any display, event or activity the intended result of which is the sale, trade, barter,
exchange or other transfer of possession or ownership of a live animal, whether for monetary or other pecuniary
gain or not.
Companion animal. See pet.
County. Hutchinson County, Texas as designated by its geographic boundaries.
Cruel treatment. Any treatment to any animal in violation of this chapter, the Texas Penal Code or the laws of
the United States.
Currently vaccinated. Vaccinated for rabies and satisfying the following criteria:
(1) The animal must have been at least four (4) months of age at the time of the vaccination;
(2) At least thirty (30) days have elapsed since the initial vaccination;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/430
(3) Not more time than the then current interval as prescribed by rule of the state board of health or
its successor agency must have elapsed since the most recent rabies vaccination.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another dog that causes bodily injury and that
occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably
certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
Dangerous wild animal. An animal of a species, other than a common domestic species, that poses a potential
physical or disease threat to the public regardless of state and duration of captivity, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Class aves. Order Falconiformes (such as hawks, eagles and vultures); subdivision Ratitae
(such as rheas, and cassowaries); and order Sting forms (such as owls);
(2) Class mammalia. Order Carnivora, family Felidae (such as lions, cheetahs, bobcats, lynxes,
servals, caracals, ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, binturongs, leopards and cougars), except
commonly accepted domesticated cats; family Canidae (such us wolves, dingoes, hyenas, coyotes,
jackals or hybrids thereof), except domesticated dogs; family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks,
martins, mink and badgers), except ferrets; family Procyonidae (raccoons); family Ursidae (such as
bears); order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and common opossums); order Edentata (such as sloths,
anteaters and armadillos); order Proboscidea (elephants); order Primates (such as monkeys,
chimpanzees, orangutans, and gorillas); and order Ungulata (such as deer, bison and camels except
where harbored on property which is zoned “EA” for estate and agricultural use and is at least five
(5) acres in area);
(3) Class reptilia. Family Helodermatidae (venomous lizards); family Viperidae (rattlesnakes,
copperheads, cotton mouths, other pit vipers and true vipers); family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras,
mambas and other Elapid); the following listed species of family Colubridae - Dispholidus typos
(Bloom slang), Hydrodynastes gigas (water cobra), Boiga (mangrove snake) and Thelotornis (African
twig snake) only; order Phidia, family Doidae (racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) and order
Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans and gavials); and
(4) Other dangerous animals not listed but hereafter determined by the animal control authority, or
court of competent jurisdiction to constitute a threat to public health and/or safety.
Destroy. The taking of an animal's life in an emergency situation where necessary to prevent attack, to protect
against serious bodily injury, to prevent the destruction of another animal, or to end the prolonged suffering of a
severely injured animal.
Dog. Any male or female domesticated member of the family Canidae but specifically excluding a wolf, jackal,
coyote, fox or other dangerous wild animal of this family or hybrid thereof.
Domestic animal. Any animal normally adapted to live in intimate association with humans, or for the advantage
of humans. It includes, but is not limited to, the following: dogs, cats, livestock, fowl or other tame or
domesticated animal of or pertaining to the family or household which can be vaccinated against rabies with an
approved rabies vaccine.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/430
Estray. When used in this chapter, the term “estray” shall have the meaning assigned by chapter 142 of the Texas
Agricultural Code as it exists on the date of adoption of this chapter or as it may hereafter be amended and
includes stray livestock, stray exotic livestock or stray exotic fowl.
Estrus. A regular period of sexual excitement in many female mammals, during which the animal seeks to mate.
Exotic animal. Any animal, reptile, fish or bird born, or whose natural habitat, is considered to be outside the
continental United States, and specifically including but not limited to those animals defined by the Texas
Department of Parks and Wildlife as exotic.
Fowl. Birds commonly considered poultry and including, but not limited to chickens, turkeys, pheasant, quail,
geese, guinea, peafowl, ducks, ostriches, emus, or similar feathered animals regardless of age, sex or breed. For
purposes of this chapter, the term “fowl” shall not include canaries, parakeets, parrots, cockatiels or other birds
commonly maintained in households within cages.
Gender. A word importing only the masculine or the feminine gender shall extend and be applied to and include
the opposite gender and the neuter.
Guard or attack dog. Any dog professionally trained for the purpose of protecting persons or property by
attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog, and that is either
securely enclosed within that area at all times or under continuous control of a trained handler. Dogs employed
by a governmental agency or the military are excluded.
Harbor. Any of the following acts shall be give rise to a rebuttable presumption that an animal is being harbored
by a person:
(1) To provide, shelter, food and/or water for an animal on the provider's property for a period of
three (3) days or more;
(2) To provide encouragement in any form to an animal to remain on, live at, or frequently visit the
property of a person for a period of time (3) days or more;
(3) To refuse the animal control authority access to property owned or controlled by the person for
the purpose of seizing an animal; or
(4) A presumption that a person is harboring an animal may be rebutted by evidence that the
person reported the animal to the animal control authority for removal or by overt act of the person to
remove the animal from the person's property.
Herding dog or working animal. An animal specifically trained or inherently designed to assist in maintaining
and working livestock, or providing assistance to any person with a disability, or providing a service to a
governmental agency or private rescue and tracking organization. This does not include guard dogs for personal
property.
Horse lot. The area used exclusively for quartering horses (the term “horses” shall include all equine animals)
and containing at least 10,000 square feet for the first one to four horses and 2,000 square feet for each horse
thereafter with a limit of eight horses per acre.
Humanely euthanize. To cause the death of an animal by a humane method which:
(1) Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress; or
(2) Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent that causes painless loss of consciousness, and death
following such loss of consciousness.
Hutch. Any detached accessory building or shelter used for the purpose of housing fowl or rabbits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/430
Hybrid. The product of mating two different species of animals regardless of the number of generations born
since the original mating.
Inhabited building. Any structure where humans either reside or periodically work, play or assemble, save and
except structures occupied by the animal owner, his/her immediate family, employees or people under his/her
direct control, but not excepting rental structures occupied by bona fide tenants.
Inoculated.
(1) A dog that is injected on an annual basis for parvo and distemper at a minimum; or
(2) A cat that is injected on an annual basis to prevent infectious feline diseases, for panleukopenia,
vira rhino tracheitis, and calcivirus at a minimum.
Intact. A dog or a cat that has not been spayed or neutered.
Isolation. The separation of an animal exposed or potentially exposed to rabies.
Kennel or cattery. Any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting
for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats or other animals; and/or a facility for keeping more than six (6)
animals of the same species which is located within the city limits on property zoned to permit such use as
provided in the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance.
Litter. All of the offspring of one animal at one birth.
Livestock. Domestic animals including horses, mules, donkeys, burros, cattle, goats, sheep, emus, ostriches, and
any member of the order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels) regardless of age, sex, size or
breed, or any crossbreeding of such species, or any domestic animal raised for business or commercial purposes
or animals commonly associated with farm and ranch enterprises. Fowl, except for emus and ostriches, and
exotic animals are not included in the definition of livestock.
Local rabies control authority (LRCA). The chief of police of the city and, as necessary to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and applicable state law pertaining to rabies control, those animal control officers, animal control
technicians, animal control veterinary technicians, peace officers or other personnel duly designated by the chief
of police of the city.
Low risk animal. A warm-blooded mammal that has a low risk of carrying the rabies disease as determined by
the Texas Department of State Health Services and includes gerbils, guinea pigs, all rodents and rabbits, shrews,
prairie dogs, beavers, gophers, nutria, squirrels, hamsters, opossums, and armadillos.
Microchip. An identification chip implanted under the skin of an animal for the purpose of identifying its owner.
Neglect. To disregard, ignore or overlook the care, health and well-being of an animal under a person's care and
control whether that person is the owner or not. The term “neglect” shall include, but is not limited to, failure to
provide adequate food, water or other substance, or failure to ensure that the animal has sufficient shelter to
prevent exposure to extreme environmental conditions, or any act which a reasonable person would conclude
placed the animal's health and safety at risk.
Observation period. The ten (10) day period following a bite incident during which the biting animal's health
status must be monitored. The ten (10) day observation period commences with the day of the bite incident and
concludes on the tenth consecutive day following that date.
Owner. Any person, partnership, corporation, association, or legal entity that harbors; shelters; maintains;
controls (physically or orally); manages; displays; possesses; has care, custody, control, shared possession of or
a property right in an animal; or that provides premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/430
period of three (3) or more consecutive days. There may be more than one person or legal entity responsible as
an owner for an animal.
Pen/lot. A dedicated area or space containing 10,000 square feet for one to four head of livestock. An additional
2,000 square feet of area or space shall be provided for each head of livestock thereafter with a limit of eight
livestock per acre.
Performing animal exhibition. Any display, act or event, other than circuses or rodeos, in which animals are
displayed, shown, exhibited and/or perform tricks, feats, or other exhibitions of training. The term shall include,
but is not limited to, dog shows, cat shows, animal exhibitions of any animal, pony rides, commercial
photographic events, and educational or informative displays or exhibitions, regardless of whether sponsored or
facilitated by a not for profit entity or by a for-profit entity.
Permit. An official document on the form prescribed and signed by the animal control authority, or his
designated agent or representative, allowing certain activities or other events involving animals and specifying
the commencement date; the expiration date; and the terms and conditions of the conduct of the permitted
activity or event. Permits shall be valid for periods of time as provided in this chapter and as evidenced on the
face of the permit. See also temporary permit.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation or other entity.
Pet or companion animal. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an animal of a species that has been
bred and raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter. The
term specifically includes, but is not limited to, domesticated dogs, domesticated cats, canaries, parakeets,
parrots, cockatiels and other birds commonly maintained in households in cages, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs,
rabbits, nutria, and Vietnamese potbelly or miniature pigs.
Pet shop. Any person or establishment, whether operated separately or in connection with another business
enterprise (except for a licensed kennel), that offers for sale small animals such as dogs, cats, birds, fish, ferrets,
and similar animals which are not dangerous wild animals or livestock, and that is located within the city limits
on property zoned to permit such use as provided in the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance.
Poisonous substance. A substance having an inherent harmful property which is capable of causing the death of
an animal when ingested into the system of the animal.
Potbelly or miniature pig. A variety of swine that is not more than eighteen (18) inches in height at the shoulder
level when full grown and has short erect ears and a straight tail.
Prohibited animals. Any animal, the possession, harboring, keeping or other maintenance of which is prohibited
by state or federal law, and including but not limited to, the following species and/or subspecies of the following
animals: lions, tigers, ocelots, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, hyenas, bears, lesser pandas,
ferrets born in natural habitats, binturong, elephants, any member of the family Suidae (except Vietnamese
potbelly pigs or miniature pigs), apes or such other nondomesticated species of animal not indigenous to nor
common to the county.
Proof of rabies vaccination. Documentation from a veterinarian, licensed to practice within one of the 50 states
of the United States, verifying that the animal has been vaccinated as prescribed by rule of the Texas Board of
Health or its successor agency with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United States
Department of Agriculture or the Texas Department of State Health Services.
Provocation. Any purposeful act that causes all animal to bite, scratch, or attack in protection of self, the
animal's owner, or the animal's owner's premises. Entrance, in any manner, into a secure enclosure (as defined in
this chapter) or another area where an animal is properly under restraint in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered provocation regardless of the reason for such entrance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/430
Quarantine. A period of ten (10) days of strict confinement of an animal, on the order of the animal control
authority or by order of the Texas Department of State Health Services or its designee, at the sole expense of the
owner of the animal and on the terms specified in this chapter or otherwise ordered by the appropriate authority,
for observation of the animal to determine the health status of the animal with respect to the rabies virus.
Rabies. An acute viral disease of humans and animals, which affects the central nervous system and can be
transmitted by an animal bite, saliva, or other contaminated bodily fluids.
Registration. The requirement for any animal declared to be a dangerous animal, as provided herein, to be
registered annually with the city, for all relevant fees to be paid, and for all such animals to exhibit at all times
appropriate registration tag(s).
Restrain. To control an animal by physical means so that it remains on the premises of the owner, or when off
the owner's premises, by means of a cage, or leash or rope under the direct control of a person of sufficient
strength to control the animal.
Riding school or stable. Any facility that has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse,
pony, donkey, mule, or burro; or any facility that regularly buys, sells or trains the above animals, including a
racetrack or a trotting track. This definition specifically excludes rodeos.
Scratch. A scrape left by the claws or nails of an animal to a human and of sufficient severity to break the skin
and draw blood.
Secure enclosure. A pen, cage, container, structure or building, or fence of sufficient strength and height to
prevent the subject animal(s) from escaping there from. The enclosure must be free of defects, disrepair or any
other deficiencies that would give rise to a reasonable conclusion that a dog or other animal would likely be able
to escape as determined by the animal control authority.
Serious bodily injury. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle
and/or bodily tissues that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical
professional or would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
treatment. In addition, it means any form of injury that creates a substantial risk of death; permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or that causes
any such condition.
Service personnel. Any person providing legitimate, authorized service to a property including, but not limited
to, public safety personnel; utility technicians; letter carriers, couriers, or delivery personnel, plumbers,
electricians, lawn maintenance workers, pest control professionals, or contractors; and others in comparable
service professions.
Sick. Any animal that appears to be suffering from an infectious, contagious, or communicable disease or that is
showing evidence of a physical injury, physical disorder, or traumatic injury or that has an elevated temperature.
Spay or neuter. The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat or the use of nonsurgical
methods and technologies approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration or the United States
Department of Agriculture to permanently render the animal unable to reproduce.
Stable. A barn, pen or any place where any horse, cow, goat or other livestock is fed and watered or kept. Also
see “riding school” and “commercial animal enterprise.”
Stray. An animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer and which is found to be running free or
at-large within the corporate limits of the city.
Strict liability. The legal responsibility for damages, or injury, even if the person found strictly liable was not at
fault or negligent. Control, ownership, damages, and/or injury are sufficient to hold the owner liable even
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/430
without proof of specific negligent acts or omissions.
Swine. Pigs, hogs, potbellied pigs or any member of the family Suidae.
Temporary permit. An official document on the form prescribed and signed by the animal control authority, or
his authorized designees, allowing certain activities or events involving animals and which specifies the
commencement date and the date that the activity must cease. A temporary permit, shall not be valid for a period
of more than fifteen (15) consecutive days under any circumstances.
Tether. To chain, tie, fasten or otherwise secure an animal to a fixed point so that it can move or range within
certain restricted limits.
Tranquilizer. A drug injected into an animal, either by a gun designed to shoot darts, or administered by hand
injection or orally, for the purpose of temporarily immobilizing said animal.
Unprovoked. Action by an animal that is not:
(1) In response to being tormented, hit, kicked, molested, abused or assaulted by any person;
(2) In response to pain or injury; or
(3) In protection of itself or its food, kennel or nursing offspring.
Vaccinated. An injection with United States Department of Agriculture-approved rabies vaccine administered as
prescribed by rule of the state board of health or its successor agency by a licensed veterinarian.
Vehicle. Includes all forms of motor vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, wagons, carts, trailers and any other
constructed or manufactured device utilized for carrying and moving property, persons or animals along public
rights-of-way.
Veterinarian. A person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the United States. Any veterinarian
practicing in the state must be licensed in the State of Texas.
Wild animal or wildlife. Any nondomesticated creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl) which is of a
species that is wild by nature, which is normally found in a wild state, and which is not naturally tame or gentle,
or which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, constitutes a danger to human life or
property including, but not limited to, all animals defined herein as prohibited animals or dangerous wild
animals.
Working animal. See “herding dog.”
Worming. The process by which an animal is treated for roundworms, hook worms, and tape worms.
Sec. 2.01.003 Establishment and designation of the animal control authority; the local rabies control
authority; duties and enforcement authority
(a) The chief of police is hereby designated and established as the animal control authority for the city.
(b) The chief of police is hereby designated to act as the local rabies control authority for purposes of
enforcement of animal health and animal control laws of the state as follows:
(1) Chapter 826 of the Texas health and Safety Code and the state rules that comprise the minimum
standards for rabies control;
(2) The rules adopted by the state under the area rabies quarantine provisions of section 826.045 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code; and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/430
(3) The ordinances or rules of the city pertaining to rabies control.
(c) The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by animal control officers, animal control technicians,
animal control veterinary technicians, peace officers and any such other persons as may be duly designated by
the chief of police (see animal control authority). Nothing herein is intended to, nor shall be considered to,
preempt or otherwise negate any statutory duty or authority of any federal, state, or other entity or official
charged with animal control, animal health issues, estray, impoundment or other animal related issues.
(d) Persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter are hereby authorized to issue citations for
violations of this chapter. The power and authority to issue citations shall exist regardless of whether the animal
made the subject of the citation has been impounded.
(e) In the exercise of authority to enforce this chapter, animal control authority personnel shall have the
authority to impound animals as provided in this chapter.
(f) In the exercise of authority to enforce this chapter, animal control authority personnel shall have the
authority to kill or otherwise disable an animal in order to protect themselves, a third person or another animal
from attack or threat of imminent injury or to prevent an animal from enduring further pain or suffering as a
result of injury or disease. The said officers and duly designated personnel shall also have the authority to
tranquilize or trap any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife in a humane manner.
(g) In the exercise of authority to enforce this chapter, animal control authority personnel shall have the
authority to euthanize an animal under any of the following circumstances:
(1) If an impounded animal is suffering from injury, disease or illness without reasonable hope of
recovery;
(2) If an animal is suspected of having rabies or manifests an apparent disposition to bite or attack
a human or other animal and the animal control authority has made reasonable, but unsuccessful
efforts to capture the dangerous animal;
(3) If an animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal as provided in this chapter and there
is no reason to believe the animal has an owner;
(4) If an animal is a wild animal, as defined in this chapter or by other law, as long as such act does
not violate any state or federal law specifically pertaining to such type of wild animal;
(5) If a nursing baby animal has been impounded either without the mother or under circumstances
where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutrition to the baby animal and euthanization is
necessary to prevent suffering of the baby animal;
(6) If an animal's owner executes a consent and authorization, in the form prescribed by the animal
control authority, surrendering ownership of and responsibility for the animal and requesting the
animal be humanely euthanized by the animal control authority or his duly designated personnel;
(7) In accord with the provisions of section 2.07.006 of this chapter regarding disposition of
unclaimed animals after impoundment.
(h) Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or negate the authority of the animal control authority to transfer
ownership of an animal to an animal welfare organization, as defined herein, when, in the sole discretion of the
animal control authority, circumstances render such transfer appropriate and in the best interest of the animal.
(i) To aid in the efficient administration of this chapter, the chief of police shall be authorized to adopt
administrative policies and operational procedures consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
Sec. 2.01.004 General offenses; strict liability; presumption of ownership
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/430
(a) A person commits an offense if he violates, disobeys, or fails to comply with a term or provision of this
chapter. Unless specifically provided otherwise herein, an offense under this chapter does not require proof of a
culpable mental state. It is the intent of this chapter to impose “strict liability” for violation or failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) For purposes of enforcement and prosecution under this chapter, a rebuttable presumption of ownership
exists with respect to each adult resident of premises upon which an animal that is the subject of a prosecution is
kept, maintained, harbored or possessed on the date of the violation alleged.
(c) A person commits an offense if he interferes with, obstructs, or resists animal control authority personnel
authorized to enforce this chapter while such person is in the course of his or her duties hereunder including, but
not limited to, the apprehension and impoundment of animals or conducting an investigation of any violation of
this chapter or other applicable state law.
(d) A person commits an offense if he takes or attempts to take from animal control authority personnel
authorized to enforce this chapter, any animal in the control or custody of the officer or other personnel or from
any vehicle used by the officer or other personnel to transport animals in the exercise of authority under this
chapter.
(e) A person commits as offense if, with intent to deceive, he knowingly makes to the animal control authority
personnel, a false report or statement, either verbal or written, which is material to an investigation of an alleged
violation of this chapter. A false report or statement under this provision shall include, but not be limited to, a
report of the occurrence of a violation or incident which the reporting person knows did not occur.
Sec. 2.01.005 Fees
The city council shall, from time to time, by resolution adopt fees to be assessed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, such fees to include, but are not limited to, the fees for issuance of permits under this chapter and
fees for care and expenses of animals incurred during impoundment at the animal shelter. It is the intent of this
chapter that the owner of the animal(s) bear the costs of such animal's care in those circumstances in which care
is provided at the animal shelter or other appropriate facility. The city shall be authorized to recover, in addition
to any fines imposed in a prosecution under this chapter, all fees and costs incurred by the city for the care and
welfare of the animal made the subject of the prosecution. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or negate
the authority of the animal control authority, under appropriate circumstances, to waive redemption fees or
expenses where such waiver is in accord with policies and procedures adopted by the chief of police.
Sec. 2.01.006 Applicability of zoning regulations
Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to negate or supersede any provision of the comprehensive zoning
ordinance of the city. In the event of a conflict between a specific provision of this chapter and a provision(s) of
the comprehensive zoning ordinance, the comprehensive zoning ordinance shall control in all instances.
Sec. 2.01.007 Permits
Permits; revocation or denial of permits; appeal process.
(1) Unless specified as a temporary permit, a permit issued under the provisions of section
2.01.012 of this chapter for multiple pets, under article 2.03 for additional fowl or rabbits, or under
article 2.09 for a commercial animal enterprise, shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months
from the date of issuance. A person desiring to renew a permit shall be required to apply for renewal
and all conditions and procedures for original application shall apply to a renewal application
including the right of physical inspection of the premises.
(2) Temporary permits may be issued by the animal control authority as authorized by this chapter
and shall be valid for the number of days stated thereon not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/430
No person may apply for more than three (3) temporary permits under this chapter within a twelve
(12) consecutive month period.
(3) Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or denied at any time by the animal
control authority for cause including, but not limited to, violations of this chapter or, in the
determination of the animal control authority, the inability of the permit holder to keep the animals in
a healthy or sanitary environment.
(A) Notice of denial of either an annual or temporary permit shall be in writing from the
animal control authority to the person who has requested such a permit;
(B) Notice of the revocation of either an annual or temporary permit shall be in writing from
the animal control authority to the permit holder; and
(C) A notice of revocation or denial shall set forth, in general terms, the deficiencies,
violations or other conditions considered in the decision to revoke or deny the permit.
(4) Persons receiving a notice of revocation or denial of permit shall have the right, within ten (10)
days of the date that the notice is postmarked or hand delivered, to appeal, by written notice of
appeal, the decision of the animal control authority to the chief of police. The chief of police shall
have ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the written appeal to render a final determination in
writing.
(5) Any person having their permit revoked may not apply for another permit under this chapter for
a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
(6) The provisions of this chapter requiring permits shall not apply to the city's animal shelter,
Borger High School's agriculture department, or Frank Phillips College's agriculture department.
Sec. 2.01.008 Registration
Any owner, who harbors an animal requiring registration within the city limits as hereinafter authorized, shall
register said animal with the animal control authority and shall be subject to unannounced health and sanitation
inspections.
State law reference–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.009 Penalty
Any person, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity found to have violated any provision of this
chapter or to have failed to comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in
accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. The imposition of a fine shall be in addition to all other remedies
provided in this chapter. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 2.01.010 Running at-large
(a) A person commits an offense if he owns, keeps, harbors or otherwise has control over any animal within
the city and allows or permits such animal to run or be at-large upon any public highway, street, alley, court,
square, park, sidewalk, or any other public or private grounds not owned by the animal's owner or property
within the corporate limits of the city. The terms of this section shall not apply to working or herding animals
when they are in the performance of their assigned tasks.
(b) An animal, off the premises of its owner, shall be deemed to be running at-large under circumstances
where the animal is not, either restrained by means of a leash, chain or other physical restraint of sufficient
strength to control the animal while off the premises of its owner, or is not under the immediate control of the
owner or other responsible person present with the animal and immediately obedient to that person's commands.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/430
An animal shall be deemed to be running at-large, on its owner's premises, under circumstances where the
animal is not confined within a secure enclosure as defined in this chapter or is not restrained by a leash, rope,
chain or other tethering device sufficient to restrain the animal to the owner's premises. An animal shall be
deemed to be running at-large if the animal is left unattended in a motor vehicle or the bed of a pickup truck and
is not tethered or confined, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, so as to prevent the animal from
exiting the vehicle of its own volition or posing a risk to passersby.
(c) The animal control authority may impound any animal observed to be at-large, whether the animal is on
public or private property not owned by the animal's owner, subject to applicable provisions of the law. If the
animal control authority observes an animal to be at-large and observes the same animal to return to the property
of its owner, the animal control authority may issue a citation to the owner for the observed violation. The
animal control authority is specifically authorized to enter onto private property, other than a private dwelling,
for the purpose of issuance of a citation to the owner of the animal.
(d) In a prosecution under this section, evidence that an animal was found running at-large in violation of this
chapter together with proof that the defendant was the owner of such animal at the time of the violation, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant allowed or permitted the animal to be running at-large.
State law references–Animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026; authority to regulate the capture and
impoundment of animals, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026(c).
Sec. 2.01.011 Confinement during estrus
Any female dog or cat, which has not been spayed or neutered and which is in the state of estrus shall be
required to be confined during such period of time within a secure enclosure sufficient to prevent any other dog
or cat to gain access to the confined animal other than may be intended for planned breeding of the animal.
Owners failing to comply with the provisions of this section may be ordered by the animal control authority to
place the animal, in the state of estrus, in a boarding kennel, veterinary clinic or hospital or in the animal shelter
for the duration of estrus. All expenses incurred as a result of such confinement shall be the sole responsibility of
the owner. Failure to comply with an order for removal of an animal pursuant to this section shall be a violation
of this chapter and such dog or cat shall be subject to impoundment.
Sec. 2.01.012 Maximum number of pets; multiple pet permits
(a) Except as specifically authorized herein, a person is in violation of this chapter if he owns or harbors, on
the premises of a single residence within the city, more than four (4) pets or companion animals, as defined
herein, in any combination. A person commits an offense if he owns or harbors, on the premises of a single
residence within the city, in addition to the permissible number of pets or companion animals, more than one (1)
litter of pets or companion animals at any given time.
(b) It is an exception to prosecution under this section if the owner has been issued and possesses a valid
multiple pet permit, as hereinafter described in this section.
(c) A person desiring to keep more than four (4) pets or companion animals in any combination on the
premises of a single residence shall apply to the animal control authority for a multiple pet permit.
(d) The issuance of a multiple pet permit shall be within the discretion of the animal control authority and,
under no circumstances, shall a permit be issued for the keeping on the premises of a single residence within the
city, of more than eight (8) pets or companion animals in any combination. Under no circumstances shall a
permit be issued for the keeping, on the premises of a single residence within the city, of more than three (3)
litters of pets or companion animals at any given time.
(e) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the animal control authority to issue a multiple pet permit and
the discretion for issuance of such permit shall rest solely with the animal control authority. The animal control
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/430
authority shall be authorized to require the following in connection with the application for a multiple pet
permit:
(1) The applicant must provide the complete address of the residence for which the multiple pet
permit is made;
(2) The applicant must provide the animal control authority with full information concerning the
breed, gender and number of animals requested to be kept on the premises of the single residence;
(3) The applicant, or any member of the applicant's household, must not have been charged with
any animal control violation in the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(4) The applicant must permit the animal control authority, upon reasonable notice, full access to
the residence and premises for the purpose of physical inspection of the premises;
(5) The animal control authority shall have the right to interview occupants of all immediately
adjacent properties in connection with the request for issuance of a multi-pet permit;
(6) The premises must meet, both upon initial inspection and upon any subsequent inspection, the
following minimum criteria:
(A) Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to allow each animal to move about freely. Size of
the facility shall be in proportion to the size of each individual animal's height and weight;
(B) Adequate food and water must be provided so that all animals kept shall be maintained in
good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration;
(C) The premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste,
parasites, insects, and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of
the general public;
(D) The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor or stench so as to avoid offense to
a person of ordinary sensibilities;
(E) The animals must be maintained in a manner that does not pose a danger to the health of
the animals themselves or adjacent animals;
(F) The animals must not cause noise that is offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary
sensibilities on adjoining or adjacent premises; and
(G) All animals must be duly vaccinated and exhibiting vaccination tags.
(f) Multiple pet permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance and shall
be maintained and displayed to the animal control authority or other officer upon request. Each application for
renewal of a multiple pet permit shall be made in accord with the provisions of subsection (e) above.
(g) Multiple pet permits are issued to specific owners, for specific animals, and for the specific premises
identified therein. An application for a new multiple pet permit will be required if:
(1) The original permit holder moves to a new residence within the city and proposes to move to
that new residence more than four (4) pets or companion animals or combination thereof, or more
than one (1) litter of pets or companion animals; or
(2) Ownership of the permitted premises changes and the new property owners propose to keep or
maintain on the property more than four (4) pets or companion animals or a combination thereof, or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/430
more than one (1) litter of pets or companion animals at the new residence.
(h) A multiple pet permit is subject to revocation by the animal control authority for cause, including but not
limited to a violation by the permit holder of provisions of this chapter, or failure of the premises upon
inspection to meet the minimum criteria established herein for animal and public health and safety. Appeals from
the denial or revocation of a permit shall be in accord with the provisions of section 2.01.007 of this chapter.
Sec. 2.01.013 Noise violations
(a) A person commits an offense if he keeps, harbors, possesses, or otherwise maintains an animal or animals
that bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle or makes any noise excessively and continuously and such noise is such as
to disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner of the animal eliminates the noise violation
within twenty-four (24) hours of the issuance of a citation for the violation or receipt of notice of the violation
and no noise violation occurs for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of the issuance of the citation.
Sec. 2.01.014 Animal nuisances
(a) The following shall constitute nuisances subject to the issuance of a corrective notice by the animal control
authority:
(1) An animal which is determined to be running at-large three (3) or more times within a twelve
(12) consecutive month period;
(2) An animal which, without provocation, attacks another animal of any kind regardless of
whether injury is inflicted on the other animal;
(3) An animal which damages, soils or defiles public or private properly other than property
belonging to or under the control of the animal's owner;
(4) An animal which produces offensive odors or unsanitary conditions sufficient to annoy a
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities living in the vicinity; or
(5) An animal which chases pedestrians, passersby or passing vehicles, including bicycles.
(b) If the animal control authority determines that a nuisance, as provided above, exists, the animal control
authority may issue to the owner of the animal a notice for correction or abatement providing reasonable
requirements to correct the conduct of the animal or the circumstances or situation created by the animal and a
reasonable time period for correction or abatement. The notice for correction shall be on a form prescribed by
the animal control authority, which may be in the form of a warning citation, and may be served upon the owner
by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, with duplicate mailing by regular mail. In the
event the owner of the animal refuses the notice for correction forwarded by certified mail and the notice for
correction forwarded by regular mail is not returned by the United States Postal Service, it shall be presumed
that the owner of the animal received the notice for correction.
(c) The owner of the animal made the subject of a notice for correction may, within ten (10) days of service of
the order, file with the animal control authority a written appeal of the order clearly stating the reasons for the
appeal. In the event no appeal is timely filed, an order for correction will be deemed final.
Sec. 2.01.015 Failure to abate animal nuisance
A person commits an offense if he fails to comply, within the time prescribed, with the terms of a final notice for
correction or abatement of animal nuisance issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. Upon failure by the
owner to abate the animal nuisance, the animal control authority may issue a citation or file a formal complaint
in municipal court.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/430
Sec. 2.01.016 Animals held pending complaint
In the event an animal has been properly impounded pursuant to this chapter for a violation of the chapter and a
complaint is pending in the municipal court arising from that violation, the municipal judge may order that the
animal remain impounded pending disposition of the municipal court case. In the event the owner of the animal
is found guilty of the violation for which the animal was impounded, the municipal judge may, in addition to
fines and court costs, assess all impoundment fees against the owner of the animal.
Sec. 2.01.017 Exemptions from chapter
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a licensed veterinarian so long as any of the animals
covered hereunder are in his custody or kept for the purpose of professional care by reason of illness.
(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the lawful keeping of horses, cows, goats, or other livestock
within Johnson Park, provided the owner of such animals for show, display or similar activity shall conform with
rules of the department of state health serviced for cleanliness and sanitation requirements.
(c) The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the lawful keeping of swine, horses, cows, goats, or other
livestock in the Borger High School and Frank Phillips College Vocational Agriculture Facilities within the city
limits; however, all animals kept in these facilities shall be subject to all health, sanitation and such other
requirements as the health department may deem necessary to protect the health of the citizens of the city.
(d) The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any traveling circus or show which remains within the city
limits for a period not to exceed five consecutive days.
ARTICLE 2.02 WILD ANIMALS, WILDLIFE, OR DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS; PROHIBITED
ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.02.001 Wild animals, wildlife, or dangerous wild animals
(a) A person commits an offense if he owns, harbors, possesses or otherwise has care, custody or control of a
wild animal or wildlife or a dangerous wild animal (as defined in this chapter) within the city except as
specifically authorized herein.
(b) A person commits an offense if he transports, conveys, imports or otherwise delivers or brings into the city
a wild animal or wildlife or dangerous wild animal except as specifically authorized herein.
(c) It is an exception to this section if the wild animal, wildlife or dangerous animal is within or maintained by
a permitted zoological park, performing animal exhibition, circus or other duly permitted commercial animal
enterprise or if the wild animal, wildlife or dangerous wild animal is exhibited or displayed at a primary or
secondary school, college or university campus or facility of a governmental entity. It is an exception to this
section if the person holds a valid certificate of registration issued by an animal registration agency as provided
by section 822.103 of the Texas Health and Safety Code for a dangerous wild animal.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal possessed or harbored within the city is an
infant or injured animal which is not capable of surviving on its own and is kept within the city for only such
reasonable time as is necessary to permit the transfer of the animal to an appropriate wildlife rehabilitator or
back to the wild.
Sec. 2.02.002 Prohibited
A person commits an offense if he owns, harbors, possesses, or otherwise has care, custody or control of a
prohibited animal (as defined in this chapter) within the city.
ARTICLE 2.03 FOWL AND RABBITS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/430
Sec. 2.03.001 Fowl
(a) A person commits an offense if he keeps; harbors or maintains on the premises of a single residence within
the city more than four (4) fowl and one litter of fowl at any one time. It is an exception to prosecution under
this section that the owner has been issued and possesses a valid permit issued by the animal control authority
under the provisions of section 2.01.012 authorizing the keeping of fowl in excess of the limits of this section
and the owner has not exceeded the permissible number of fowl thereunder. It is an exception to prosecution that
the owner of the fowl and the subject premises meet the requirements of subsection (c) below. Fowl shall be kept
within pens, coops or hutches which meet the requirements of this chapter and are maintained in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. A fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen, coop, or hutch for purposes of this
section.
(b) All pens, coops, or hutches for the keeping of fowl shall be maintained a minimum of 100 feet from any
residence or commercial building, excluding the residence or commercial building of the person keeping or
harboring the fowl, except as specifically provided herein. If the fowl kept are pigeons, registered with a
recognized association of pigeon fanciers and kept for purposes of competition, the enclosures for such pigeons
may be located no less than fifty (50) feet from any residence or commercial building, excluding the residence or
commercial building of the person keeping or harboring the pigeons.
(c) Within a district classified by the comprehensive zoning ordinance as “EA - estate and agricultural,” a
person may keep and harbor, without the necessity of a multiple pet permit, up to 150 fowl, including lifters of
fowl, at any one time.
Sec. 2.03.002 Rabbits
(a) A person commits an offense if he keeps, harbors, or maintains on the premises of a single residence
within the city more than four (4) rabbits and one litter of rabbits at any one time. It is an exception to
prosecution under this section that the owner has been issued and possesses a valid permit issued by the animal
control authority under the provisions of section 2.01.012 authorizing the keeping of rabbits in excess of the
limits of this section and the owner has not exceeded the permissible number of rabbits thereunder. It is an
exception to prosecution that the owner of the rabbits and the subject premises meet the requirements of
subsection (d) below.
(b) Rabbits shall be kept within pens, coops, or hutches which meet the requirements of this chapter. A fenced
yard shall not qualify as a pen, coop or hutch for proposes of compliance with this subsection.
(c) All pens, coops or hutches for the keeping of more than four (4) rabbits shall be maintained a minimum of
100 feet from any residence or commercial building, excluding the residence or commercial building of the
person keeping or harboring the rabbits.
(d) Within a district classified by the comprehensive zoning ordinance as “EA - estate and agricultural,” a
person may keep and harbor, without the necessity of a multiple pet permit, up to 150 rabbits, including litters of
rabbits, at any one time.
ARTICLE 2.04 LIVESTOCK*
Sec. 2.04.001 Compliance with this article
No person shall keep livestock of any kind within the city limits except in accord with the provisions of this
article.
Sec. 2.04.002 Other than horses and mules
(a) A person commits an offense if he keeps, harbors, possesses or maintains livestock, other than horses and
mules as provided herein, within the city on property in a district which is zoned other than “EA - estate and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/430
agricultural; LI - light industrial; or HI - heavy industrial” under the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(b) The following are excepted from application of this section provided their operations are conducted in
accord with applicable zoning ordinances and applicable state law and regulations: animal slaughterhouses;
animal processing plants; animal rendering plants; livestock auctions; livestock shows or events; rodeos;
livestock related activities or businesses; and animal shelters run by governmental entities or private animal
welfare organizations.
Sec. 2.04.003 Maximum number of livestock
(a) A dedicated area or space containing 10,000 square feet for one to four head of livestock. An additional
2,000 square feet of area or space shall be provided for each head of livestock thereafter.
(b) The area used exclusively for quartering horses (the term “horses” shall include all equine animals) and
containing at least 10,000 square feet for the first one to four horses and 2,000 square feet for each horse
thereafter with a limit of eight horses per acre.
Sec. 2.04.004 Deer, bison, and camels
A person commits an offense if he keeps, fences, stables, pastures or otherwise keeps livestock of the order
Ungulata (including deer, bison and camels) on a tract or parcel of land of less than five (5) acres.
Sec. 2.04.005 Spacing from occupied structures and residential zoning districts
(a) A person commits an offense if he stables, stalls or pens livestock within one hundred (100) feet of an
occupied building or structure other than a building or structure occupied or controlled by the owner of the
livestock. It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this section that the occupied building or structure of a
person other than the owner of the livestock was built or erected at or after the time at which the livestock was
already kept, fenced, stabled or pastured on the property of the owner of the livestock.
(b) It is an exception to applicability of this subsection that the owner of the livestock had erected and existing
on the owner's property a stable, stall, pen or other enclosure for livestock which was, on the effective date of
this chapter, situated within one hundred (100) feet of an occupied building or structure other than a building or
structure occupied or controlled by the owner of the livestock. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to
except the said existing stable, stall, pen or other enclosure from all other requirements of this chapter.
(c) A person commits an offense if he stables, stalls or pens livestock within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a
property line of the nearest residence in a residential zoned district and the pen/lot contains five (5) or more
acres in accordance with chapter 14, zoning. It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this section that the
residence of a person other than the owner of the livestock was built or erected at or after the time at which the
livestock was already kept, fenced, stabled or pastured on the property of the owner of the livestock.
(d) It is an exception to applicability of this subsection that the owner of the livestock had erected and existing
on the owner's property a stable, stall, pen or other enclosure for livestock which was, on the effective date of
this chapter, situated within one hundred (100) feet of an occupied building or structure other than a building or
structure occupied or controlled by the owner of the livestock. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to
except the said existing stable, stall, pen or other enclosure from all other requirements of this chapter.
(e) The keeping of horses and mules is specifically authorized to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained
on property within the city zoned EA - estate and agricultural; LI - light industrial; or HI - heavy industrial under
the following terms and conditions:
(1) On any tract or parcel of land of five (5) acres or more, a person may maintain no more than
two (2) horses or mules (or combination thereof) for the first fenced acre of such tract and no more
than one (1) horse or mule for each additional fenced acre;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/430
(2) Pasture fencing provided for horses and mules must be a minimum of five (5) feet in height at
its lowest point and shall not extend into the front yard between the main building structure and the
street or street right-of-way; and
(3) Horses and mules kept on property shall be provided with a minimum of a three-sided roofed
shelter meeting the sanitation requirements of this chapter, all applicable zoning requirements, and
providing adequate protection for the animal(s) from the elements.
Sec. 2.04.006 Honeybees
A person commits an offense if he constructs, places, or maintains a beehive within three hundred (300) feet of
any residence other than his own. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person who placed or
maintained the beehive within time hundred (300) feet of the residence(s) of other persons obtains the written
consent of the occupants of all such residences.
Sec. 2.04.007 Swine and pigs
A person commits an offense if he keeps, harbors, possesses or maintains swine, pigs or any member of the
family Suidae within the city, except Vietnamese potbelly or miniature pigs.
ARTICLE 2.05 ANIMAL PROTECTION
Sec. 2.05.001 Animals in motor vehicles
(a) A person commits an offense if he intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence leaves
an animal unattended in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's physical
health, safety or immediate welfare. In the event that a person is found guilty of this offense, the municipal court
shall, in addition to any fine and court costs assessed, assess any and all fees and expenses incurred pursuant to
the provisions of subsection (b) below.
(b) In the event that an animal is left unattended in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to
endanger the animal's physical health, safety or immediate welfare, an animal control officer or police officer
shall make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or person in control of the vehicle. In the event that the
owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempt, an animal control officer or police officer is
authorized to use reasonable force and measures to remove the animal from the vehicle to secure the animal's
physical health and safety. An animal removed from a vehicle under these circumstances shall be taken to the
city's animal shelter, or to a veterinarian if the animal is determined to be in physical distress, and a written
notice shall be attached to the vehicle by the animal control officer or police officer advising that of the
telephone number and address of the location from which the animal may be claimed. The city shall have no
responsibility for any damage sustained to a vehicle in the course of securing the safety of an animal under this
section.
(c) A person commits an offense if he intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence
transports an animal in a motor vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, in a cruel, inhumane or unsafe manner or
fails to effectively and humanely restrain the animal so as to prevent the animal from jumping from or being
thrown from the vehicle, trailer or other conveyance during its normal operation.
Sec. 2.05.002 Tethering of animals
A person commits an offense if he tethers, chains or otherwise secures an animal by or under any of the
following methods or circumstances:
(1) To tether an animal in such a way that it is capable of moving within 15 feet of any public
right-of-way, park, or other public land, including sidewalks, or within five (5) feet of any privately
or commercially owned property line when such tether or line is stretched to its full length;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/430
(2) To tether any animal in such a manner as to cause the animal injury or pain or not to permit the
animal to reach shelter, food and/or water or otherwise create an unsafe or unhealthy situation;
(3) To tether any animal in such a manner as to permit the animal to leave the owner's property;
(4) To tether any animal in a manner whereby the animal is subject to harassment, stings or bites
from outdoor insects, or attacks by other animals;
(5) To tether any animal with a tether that is not equipped with swivel ends and which is not also
attached to a pulley or a trolley;
(6) To tether any animal in such a manner that does not prevent the animal from becoming
entangled with any obstruction, from partially or totally jumping any fence, or from leaving its
owner's property;
(7) To fail to remove waste from the area within which the animal is tethered on a reasonable basis
so as to avoid a health hazard;
(8) To tether any animal without using a properly fitted collar or harness which prevents the tether
from being directly wrapped around the animal's neck;
(9) To tether with a choke-type collar of any sort; and
(10) To use a tether weighing more than 1/8 of the animal's body weight.
Sec. 2.05.003 Trapping or shooting; hunting
(a) It is unlawful for a person to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set, triggered, activated
or used, any steel jawed, leg-hold trap to capture an animal. It is unlawful for any person, other than the animal
control authority, to set or otherwise use other trapping devices, including “live traps,” for the purpose of
capturing any animal. Consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the animal control authority is authorized to
utilize humane “live traps” and may conduct humane trapping operations and may also provide or authorize the
use of humane trapping devices for use by persons within the city as may be necessary. Nothing in this provision
is intended to prohibit the prudent use of traps on a person's own property to control rodents.
(b) It is unlawful for a person to hunt, shoot, intentionally injure or kill any wild bird, animal, or mammal
within the city. It is unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot, kill, intentionally injure or kill any domestic bird,
animal, mammal, reptile or pet in the city which animal is not owned by such person. Nothing in this provision
is intended to prohibit the destruction of poisonous snakes or to prohibit the animal control authority from
utilizing firearms in emergency field situations where such actions are authorized by law or policy.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution for the shooting of a domestic animal that the animal shot was a vicious
animal which posed an immediate threat to personal or public safety or to the safety of livestock or a domestic
pet or other domesticated animal.
(d) It is an exception to prosecution that the person engaging in hunting is on property within the city upon
which state law prohibits the city's restriction of hunting rights and the hunter has a valid hunting license and is
on the property with the property's owner's permission and with permission to engage in hunting.
Sec. 2.05.004 Animal fighting
(a) A person commits an offense if he intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence causes,
instigates or permits an animal to fight with another animal or human or allows or otherwise permits to be used
property that he owns or controls for the purpose of conducting fights between animals or between animals and
humans. For purposes of this section, “animal” shall mean a domesticated living creature and a wild living
creature previously captured.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/430
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person caused a dog to fight with another dog in
order to protect a person, livestock, or other property from the other dog and for no other purpose.
Sec. 2.05.005 Use of poisonous substances
A person commits an offense if he administers a poisonous substance to an animal belonging to another without
express authority of that other person or the owner's effective consent for administration of the poisonous
substance. A person commits an offense if he leaves exposed or accessible to domestic animals or persons any
poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or otherwise.
Sec. 2.05.006 Abandonment
A person commits an offense if he abandons an animal in his custody.
State law reference–Cruelty by abandoning nonlivestock animal, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092(b)(4).
Sec. 2.05.007 Cruel treatment
(a) A person commits an offense if he beats, clubs, mutilates, torments, physically abuses, mentally abuses,
overloads, overworks or otherwise harms or abuses an animal.
(b) A person commits an offense if he fails to provide for animals in his ownership or control at all times
adequate food, potable water, appropriate shelter, protection from inclement weather conditions and veterinary
care when required to prevent suffering.
(c) A person commits an offense if he owns, keeps, shelters, or harbors any animal having a potentially lifethreatening
infestation of fleas, ticks or other parasites; any obvious life threatening illness; or a communicable
illness transmissible to other animals or humans, and fails to seek and obtain treatment for the animal from a
licensed veterinarian for such infestation or illness.
(d) A person commits an offense if he kills a dog or cat for the skin or fur of the animal.
(e) A person commits an offense if he attaches a collar or harness to an animal that is of inadequate size for
the animal such that it restricts the animal's growth or causes damage to the animal's skin.
(f) A person commits an offense if he engages or permits another person to engage in any sexual act with an
animal.
(g) The animal control authority shall have authority, in accord with the provisions of chapter 821 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, to obtain a warrant for seizure and impoundment of any animal that is the subject of an
investigation for cruel treatment, as defined herein or as defined by chapter 821 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code, pending a hearing and order by the judge of the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction
regarding disposition of the animal. Procedures regarding the disposition of the animal(s) shall be in accord with
the provisions of this chapter and chapter 821 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
Sec. 2.05.008 Removing young from mother
Unless specifically authorized by permit issued by the animal control authority, no person may physically
remove from the mother any animal less than six (6) weeks of age for the purpose of offering same for sale,
trade, barter or for giving same away for commercial purposes.
Sec. 2.05.009 Sale of animals in public places
(a) In this section, the term “public place” shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, highways, public rights-of-way, city parks,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/430
sidewalks, open air markets, flea markets, trade days, parking areas and parking lots, and the common areas of
schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
(b) A person commits an offense if he sells; offers for sale; barters; trades; exchanges; or gives away an
animal in a public place as defined herein.
(c) Exception. It is an exception to the provisions of subsection (b) above that the person or entity is an
authorized animal shelter maintained by a governmental entity or recognized animal welfare organization and
offers the animals for adoption at no profit. The animal control authority is hereby authorized to enter onto
premises utilized by any animal shelter or animal welfare organization for adoption of animals for the purpose of
inspection of the premises for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(d) The animal control authority shall have authority to remove or cause to be removed from the public place
on which the animal is offered for adoption any animal which, in the determination of the animal control
authority, poses a risk to the health or safety of the public or of other animals.
Sec. 2.05.010 Minimum requirements for pens and enclosures; sanitary requirements
It is a violation of this chapter if a person keeps, harbors or otherwise maintains an animal in a pen, cage,
enclosure, fenced area or other shelter which is not in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(1) Requirements for pens and enclosures. All pens, enclosures or cages used to confine animals
shall be of sufficient size to maintain the animal(s) within in reasonable comfort and health. All pens,
enclosures or cages used to confine animals shall provide protection from precipitation, inclement
weather and extreme weather conditions and shall be adequately ventilated. In the event of cold
temperatures, the pen, enclosure or cage must be sufficient to permit the animal to maintain its body
heat.
(A) Plastic shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be sufficient as outdoor animal
enclosures or shelters.
(B) The animal control authority shall have authority to determine the adequacy of pens,
cages and enclosures under this chapter.
(2) Sanitary requirements. Owners of animals shall be required to maintain and keep all pens,
cages, enclosures and fenced areas for animals in a sanitary condition which shall require, but not be
limited to, the following:
(A) All animal waste shall be disposed of promptly and all pens and enclosures shall be
cleaned as necessary to prevent odor, insects and vermin infestation or other nuisance;
(B) Approved spray or other treatments shall be used at reasonable intervals as necessary to
maintain the premises free of flies, mosquitoes, fleas, ticks or other insects;
(C) Adequate food and water supply for the animal must be readily available to the animal in
the enclosure or accessible in the area and must be maintained in a sanitary condition.
ARTICLE 2.06 DANGEROUS ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.06.001 Purpose and election to implement remedies of state law
It is the intent of this section to provide appropriate procedures and means for dealing with animals, including
but not limited to, dogs which are dangerous or which, by their actions, represent a danger to the public health
and safety in the future. In interpreting the provisions of this section, the animal control authority shall take into
consideration the right of an individual to possess and utilize an animal for security or guard purposes and shall
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/430
also take into consideration the right of the public to be free from fear of attack and injury by a dog or other
animal. Further, it is the intent and purpose of this section to promote public safety with respect to dangerous
wild animals while providing means for the safe exhibition of certain animals for public entertainment and
education. It is the specific intent of this provision to elect adoption of Texas health and Safety Code chapter
822, subchapter D, dangerous dogs as it exists at the time of adoption of this chapter or as it may hereafter be
amended.
Sec. 2.06.002 Definitions
Dangerous animal. An animal which:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person which results in bodily injury to the person and which
occurs in a place other than a secure enclosure in which the animal was being kept;
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than a secure enclosure in which the animal was
being kept and those acts by the animal cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack
and cause bodily injury to that person;
(3) Has killed or seriously injured a domestic animal without provocation while in a place other
than a secure enclosure in which the attacking animal was kept;
(4) Is kept, harbored or trained for fighting or used for the purpose of fighting;
(5) Is an animal known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and which cannot be
effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the Texas Department of State
Health Services; or
(6) Is determined by the animal control authority, due to temperament, condition, training and/or
observed behavior of the animal, to be a danger to persons or to other animals.
Final determination or finally determined. A written notice issued by the animal control authority, that an animal
is a dangerous animal, which is not timely and properly appealed in accord with this chapter, or, the written
decision of the municipal court determining, on appeal, that an animal is a dangerous animal as defined by this
chapter.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure of its own volition
which meets the following minimum requirements:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of the animal(s) kept therein;
(4) Clearly marked with notice that the area or structure contains a dangerous animal;
(5) Adequately lit and ventilated and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;
(6) Of a minimum area of two (2) square feet per pound of weight of the animal to be secured; and
(7) In compliance with all requirements of this chapter, and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter, for animal enclosures.
Sec. 2.06.003 Reporting of incidents involving dangerous animals; disposition of animals pending
investigation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/430
(a) A person shall report to the animal control authority an incident or observation of an animal potentially
meeting the criteria described in the dangerous animal definition in section 2.06.002 above. The animal control
authority shall investigate all such reports and shall make a determination as to whether the animal is a
dangerous animal as defined herein.
(b) Pending the investigation and determination of the animal control authority as to whether the animal is a
dangerous animal, the animal control authority shall have the authority to require the owner to, within twentyfour
(24) hours of receipt of notice of the order, deliver the animal to the city's animal shelter (or other
appropriate facility designated by the animal control authority) for impoundment in secure and humane
conditions. In the event that the owner of an animal made the subject of a report under this section can not be
located after reasonable effort and the animal poses a threat to the public health and safety if not immediately
impounded, the animal control authority shall be authorized to impound the animal pending investigation of the
report. In the event that the owner of an animal made the subject of a report under this section cannot, after
reasonable effort, be located for service of written notice by the animal control authority, the animal control
authority shall be authorized to humanely euthanize the animal after five (5) days.
Sec. 2.06.004 Determination of dangerous animal by animal control authority; appeal of determination
(a) The animal control authority shall investigate reports made pursuant to section 2.06.003 above. Such
investigations may include the interviewing of individuals, the taking of sworn statements, examination of the
animal and other review of other relevant information. If, at the conclusion of the investigation, the animal
control authority determines that the animal is a dangerous animal, as defined herein, the animal control
authority shall provide notice, in writing, of that determination to the owner of the animal. The written notice
may be delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, with concurrent mailing by regular
mail. In the event the owner of the animal refuses the written notice by certified mail, it shall be presumed that
the owner received the written notice forwarded by regular mail.
(b) In the event that the animal made the subject of the investigation has not been impounded pending the
investigation, upon determination by the animal control authority that the animal is a dangerous animal, the
written notice of that determination shall be accompanied by a written directive from the animal control
authority to deliver the animal to the animal control authority, within five (5) days of the issuance of the written
notice, for agreed registration in accord with the provisions of this chapter or the determination of the municipal
court regarding the disposition of the animal.
(c) In the event the owner fails to deliver the animal to the animal control authority as required by this section,
the animal control authority shall request from the municipal court the issuance of warrant for seizure of the
animal. The animal control authority shall, promptly upon issuance of the warrant for seizure, seize the animal
and provide for its impoundment in secure and humane conditions pending the municipal court's order regarding
disposition of the dog. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for all costs incurred in seizing the dog and
the costs and fees for impoundment of the animal.
(d) The owner of an animal which has been determined by the animal control authority to be a dangerous
animal may, within ten (10) days following issuance of the written notice of the determination as a dangerous
animal, appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the municipal court by filing with that court a
written notice of appeal of the determination. The written notice of appeal must plainly state the grounds of the
appeal of the determination and have attached a true and correct copy of the written notice issued by the animal
control authority which is appealed. A written notice of determination as a dangerous animal issued by the
animal control authority and not timely appealed as provided in this section shall be considered, in all respects,
final upon the 11th day following its issuance.
(e) The municipal court shall, upon receipt of a written appeal as provided above, set the matter for hearing.
The hearing must be set not later than ten (10) days from the date of the filing of the written appeal. The court
shall provide written notice of the date and time of the disposition hearing to: (1) the owner of the animal; (2) the
animal control authority; and (3) the city attorney's office. The written determination of the animal control
authority that the animal is a dangerous animal shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the animal is a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/430
dangerous animal. Any interested person may present competent evidence to the court to rebut the presumption
of the animal's status. The municipal court shall render its decision in writing within ten (10) days of the date of
the hearing. Copies of the decision shall be forwarded to the owner and to the city attorney's office. In the event
the decision of the municipal court affirms the animal control's authority that the animal is a dangerous animal,
the owner shall be required to comply with the registration requirements set forth below and the animal shall
remain impounded pending the owner's compliance with those registration requirements.
Sec. 2.06.005 Registration of dangerous animals
(a) Not later than ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of a written notice by the animal control
authority that an animal is a dangerous animal, or in the event of appeal of such written notice by the animal
control authority, not later than ten (10) days from the date of a written decision of the municipal court affirming
the determination that an animal is a dangerous animal, the owner of the animal shall:
(1) Register the animal with the animal control authority and obtain from the animal control
authority a tag supplied by the animal control authority clearly identifying the animal as a “dangerous
animal”;
(2) Ensure that the identification tag is placed on and worn on the animal at all times;
(3) Provide to the animal control authority documentation confirming that the animal has been
fitted with a microchip identification device registered with the microchip company and fitted by a
licensed veterinarian or, alternatively, reimburse the city for the costs of the microchip device fitted
by the animal control authority;
(4) Provide to the animal control authority documentation confirming that the owner has in effect
liability insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from
an attack by the animal causing bodily injury to a person;
(5) Provide documentation to the animal control authority confirming that the animal made the
subject of the written determination has been spayed or neutered or provide written consent for the
spay or neuter of the animal while impounded by the city; and
(6) Permit inspection of the owner's premises where the animal is proposed to be kept for the
purpose of ensuring that a secure enclosure, as defined herein, is provided for the animal.
(b) The registration required by this section is specific and valid as to only the animal made the subject of the
registration and the owner identified in the registration certificate. A registration certificate issued pursuant to
this section may not be transferred, sold or otherwise conveyed to another person.
(c) The registration required by this section shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
its issuance and the owner shall be required to re-register the dangerous animal at the expiration of its
registration period. Re-registration of a dangerous animal shall require compliance with each of the above
provisions. In the event an owner fails to timely re-register an animal finally determined to be a dangerous
animal subject to registration, the animal control authority shall be authorized, without hearing or warrant, to
immediately seize the animal; notify the owner of the seizure; and impound the animal until such time as the
owner properly re-registers the animal. In the event the owner fails to properly re-register a dangerous animal
impounded pursuant to this provision within fifteen (15) days of its impoundment, the animal control authority
shall be authorized to humanely euthanize the animal.
(d) An animal finally determined, by notice of the animal control authority or by the municipal court, to be a
dangerous animal shall not be released from impoundment until each of the requirements of subsection (a) above
has been met by the owner and all fees and costs incurred in connection with the care, impoundment and other
required procedures for the animal have been paid to the city. A finding by the animal control authority that an
owner of a dangerous animal is no longer in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/430
grounds for revocation of the animal's registration and seizure and impoundment of the animal as provided in
subsection (b) above. In the event the owner of an animal finally determined to be a dangerous animal fails to
comply with the requirements of subsection (a) above within thirty (30) days of the final written determination,
the animal control authority shall be authorized to humanely euthanize the animal.
Sec. 2.06.006 Requirements for restraint of dangerous animal
The owner of an animal finally determined to be a dangerous animal shall:
(1) At all times when the animal is on the owner's property, restrain the animal on an adequate
leash in the immediate control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older, or restrain the animal
in a secure enclosure as defined in this chapter; and
(2) At all times when the animal is taken off the owner's property, restrain the animal with a
muzzle which will prevent it from biting any person or other animal but which will not cause injury
to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration.
Sec. 2.06.007 Requirements for notification by owner of dangerous animal
(a) The owner of an animal finally determined to be a dangerous animal shall notify the animal control
authority within twenty-four (24) hours of any of the following:
(1) The animal is running at-large;
(2) The animal has attacked a human being or other animal;
(3) The animal has died; or
(4) The animal has been sold or given away.
(b) If the owner of the dangerous animal sells or gives away the animal, the owner shall provide the animal
control authority with the name, address, and telephone number of the animal's new owner. If the new owner
resides within the city or if the dangerous animal is kept or maintained in the city by the new owner, regardless
of the new owner's residence, the animal control authority shall notify the new owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by regular mail that the new owner is required to comply with the requirements of this
section. Failure of the new owner to properly register the animal with the animal control authority within fifteen
(15) days of the issuance of such notice to the new owner shall authorize the animal control authority to seize
and impound the animal until such time as the new owner complies with the requirements of this section. In the
event the new owner fails to properly register the impounded animal within fifteen (15) days of its impoundment
pursuant to this provision, the animal control authority shall be authorized to humanely euthanize the animal.
Sec. 2.06.008 Offenses; defenses to prosecution
(a) Offense. A person who owns, keeps or otherwise has care, custody or control of a dangerous animal, as
defined in this chapter, commits an offense if the person fails to comply with any provision of this chapter
pertaining to the regulation of dangerous animals.
(b) A person commits an offense if he owns, keeps or otherwise has care, custody or control of a dangerous
animal, as defined in this chapter, and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on a person or domestic animal
outside the animal's secure enclosure and causes bodily injury to a person, or domestic animal.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) above, that the person keeping or in care or
control of the animal is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a duly organized animal shelter, or
a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals or animal control
and has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal in connection with that position.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/430
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) above, that the person is an employee of the
institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses
animals for law enforcement or correction purposes.
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) above, that the person is a dog trainer or an
employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702 of the Texas Occupations Code.
ARTICLE 2.07 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.07.001 General provisions
(a) Animals found to be in violation of this chapter or found to be in circumstances in which impoundment is
authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be taken into the custody of the animal control authority and
impounded at the city's animal shelter or other appropriate facility designated by the animal control authority.
(b) The owner of an impounded animal(s) is responsible for and required to pay to the city all fees, costs and
expenses incurred in the seizure and impoundment of the animal. These fees, costs and expenses shall include,
but not be limited to, daily impoundment fees, veterinarian fees, and costs of medications required for the
animal's care while impounded.
(c) An owner of an animal may voluntarily relinquish ownership and control of the animal to the animal
control authority by execution of a relinquishment document in the form prescribed by the animal control
authority. Upon execution of the relinquishment document and surrender of the animal, the animal control
authority shall have authority to make any disposition of the animal authorized by section 2.07.006. An owner
relinquishing a sick or injured animal may be held responsible for the payment of all veterinary or medication
fees incurred for the care of the animal.
Sec. 2.07.002 Tampering with shelter facilities or animal control vehicles
A person commits an offense if he, without effective consent or authority, breaks into, opens or otherwise
intrudes into the city's animal shelter or other facility used by the city to impound or keep animals. A person
commits an offense if he turns out, releases; causes to be turned out or released; or aids or abets the turning out
or release of any animal from the city's animal shelter, any facility used by the city for impoundment of animals,
or any vehicle used or utilized by the city or animal control authority for the seizure and transport of animals.
Sec. 2.07.003 Impoundment periods
An impounded animal, not exhibiting an identification tag or microchip, shall be kept for three (3) full days
excluding the date of impoundment. An impounded animal exhibiting an identification tag or microchip shall be
kept for five (5) full days excluding the day of impoundment during which period the animal control authority
will notify the owner, if determinable, of the impoundment of the animal. If the owner of an impounded animal
does not claim the animal within the prescribed period, disposition of the animal will be made as provided in
section 2.07.006.
Sec. 2.07.004 Disposition of animals prior to expiration of impoundment period
In the event that a nursing baby animal is impounded without its mother or where the mother is unable to
provide adequate nutrition for the baby animals causing the baby animals to suffer, the animal control authority
shall have immediate authority to transfer the baby animals to a nonprofit humane organization or to humanely
euthanize the baby animals. In the event that an impounded animal is suffering from injury or illness, the animal
control authority shall have the authority to immediately transfer the animal to a nonprofit humane organization
or animal welfare organization or to humanely euthanize the animal. If an animal subject to impoundment
cannot be moved from the location where it is found due to injury or illness, the animal control authority shall be
authorized to dispose of the animal in the most expedient, humane manner possible to avoid prolonging its
suffering.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/430
Sec. 2.07.005 Redemption of impounded animal
(a) Except as may be specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, the owner of an impounded animal may
reclaim the animal, during normal hours of operation of the city's animal shelter, on the following conditions:
(1) Satisfactory proof of ownership of the animal;
(2) Photo identification by the person reclaiming the animal;
(3) Proof of current vaccination of the animal, if vaccination of the animal is required by the
provisions of this chapter;
(4) Payment of all impoundment fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the city in keeping
the animal and/or attempting to locate the owner of the animal.
(b) If an impounded dog or cat has not been spayed or neutered and has previously been impounded on four
(4) or more occasions, the animal control authority may, require the animal to be spayed or neutered prior to
release of the animal to the owner. If the animal control authority imposes a spay or neuter requirement, the
owner will have thirty (30) days to provide the animal control authority proof that the spay or neuter requirement
has been satisfied or will be in violation of this chapter.
(c) A dangerous wild animal may be reclaimed only under the following conditions:
(1) Proof that the person reclaiming the animal holds a valid certificate of registration for the
animal issued by an animal registration agency in compliance with the provisions of Texas Health
and Safety Code, section 822.103; and
(2) The execution of a written agreement by the owner of the animal to immediately remove the
animal from the city limits.
(d) Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the release or reclaiming of an animal subject to quarantine
until completion of the quarantine period.
Sec. 2.07.006 Disposition of unclaimed animals
All impounded animals not claimed by an owner, within the periods prescribed in section 2.07.003 shall, in the
sole discretion of the animal control authority, be adopted, transferred to a nonprofit humane organization, sold,
or humanely euthanized.
Sec. 2.07.007 Adoption of animals
(a) Animals may be adopted from the city's animal shelter under the following conditions:
(1) The animal is classified as adoptable by this chapter and by the animal control authority;
(2) The person proposing to adopt has not been cited within the past twelve (12) months for any
violations under this chapter;
(3) The person proposing to adopt has never been charged with any violation of this chapter or
state law pertaining to cruel treatment of animals;
(4) The dog or cat to be adopted has to be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of adoption or
when it is six (6) month of age;
(5) The dog or cat has received all vaccinations required by this chapter and/or state law;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/430
(6) The person proposing to adopt has appropriate facilities to provide for the animal;
(7) All adoption fees and other fees authorized by this chapter are tendered to the city.
(b) The requirements for payment of adoption fees shall not apply where cooperative agreements exist
between the city and an animal welfare group or humane organization established for the placement and care of
animals; nor shall the adoption fees apply to transfers of animals made under cooperative agreements between
the city and other governmental entities.
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Sec. 2.07.008 Disposition of estray
Upon receipt by the animal control authority of a report of estray within the city or upon discovery by the animal
control authority of estray within the city, the animal control authority shall, as soon as practicable, notify the
sheriff of the county to report the presence of the estray, a description of the estray and the location where the
estray may be found. If circumstances permit, the animal control authority shall refer the impoundment and
disposition of the estray to the sheriff of the county. If circumstances do not permit such a referral, the animal
control authority shall be authorized to assist the sheriff in the seizure and impoundment of the estray pending
the disposition of the estray by the sheriff of the county in accord with the provisions of chapter 142 of the Texas
Agriculture Code.
ARTICLE 2.08 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.08.001 General standards and procedures
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the minimum standards and procedures for
control of rabies set forth in chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code are hereby adopted by the city as
those standards and procedures exist on the date of adoption of this chapter and as they may hereafter be
amended by the legislature or the Texas Board of Health.
Sec. 2.08.002 Animal vaccinations; offense
(a) All dogs or cats four (4) months of age or older within the city shall be vaccinated against rabies. All such
vaccinations shall be repeated at the intervals prescribed by rule of the state board of health or its successor
agency.
(b) A person establishing residence in the city shall, within fifteen (15) days of establishing residency, comply
with the provisions of this chapter regarding vaccination.
(c) A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall issue to the owner of the animal a
vaccination certificate on a form approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services. The veterinarian
shall also issue to the owner a metal tag serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate and
with the veterinarian's address and the year of the vaccination stamped thereon. The veterinarian shall retain a
duplicate copy of the certificate of vaccination which shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated animal;
(2) The date of vaccination;
(3) The type of rabies vaccine used;
(4) The year and number of the rabies tag issued; and
(5) The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated animal.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/430
(d) The owner of the vaccinated dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the animal's collar or harness the
metal tag issued by the veterinarian in connection with the vaccination. In the event a metal tag confirming
vaccination is lost, the owner of the animal shall obtain a duplicate tag and cause same to be attached to the
animal's collar or harness.
(e) A person commits an offense if he owns, keep, harbors, possesses or allows any dog or cat which is not
currently vaccinated in compliance with this chapter to remain upon the person's premises under his control.
(f) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner provides to the municipal court a valid and
current certificate of vaccination for the animal made the subject of a citation or formal complaint for violation
of this section. Upon proof of current vaccination in accord with the provisions of this chapter, the case shall be
dismissed upon payment of any required administrative fees imposed by the court.
Sec. 2.08.003 Vaccination of impounded animals
In the event an owner desires to reclaim from impoundment an animal required to be vaccinated by this chapter
and the owner is not able to provide proof of current vaccination of the animal, the animal control authority shall
have authority to cause the animal to be vaccinated against rabies and shall assess the costs of such vaccination
to the owner for payment prior to reclaiming of the animal.
Sec. 2.08.004 Duty to report animal bites or rabies exposure
(a) Any person, including the owner of the animal, having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to a human
or to another animal by an animal which the person has reason to believe may be or is rabid shall report that
incident to the animal control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence of the bite or scratch
incident.
(b) Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or believes an animal has been exposed to rabies and any
other person who reasonably suspects rabies in an animal or believes an animal has been exposed to rabies shall
immediately report that information to the animal control authority.
(c) Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal shall report the occurrence to the animal control
authority within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence. If the person bitten or scratched is under the age of
seventeen (17) years, the parent or guardian of the minor, if he has knowledge of the bite or scratch, shall report
the occurrence to the animal control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of obtaining such knowledge.
(d) A person who owns, keeps, or harbors an animal within the city and has knowledge that the said animal
has bitten a person outside of the city within the last ten (10) days shall report the bite incident to the animal
control authority.
(e) A report required to be made under this section shall include, if known to the reporting person, the
following information:
(1) The location within the city (or other jurisdiction) where the bite or scratch occurred;
(2) The location where the animal, which committed the act or is suspected to have rabies, may be
located;
(3) The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched;
(4) The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors or has control over the premises
where the animal may normally be found;
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) who owns, keeps or harbors an animal(s) which
may have been exposed to rabies.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/430
Sec. 2.08.005 Investigation of reports
The animal control authority shall investigate reported bite and scratch incidents in accord with state law and the
procedures and recommendations of the Texas Department of State Health Services.
Sec. 2.08.006 Submission of animal to quarantine; offense
(a) The owner of any dog or cat which has been reported to have inflicted a bite or scratch on any person
shall, upon request by the animal control authority, immediately surrender the animal for quarantine to the
animal control authority, or to a designated facility as directed by the animal control authority, in accordance
with section 2.08.009.
(b) A person commits an offense if he owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or allows to remain on premises under
his control an animal made the subject of quarantine notice by the animal control authority and fails to produce
or surrender the animal to the animal control authority upon request. Each day a person continues to fail to
produce or surrender the animal shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Failure of an owner to surrender an animal in accord with a notice of quarantine by the animal control
authority shall render the animal subject to immediate impoundment by the animal control authority for such
purpose.
Sec. 2.08.007 Quarantine period
A dog or cat whose owner is known and which is required to be quarantined under this provision shall be
observed for a minimum period of ten (10) days from the date of bite. The location and conditions of quarantine
during this observation period shall be determined by the animal control authority in accord with the provisions
of this chapter and applicable state law.
State law references–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.; quarantine of animals,
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042
Sec. 2.08.008 Quarantine period of stray animals
A stray dog or cat, or an animal whose owner cannot be located after reasonable effort, which is required to be
quarantined under this provision shall be maintained by the animal control authority for a period of seventy-two
(72) hours after which time, if no owner has been located, the animal may be humanely euthanized and the brain
of such animal submitted for rabies examination.
Sec. 2.08.009 Terms and conditions of quarantine
(a) In the sole determination of the animal control authority, a period of quarantine under this provision may
be accomplished:
(1) By quarantine in the city's animal shelter under the supervision of the animal control authority;
(2) By quarantine at an approved veterinary clinic under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian
and in accord with requirements of state law;
(3) By quarantine by owner where permitted by state law and approved by the animal control
authority which approval may only be granted under the following conditions:
(A) The owner provides the animal control authority with documentation of current rabies
vaccination and the animal control authority determines that the owner has not been cited for
any animal control violations in the city in the past twelve (12) months;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/430
(B) The animal must be maintained within a secure enclosure (as defined in this chapter)
approved by the animal control authority for such purpose and must remain therein for a
minimum of ten (10) consecutive days;
(C) The animal must have no contact with other animals or people save and except those in
the immediate household of the animal;
(D) The animal may not, under any circumstances, be removed from the corporate limits of
the city during the quarantine period;
(E) The owner must notify the animal control authority immediately if the animal exhibits
symptoms of disease or behavioral changes during the quarantine period;
(F) The owner must not permit any medical procedure, including vaccination of any sort, on
the animal during the quarantine period without written consent of the animal control authority;
(G) The owner must permit the animal control authority or a licensed veterinarian to examine
the animal on the first day of quarantine; upon reasonable notice, during the quarantine period;
and on the final day of the quarantine period.
(b) Nothing herein shall be deemed to require or mandate the animal control authority to permit quarantine by
owner. Quarantine by owner may be terminated by the animal control authority and/or the local rabies control
authority at any time during the quarantine period for failure of the owner to comply with any of the
requirements herein and, in such event, the animal control authority shall have the immediate right to seize the
animal and effect quarantine of the animal at an appropriate designated facility at the sole cost and expense of
the owner of the animal.
Sec. 2.08.010 Costs of quarantine
All costs of quarantine, regardless of where accomplished, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the
animal subject to quarantine. In the event an animal is quarantined at the city's animal shelter, all quarantine fees
and expenses shall be paid to the city prior to the animal's release to the owner.
Sec. 2.08.011 Disposition of certain animals during quarantine
In the event, that due to the conduct and behavior of the animal, it is not possible for the animal control authority
to maintain the animal securely in quarantine, or if the animal has inflicted serious bodily injury on a person, or
if the animal exhibits such severe symptoms of rabies as to cause distress and suffering to the animal, the animal
control authority shall be authorized to immediately humanely euthanize the animal and have the animal's brain
submitted for rabies testing.
Sec. 2.08.012 Interference with or interruption of quarantine period
A person commits an offense if he interrupts the quarantine period of an animal required by this provision by
removing the animal from the quarantine facility or conditions. Interruption of a quarantine period shall
authorize the animal control authority to immediately impound the animal and complete quarantine in accord
with this provision under the supervision of the animal control authority.
Sec. 2.08.013 Release of animal from quarantine
(a) An animal which has been quarantined under these provisions may be released from quarantine under the
following conditions:
(1) The full ten (10) day observation period has expired with no indication of rabies in the animal;
(2) The owner provides proof of current vaccination of the animal;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/430
(3) All applicable fees and expenses of quarantine have been paid; and
(4) The animal is not subject to impoundment for other violations or legal proceedings.
(b) In the event all of the above terms and conditions are met save and except proof of current vaccination, the
animal control authority shall cause the animal to be vaccinated, recover the costs of that vaccination from the
owner and the animal may be released to the owner.
Sec. 2.08.014 Disposition of unclaimed animals
In the event the owner of an animal subject to quarantine under this provision fails or refuses to reclaim the
animal upon completion of the quarantine period, the animal will be humanely disposed of in accord with this
chapter and the provisions of Texas Health and Safety Code, section 826.043(d).
Sec. 2.08.015 Disposition of domestic animals potentially exposed to rabies
(a) Domestic animals currently vaccinated for rabies and potentially exposed to rabies shall, in the sole
discretion of the animal control authority, either be provided a rabies vaccination booster immediately and
placed in isolation under the supervision of the animal control authority for forty-five (45) days or, alternatively,
the animal will be humanely euthanized.
(b) Domestic animals not currently vaccinated for rabies and potentially exposed to rabies shall, in the sole
discretion of the animal control authority, either be provided a rabies vaccination immediately, placed in strict
isolation for 180 days and provided rabies vaccination boosters during the third and eighth weeks following
exposure; or, alternatively, be humanely euthanized.
Sec. 2.08.016 Enforcement
For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by these provisions, the animal control authority and/or any
police officer of the city is authorized to enter onto private property, other than a private dwelling upon which an
animal is kept or harbored and to require proof of current vaccination of such animal as required by this chapter.
The owner of an animal is required to produce vaccination information for each animal in his ownership upon
request by the animal control authority or a peace officer.
ARTICLE 2.09 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ENTERPRISES
Sec. 2.09.001 Definition
As permitted by the zoning regulations of the city, a commercial animal enterprise is an activity or venture with
a commercial purpose where animals are raised, trained, boarded, harbored, maintained, groomed, displayed
and/or offered for sale and shall include, but is not limited to, kennels, pet shops, grooming shops, animal
clinics, animal hospitals, animal research centers, zoological parks, petting zoos, livestock auctions, guard dog
or obedience training centers, horse stables or riding facilities, farms or ranches, or performing animal
exhibitions as defined in this chapter.
Sec. 2.09.002 General operational requirements
All commercial animal enterprises shall be operated and animals cared for in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code and this chapter.
Sec. 2.09.003 Permits; offense
(a) In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with all applicable zoning regulations and permit requirements
under other applicable chapters, commercial animal enterprises shall be required to obtain operational permits
from the animal control authority as provided herein. A person commits an offense if he operates, causes to be
operated or otherwise engages in a commercial animal enterprise, for which the issuance of permit is required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/430
under this chapter, without a valid permit issued by the animal control authority for such commercial animal
enterprise.
(b) Annual operational permits from the animal control authority shall be required for:
(1) Kennels;
(2) Private animal shelters;
(3) Private animal fostering facilities;
(4) Private animal boarding facilities;
(5) Horse stables or riding facilities;
(6) Grooming shops or facilities;
(7) Pet stores or shops; and
(8) Private petting zoos.
(c) Temporary operational permits from the animal control authority shall be required for:
(1) Performing animal exhibitions;
(2) Animal amusement vendors;
(3) Circuses or carnivals with acts involving animals; or
(4) Any other transitory or temporary commercial animal enterprise seeking to do business in the
city.
(d) In addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter or state law, private animal shelters, private
animal fostering facilities, and private animal boarding facilities for dogs and/or cats must comply with the
following criteria as a condition of issuance and maintenance of an annual operational permit:
(1) All animals must be maintained on a nonporous or sealed surface which provides for proper
drainage, sanitation and disposal of waste;
(2) All animals must be provided access to an enclosure consisting of at least three (3) sides and
capable of providing shade and protection from the elements;
(3) All animal enclosures must be adequately ventilated; and
(4) All animal enclosures must be supplied with facilities for daily washing and sanitation of the
premises.
Sec. 2.09.004 Exceptions to permit requirements
The following facilities and enterprises are exempt from the requirement of an operational permit by the animal
control authority, same being subject to regulation and oversight by other appropriate agencies and
organizations:
(1) Animal hospitals;
(2) Veterinary clinics, including temporary sites set up by a licensed veterinarian to provide low
cost vaccinations or other treatment;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/430
(3) Private or governmental research facilities where animals are maintained;
(4) Education facilities where animals are maintained;
(5) Animal shelters, impounds or facilities maintained by governmental entities, political
subdivisions of the state or governmental agencies;
(6) Rodeos and rodeo-affiliated livestock shows;
(7) Livestock auction facilities;
(8) Equestrian or cutting horse events sponsored by a recognized association or organization;
(9) Facilities maintained by nonprofit humane or animal welfare organizations, including but not
limited to the American Humane Society and the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; and
(10) The seasonal sale of brooder rabbits, chicks, ducklings or other fowl by feed stores or
agricultural supply enterprises for agricultural purposes where such activity is otherwise authorized
by applicable zoning ordinances and state health regulations.
Sec. 2.09.005 Issuance of permits; conditions; revocation; appeals
The provisions of section 2.01.007 of this chapter shall control, in conjunction with all terms and conditions of
this article, regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of operational permits. Nothing herein shall be construed
to supersede any provision of any applicable zoning regulation or permit requirement of any other applicable
municipal code.
Sec. 2.09.006 Inspections
The animal control authority shall, in connection with the application for and issuance of permits pursuant to this
article, have the authority to inspect all premises on which commercial animal enterprises subject to permit are
or will be conducted. Additionally, the animal control authority shall have the authority to enter upon and
inspect, at all reasonable times, any premises on which a permitted commercial animal enterprise is conducted.
Sec. 2.09.007 Revocation of operational permit; offense
(a) If the animal control authority determines that any term or condition of an operational permit issued under
this article has been violated, the animal control authority shall be authorized to revoke the operational permit.
Notice to the permit holder shall be provided in accord with the provisions of section 2.01.007.
(b) A person commits an offense if he continues, causes to continue or otherwise engages in a commercial
animal enterprise after final revocation of an operational permit previously issued for that enterprise. Each day
that a person continues to engage in a commercial animal enterprise after final revocation of an operational
permit shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance O-002-12 adopted 4/3/12)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/430
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Building standards commission
(a) Members; terms of members; duties.
(1) There is hereby created a building standards commission to be composed of seven members
who shall live within the corporate limits of the city. They will hold office for a period of four years
with staggered terms, or until their successors are appointed. As near as practicable, all members of
the commission will be qualified in one or more of the fields of engineering, building construction,
electrical construction, and plumbing construction and at least one of the members will possess a
valid master or journeyman plumbing license as issued by the state. A city employee in the respective
department or division of the city, who shall be designated by the city manager, shall be authorized to
act as a substitute for the head of their department as an ex officio member of the commission. (1998
Code, sec. 150.47; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) The building standards commission will serve in an advisory capacity to the city council on
proposed ordinance amendments to the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and fire codes of
the city; hold hearings pertaining to substandard and/or dangerous buildings or structures,
recommending the repair or demolition thereof; and hold hearings on appeals and requests for
variances from the regulations or provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and fire
codes of the city.
(b) Administrative official. The city manager shall designate the administrative official, who shall serve as
secretary to the commission and as liaison between the commission, the public and the city council. The
designated administrative official shall keep minutes of all meetings in a well-bound book, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; shall conduct all official
correspondence; shall compile the required records of its examinations and other official actions; shall maintain
the necessary files; and shall generally supervise the clerical work of the commission.
(c) Rules; meetings. The building standards commission shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; however,
such rules shall not be inconsistent with the Code of Ordinances of the city or with the statutes of the state.
Meetings shall be held once each month or at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the building
standards commission may deem necessary in order to conduct its duties. The chairperson, or, in his absence, the
vice-chairperson or acting chairperson, shall conduct all meetings and hearings of the commission and may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
(d) Appeals from decisions of inspectors. The building standards commission is authorized to hear and decide
appeals upon the basis of the provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and fire codes of the
city in cases where it is alleged that an order, requirement or decision of a city inspector in the enforcement of
said codes is erroneous. Such appeals shall be made in writing within 15 days after the order or decision has
been rendered by the inspector, by filing with the secretary of the building standards commission a notice of
appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. An appeal shall stay all proceedings or actions appealed from unless
the inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the commission that a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property; in such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed unless the building standards
commission determines upon investigation that a stay is justified. The building standards commission shall set a
reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Any party may appeal in person or by attorney or by
agent.
(e) Variances. The building standards commission may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such
variances from the terms of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and fire codes as will not be contrary
to the public interest or under special conditions, where a literal enforcement of the provisions of said codes will
result in unnecessary hardship, with the intent that the spirit of the codes shall be observed and substantial justice
done, but subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards. In hearing an appeal, the commission shall not have
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/430
the power to waive or set aside the requirements of said codes, but shall have the power to interpret their
provisions, and, in cases of alternate type of construction or material, shall determine whether or not such
alternate type of material is, in fact, equal to the city's codes, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation
and safety to the public.
(f) Right of appeal. Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decision of the commission
shall have a right of appeal to the city council within ten days from the rendition of such decision, order or
requirement by the commission. Said appeals shall be submitted by written notice of appeal to the city council
requesting a hearing before the city council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. Due process
shall not be denied and further appeal may be made to the court of proper jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.47)
Sec. 3.01.002 Liability insurance for persons engaged in construction, alteration or repair of buildings
(a) Generally. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of construction, alteration or repair of
buildings within the corporate limits of the city shall provide to the planning and zoning department proof of
liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 for the use and benefit of the city, the property owner or any
person injured or damaged by any act or neglect of the principal or his agents or employees, or by reason of
failure to repair any defective work, device or installation, or for failure to remedy any defects or faulty
workmanship or material within the time prescribed by the building official for the completion of such remedial
work without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, and guaranteeing compliance with the
requirements of the Code of Ordinances of all work installed by the principal, his agents or employees. Payment
for said insurance may be demanded and received by any person aggrieved by reason of the principal's failure to
perform his obligations under said insurance. No permit for the construction, alteration or repair of any building
shall be issued until the proper insurance has been filed with the city as required herein.
(b) Roofers. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of roofing or the replacement of roofing
within the corporate limits of the city shall comply with the requirements of this section prior to obtaining a
permit.
(c) Exception. Persons who own a single-family dwelling and who reside within such dwelling and have
established the same as their legal place of residence shall not be required to file proof of liability insurance to
obtain a permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.01)
Sec. 3.01.003 Building lots
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building
site, building tract or building lot has been created in compliance with one of the following conditions:
(1) The lot or tract is described as a separate lot or tract by a plat of record, properly approved by
the planning and zoning commission and city council and filed in the plat of records of the county.
(2) The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to February
21, 1967, or prior to annexation to the city, whichever is applicable, in which event only one main
building may be constructed, and a permit issued therefor, on such original.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.02)
Sec. 3.01.004 Containment and disposal of trash and debris at construction sites
Each person engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of any building or appurtenance thereto shall be
responsible for all trash, debris and unused material from construction placed or collected on the construction lot
or site. Such person shall be responsible for placing all trash and debris, including that which is capable of being
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/430
wind blown, in a covered container or enclosure until disposed of or removed from the construction lot or site.
The building inspector may cause all inspections to be withheld or work to be stopped if uncollected or
uncontained trash, debris or unused material from construction is evident on the construction lot or site or on
adjacent property. (1998 Code, sec. 150.03)
Sec. 3.01.005 Trench safety
On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city, or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain: (1) a reference to the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration standards for trench safety in effect during the period of construction of the project; (2) a
copy of special shoring requirements, if any, of the political subdivision, with a separate pay item for the special
shoring requirements; (3) a copy of any geotechnical information that was obtained by the owner for use by the
contractor in the design of the trench safety system; and (4) a separate pay item for trench excavation safety
protection. This section does not apply to a person subject to the safety standards adopted under and the
administrative penalty provisions of V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, chapter 121, subchapter E, section 121.201 et seq.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.04; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Trench safety requirements, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.021 et seq.
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING CODE*
Division 1. International Building Code
Sec. 3.02.001 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14 the International Building Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings or structures in the city, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out completely in detail. A copy
of said International Building Code shall be filed with the director of administrative services, such copy to be
open for public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.02.002 Amendments
The International Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby
amended, as applicable to the city in the following sections, paragraphs and sentences to read as follows:
Section 101, General, paragraph (A) 101.1 Title, Insert “City of Borger”
Add paragraph (A) 101.4.7 The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended,
shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement,
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. Any reference to the electrical
code shall mean National Electrical Code.
Section 105, Permits, paragraph 105.1.2, annual permit records, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Section 105, Permits, paragraph 105.5, expiration is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is
commenced within 90 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than
90 days each.
Section 109, Fees is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/430
(A) 109.2.1 Fee schedule. Before any building permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
code, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee in such amount as specified herein:
$0.10 per square foot for new and addition construction, $20.00 minimum.
$5.00 per estimated value of remodel or enlargement, $20.00 minimum.
$20.00 for roofing permit (no permit for 700 square feet or less).
$20.00 for each reinspection requested or required.
Any contractor commencing work on a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical and
plumbing system before obtaining a permit as required by this code shall pay an administrative fee of
$100.00 plus the permit fee as set forth by the fee schedule.
Any homeowner commencing work on a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical and
plumbing system before obtaining a permit as required by this code shall pay double the permit fee
amount, if after being notified of the requirement for such permit, does not purchase said permit by
the end of the following business day.
Section 111, Certificate of occupancy, paragraph (A) 111.2, certificate issued, items 3, 7, 10, 11, and 12 are
hereby deleted.
Section 901, General, paragraph 901.5, acceptance test, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When required, the test shall be conducted in the presence of the fire marshal.
Section 901, General, paragraph 901.6.3, group H, exception, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When approved by the fire marshal, on-site monitoring at a constantly attended location shall be
permitted provided that notifications to the fire department will be equal to those provided by an
approved supervising station.
Section 1507, Requirements for roof covering, paragraph 1507.8.1, deck requirements, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Wood shingles shall be installed on solid sheathing.
Table 1507.8.5, Wood shingle material requirements, applicable minimum grades column is hereby amended by
deleting 2 and 3.
Section 1507, Requirements for roof covering, paragraph 1507.9.1, deck requirements is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Wood shakes shall be installed on solid decking.
Section 1809, Shallow foundations, paragraph 1809.4, depth and width of footings first sentence, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
The minimum depth of footings below grade level shall be 24 inches.
Section 1904, Durability requirements, table 1904.2, minimum specified compressive strength, Moderate
exposure column is hereby amended to read as follows:
3,000, 3,000,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/430
Chapter 27, Electrical, section 2701, general, paragraph 2701.1, scope second sentence, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of the most recent adopted National Electrical Code.
Chapter 27, electrical, section 2702, emergency and standby power systems, paragraph 2702.1, installation
through paragraph 2702.3. maintenance is hereby deleted and reserved.
Sec. 3.02.003 Appendix chapters
(a) The following appendices of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, as published by the
International Code Council are hereby deleted and reserved:
Appendix A, Employee Qualifications
Appendix B, Board of Appeals
Appendix D, Fire Districts
(b) Appendix H, signs, section H109, ground signs, paragraph H109.1, height restrictions, is hereby amended
to read as follows:
The structural frame of a ground sign where made of combustible or noncombustible material shall
not be higher than 50 feet above the surface of the ground.
Secs. 3.02.004–3.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Existing Building Code
Sec. 3.02.031 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the
building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems of existing buildings in the city, and providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out
completely in detail. A copy of said International Existing Building Code shall be on file with the city secretary
and building official, such copies to be open for public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.02.032 Amendments
The International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. is
hereby amended as applicable to the city, in the following sections, to read as follows:
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 101, general, paragraph (A) 101.1, title, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the existing building code of the City of Borger, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 105.1, permits, paragraph 105.1.1, annual permit is hereby deleted
in its entirety.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 105.1.2, annual permit records, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/430
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, construction documents, paragraph 106.3.1, approval of
construction documents, first sentence is hereby amended to read as follows:
When the code official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved by stamp as
“approved for construction.”
Chapter 6, Repairs, section 607, electrical, paragraph 607.1.1, receptacles, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Replacement of electric receptacles shall comply with the applicable requirements of section
406.3(D) and in dwelling units with section 406.11 of NFPA 70.
Chapter 7, Alterations-Level I, section 702, building elements and materials, paragraph 702.4, materials and
methods, is hereby amended to read as follows:
All new work shall comply with materials and methods requirements in the National Electrical Code,
International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Mechanical
Code, and International Plumbing Code, as applicable, that specify material standards, detail of
installation and connections, joints, penetrations, and continuity of any element, component, or
system in the building.
Chapter 8, Alterations-Level 2, section 808, electrical, paragraph 808.1, new installations, exception, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Electrical equipment and wiring in newly installed or opened existing walls, partitions and ceilings
shall comply with all applicable requirements of chapter 3, building regulations, article 3.04,
electricity, division 2, electrical code, Code of Ordinances of the City of Borger and NFPA 70
(National Electric Code).
Chapter 8, Alterations-Level 2, section 808, electrical, is hereby amended by adding paragraph 808.3.8 Arc fault
circuit interruption to read as follows:
808.3.8, Arc fault circuit interruption. All electrical circuits in a dwelling unit, except kitchen,
bathroom and garage, shall be arc fault protected in accordance with section 210.12(B) of NFPA 70
(National Electric Code).
Chapter 8, Alterations-Level 2, section 808, electrical, is hereby amended by adding paragraph 808.3.9 Tamper
resistant receptacles to read as follows:
808.3.9, Tamper resistant receptacles. All new, 120 V, 15 amp or 20 amp receptacles installed in
dwelling units shall be labeled “tamper resistant” in accordance with section 406.12 of NFPA 70
(National Electric Code).
Chapter 10, Change of occupancy, section 1008, electrical, paragraph 1008.3, service upgrade, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Where the occupancy of an existing building or part of an existing building is changed, electrical
service shall be upgraded to meet the requirements of the City of Borger, chapter 3, building
regulations, article 3.04, electricity, division 2, electrical code, Code of Ordinances of the City of
Borger and where the electrical service of an existing building or the electrical demand is increased,
the electrical service shall be upgraded to current NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code) and XCEL
Energy requirements.
Chapter 13, Relocated or moved buildings, section 1302, requirements, paragraph 1302.1, location on the lot, is
hereby amended by adding a second sentence to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/430
The building shall be located on a lot or recorded tract in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance,
Code of Ordinances, City of Borger.
ARTICLE 3.03 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE*
Sec. 3.03.001 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012
edition, published by the International Code Council, regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the city, and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out completely
in detail. A copy of said International Energy Conservation Code shall be on file with the city secretary and
building official, such copies to be open for public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.03.002 Amendments
Chapter 1, Administration and enforcement.
C101.1 Title insert “City of Borger.”
C104.3, Final inspection, is hereby amended to read as follows:
C104.3. Required inspections. The following components of the building or structure shall be
inspected as needed to ascertain compliance with this code. These inspections are in addition to
those required by other sections of this code. All insulation and fenestration shall be marked
and identified, or certified in accordance with section 102.
C104.3.1. Foundation, basement and floor slab insulation. Foundation, basement, and
floor slab insulation shall be inspected after it is installed but prior to it being concealed
by other materials. Depending upon where the insulation is placed, partial inspections
may be required either prior to or after placement of concrete, or both. Insulation located
on the exterior or foundation walls and slab edges may be inspected at the exterior wall
insulation stage following the framing inspection.
C104.3.2. Exterior wall, crawl space, floor and roof insulation. Exterior walls, vapor
barriers, exterior insulating sheathing, exterior weather resistive barriers, crawl spaces and
floors other than concrete slabs on grade, and roof insulation if used, shall be inspected
after the framing inspection, but prior to being concealed by other materials.
C104.3.3. Ceiling insulation, penetrations of the building envelope and fenestration.
Ceiling insulation, penetrations of the building exterior envelope, and fenestration
(windows, doors, and skylights) shall be inspected after installation. These may be
inspected all at one time, or individually as necessary.
C104.3.3.1. Ceiling insulation. Either ceiling insulation depth markers, or
certification markers, or both, shall be present upon inspection.
C104.3.3.2. Penetrations of the building envelope. Penetrations of the building
envelope shall be inspected to ascertain whether they have been appropriately sealed
to limit uncontrolled air leakage (infiltration and exfiltration). Interior wall and
ceiling substrates or finish material, materials, and subflooring, if used, shall be in
place, and penetrations sealed. Secondary construction such as furred-out spaces,
cabinets, fixtures, and similar components shall not conceal penetrations of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/430
building envelope (exterior walls and ceilings) until those penetrations have been
sealed and the inspection is approved.
C104.3.3.3. Fenestration. Fenestration (windows, doors, and skylights) shall be in
place, sealed around their perimeters where they are attached to the frame, and voids
in the rough framing shall be insulated. Fenestration U-factor labels or
documentation, both in accordance with section 102, shall be available for
inspection.
C104.3.4. Mechanical systems and lighting. Mechanical systems, including those required
for comfort heating and cooling, service water heating and swimming pool heating
equipment, and lighting systems shall be inspected for compliance with energy
conservation measures at the same time as the rough-in, top-out, and final inspections
normally required for electrical, heating and air-conditioning and plumbing permits under
the respective codes.
C104.3.5. Final inspection. Upon completion of a project requiring a permit the energy
conservation measures and components shall be inspected for compliance at the same
time as the final inspections normally required for building, electrical, heating and airconditioning
and plumbing permits under the respective codes.
R402.1 General (prescriptive). The building thermal envelope shall meet the requirements of sections
R402.1.1 through R402.1.4 for climate zone 4 as amended until December 31, 2014. Effective
January 1, 2015 table R402.1.1 and table R402.1.3 will be in effect as printed in 2012 IECC.
TABLE R402.1.1
FENES. UFACTOR
SKYLG HT
U- FACTOR
GLAZED
FENES. RVALUE
CEILING
R-VALUE
WOOD
FRAME
WALL
R-VALUE
MASS
WALL
R-VALUE
FLOOR
R-VALUE
BASMNT
R-VALUE
SLAB
R-VALUE
& DPTH
CRWL
SPACE
WALL
R-VALUE
0.35 0.60 N/R 38 13 5/10 19 10/13 10, 2 FT 10/13
TABLE R402.1.3
FENESTRATION
U-FACTOR
SKYLIGHT
U-FACTOR
CEILING
U-FACTOR
FRAME
WALL
U-FACTOR
MASS WALL
U-FACTOR
FLOOR UFACTOR
BASEMENT
WALL UFACTOR
CRAWL
SPACE WALL
U-FACTOR
0.35 0.60 0.03 0.082 0.141 0.047 0.059 0.065
ARTICLE 3.04 ELECTRICITY
Division 1. Generally
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/430
Sec. 3.04.001 Exemptions from article
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to electric light, heat and power companies, telephone
companies and telegraph companies, normally operating or operating under franchise or state laws in the
installation, maintenance, removal or repair of wires or other equipment used in connection with their business
as producers to supply consumer service, and street lighting, illumination of public ways, alleys, parks or
communications.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the fire, police and traffic signal installations, or other
similar installations installed and maintained by the city.
Sec. 3.04.002 Approval of materials
All wiring materials, wiring devices such as switches, fuses, panels, lighting fixtures, ballast, transformers,
conductors, appliances, and circuit breakers, and signal devices must bear the stamp of approval of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters or “UL” label.
Sec. 3.04.003 Recommendations by building standards commission
The building standards commission shall submit to the city council written recommendations and suggestions
for the improvement, enforcement and administration of the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.04.004 Supervision of apprentices, trainees or helpers
(a) Apprentices, trainees or helpers shall be adequately supervised by a master electrician or a journeyman
electrician.
(b) Apprentices, trainees or helpers shall be limited to two apprentices, trainees or helpers for each master or
journeyman electrician during the installation of electrical systems.
Secs. 3.04.005–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Code*
Sec. 3.04.031 Adopted
The latest published edition of the National Electrical Code as approved by the National Fire Protection
Association is hereby adopted as the minimum standard for the installation of all electrical wiring devices and
equipment in the city and said National Electrical Code is hereby made a part of this article as fully and to the
same extent as if copied herein in full. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the
National Electrical Code, the provisions of this article shall govern.
Sec. 3.04.032 Amendments
The National Electrical Code, as adopted by section 3.04.031, is hereby amended in the following sections:
Annex H. Administration and Enforcement.
Section 80.9, Application, paragraph (C), additions, alterations or repairs, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
In a building, structure or residence which is altered, remodeled, added onto, or converted, the
electrical installation within such portion shall conform to the requirements of article 3.04 of
the Borger Code of Ordinances and the National Electrical Code. When a portion of a residence
is converted to another use and the area of the use exceeds 10% of the area of the residence, the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/430
electrical installation of the converted portion shall be separate from that of the remaining
residence. All wiring shall be installed in approved raceways, and the electrical installation in
the converted portion shall conform to the requirements of article 3.04 of the Borger Code of
Ordinances and the National Electrical Code.
Section 80.15, Electrical board, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Section 80.19, Permits and approvals, paragraph D, annual permits, is hereby deleted.
Section 80.23, Notice of violation, penalties, paragraph B(3), is hereby amended to read as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall willfully violate any of the applicable provisions of
this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
fine as set forth in section 1.01.009 of the Borger Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation
continues after due process shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 80.25, Connection to electricity supply, paragraph (C), notification, is hereby deleted and
reserved.
Section 80.25, Connection to electricity supply, paragraph (E), disconnection, second sentence, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
If, upon subsequent inspection, it is found that the installation is not in conformity with the
provisions of this code, the electrical inspector shall notify the person, firm or corporation
making the installation to rectify the defects and, if such work is not completed within ten
business days, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to cause disconnection of the
portion of the installation that is not in conformity.
Section 80.27, Inspector's qualifications, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Section 80.29, Liability for damages, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Article 80 shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning,
designing, operating, controlling or installing any electric equipment for damages to persons or
property caused by a defect therein, nor shall the city or any of its employees be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection, reinspection or other examination
authorized.
Section 80.35, Effective date, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Article 80 shall take effect 14 days after passage by the city council and publication.
Article 210, Branch circuits, paragraph 210.23(C), 40- and 50-ampere branch circuits, is hereby amended by
adding the following to read as follows:
The minimum conductor size shall be no. 6 THW copper. A range receptacle shall be on a minimum
50-ampere rated circuit. Wall-mounted ovens and countertop cooking units shall have individual
branch circuits with a minimum conductor size of no. 10 AWG.
Article 210, Branch circuits, section III, required outlets, paragraph 210.52(B), receptacle outlets served, is
hereby amended by adding the following:
No more than four receptacle outlets shall be allowed in any kitchen and other rooms specified in
210.52(B)(1). Dishwasher and garbage disposals shall be installed on separate branch circuits.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/430
Article 210, Branch circuits, section III, required outlets, paragraph 210.52 (F), laundry areas, is hereby
amended by adding a second sentence to read as follows:
Dryers shall be provided a separate circuit from other loads. The minimum conductor size shall be
no. 10 THW copper. A dryer receptacle shall not be rated less than 30 amperes.
Article 230, Services, section I, general, is hereby amended by adding the following:
230.11. Overhead service drop provisions. When alterations, changes or modifications are made to an
existing service drop the following provisions shall apply:
(A) When a new electrical installation is to be served with an overhead service drop, a means
of attachment shall be provided by the master electrician or the homeowner at the location that
will allow the service drop to comply with the National Electrical Code. When an electrical
installation is started before the electric company facilities are placed, it shall be the
responsibility of the electric company to determine the location of the facility from which the
service drop for the electrical installation will be installed. The means of attachment shall be a
clamp on a service mast or a galvanized “hook” bolt or “eye” bolt, minimum size 3/8 inch,
rigidly attached to rafter or stud to give adequate support to the service drop.
(B) When an addition is to be made to an existing building that requires that the service
entrance be relocated to the new portion of the building, the service entrance shall comply with
the rules established for all new installations.
(C) When the meter loop is changed on an existing installation, the installation shall be made
to comply as nearly as possible with this section and the National Electrical Code.
(D) The master electrician or homeowner shall provide for and install facilities to
accommodate metering of an electrical installation in accordance with uniform practices
established by the electric company. The meter enclosure shall be mounted on the outside of a
building near the point of contact between the electrical installation and the electric company
service lines at a location that does not subject the enclosure to physical damage and will cause
the meter to be readily accessible to representatives of the electric company for installing,
replacing, removing, inspecting, testing and reading. Exceptions to the outside location may be
made only by specific agreement with the electric company and with the approval of the
electrical inspector.
(E) Should an addition to or alteration of any building enclose the metering installation such
that it will no longer be in an accessible outside location, the metering installation shall be
relocated to a point outside the addition or alteration, maintaining strict conformance to the
provisions of article 3.04 of the Borger Code of Ordinances and the National Electrical Code.
(F) Existing metering installations which are located inside a building shall be removed to an
outside location at such time that changes, alterations or additions are made to the service
entrance of the electrical installation.
(G) All disconnecting switches accessible to the general public under 200 amperes shall have
rain-tight and dead-front panels. All disconnecting switches 200 amperes or over that are
exposed or accessible to the general public shall have rain-tight and locked or bolted closed
panels.
Article 230, Services, section VI, service equipment disconnecting means, paragraph 230.70(A)(1), readily
available location, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/430
The service disconnecting means shall be a minimum three-wire, 120/240 volt and have a capacity of
not less than 100% of the load that it is supplying. The service disconnect shall be located in the open
outside nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors and shall conform to the requirements
of 230.71.
Article 250, Grounding and bonding, section III, ground electrode system and ground electrode conductor,
paragraph 250.52(5)(6), rod and pipe electrodes, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Electrodes shall be copper clad, 5/8-inch O.D. and eight feet in length.
Article 250, Grounding, paragraph 250.64(B), securing and protecting from damage, the second sentence is
hereby deleted.
Article 250, Grounding, paragraph 250.64(B), securing and protection against physical damage, the third
sentence is hereby amended to read as follows:
A 6 AWG grounding conductor shall be in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, rigid
nonmetallic conduit, electrical metallic tubing or cable armor with such protection securely fastened
to the construction and outside the structure.
Article 310, Conductors for general wiring, table 310.106(A), minimum size of conductors, is hereby amended
as follows:
Conductor voltage rating (Volts) 0–2000, minimum conductor size (AWG) copper 12.
Sec. 3.04.033 Variances
The building standards commission may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variances from the terms
of the electrical code as provided in section 3.01.001(e).
Secs. 3.04.034–3.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Licenses
Sec. 3.04.061 Adoption of state law
The city hereby adopts the procedures for licensing of electricians and the regulations for electrical work
contained in the Texas Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1305.
Secs. 3.04.062–3.04.090 Reserved
Division 4. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 3.04.091 Work requiring permit
No person using electric power as a consumer shall begin any electrical installation or begin any work of
installing, erecting or altering material, wiring fixtures or any other apparatus to be used for the utilization of
electricity for light, heat and/or power in or on any building or premises in the city without first securing a
permit therefor from the office of the electrical inspector; provided, however, that no permit shall be required for
minor work such as repairing flush or tumbler switches, replacing fuses, or changing lamp sockets and
receptacles; provided further that this section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs on the premises of a
person regularly employing a qualified maintenance electrician for that purpose.
Sec. 3.04.092 Persons to whom permits may be issued
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/430
Nothing contained within this division shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners of
dwellings for electrical repair work in such dwellings. Electrical permits shall be issued to any responsible
master electricians for any type of new residential or commercial construction.
Sec. 3.04.093 Application for permit; issuance of permit
Homeowners and licensed master electricians desiring a permit required under the provisions of this division
shall make applications therefor to the planning and zoning department. After payment of the required
inspection fees, the electrical inspector or his representative shall issue the applicant a permit for the proposed
work.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
Sec. 3.04.094 Fees
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay all associated fees as
listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 3.04.095 Duty to notify inspector upon completion of work
Upon the completion of electrical work which has been authorized by the issuance of a permit under the
provisions of this division, it shall be the duty of the person holding such permit to immediately notify the
electrical inspector thereof, who shall inspect such electrical work within 24 hours after such notice, exclusive of
Sundays and holidays.
Sec. 3.04.096 Concealed wiring
Installations wherein there is wiring to be concealed shall be inspected before concealment. The person
installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector thereof and the wires shall not be covered or concealed
until the electrical inspector has approved same. Any person covering or concealing wires before inspection
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 3.04.097 Final inspection and authorization of connection of service
If the work is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector, subject to
other applicable provisions of this code, shall issue an electrical permit number to the public utility company
furnishing electrical service or the person supplying the energy, which electrical permit number shall authorize
connection of such approved work to the source of energy of the electrical service, the turning on of current and
the use of the installation. No connection shall be made until such authorization is issued.
Sec. 3.04.098 Tampering with installation
No person shall molest in any way or tamper with wires installed in any residence, building or other structure.
No person shall place any material except incombustible insulation material within one inch of any wire after it
has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector.
Secs. 3.04.099–3.04.120 Reserved
Division 5. Electrical Inspector
Sec. 3.04.121 Office created
There is hereby created in and for the city the office of electrical inspector, in charge of which shall be the
electrical inspector, and within which may be assistant electrical inspectors.
Sec. 3.04.122 Qualifications
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/430
The electrical inspector shall be a competent person of good moral character, shall have an adequate knowledge
of current and approved methods and practices relating to electrical installations, and shall have passed the
examination for journeyman electrician within 90 days of employment or appointment as electrical inspector.
Sec. 3.04.123 Appointment
The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council and shall
hold office until his successor is appointed and duly qualified. Assistant inspectors may be appointed by the city
manager whenever occasion demands.
Sec. 3.04.124 Removal from office
The city manager may remove from office the electrical inspector or any of his assistants for incompetence or
neglect of duty.
Sec. 3.04.125 Nonliability of inspectors
The building inspector, electrical inspector, or their authorized representatives charged with the enforcement of
this code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render
themselves personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or
omission in the discharge of their duties.
Sec. 3.04.126 Duties as to inspection and testing
The electrical inspector shall inspect and test electrical installations and systems in all consumer installations
when the same are installed, repaired or constructed, and he shall further make inspections of such installations
when he has reason to believe the same are unsafe, improper, and do not comply with applicable provisions of
this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.
Sec. 3.04.127 Correction of deficiencies
(a) The electrical inspector shall, upon determining that unsafe, improper or unlawful consumer installations
exist upon any premises or within any building within the city, immediately notify the owner of such premises or
building or his agent, and/or the electrician performing work on such premises or within such building, in
writing, specifying the exact deficiency existing, and shall allow such parties a reasonable time to correct such
deficiency.
(b) If corrective action is not begun immediately, or if the deficiency is not corrected within the prescribed
time, then the electrical inspector shall, if he believes the public welfare endangered, order the electricity supply
or service to such premises or building discontinued.
Sec. 3.04.128 Right of entry
The electrical inspector and his assistants, when in the performance of their duties, and as far as may be
necessary for the performance of their duties, shall have the right to enter any consumer's building at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of making any tests or inspections of the electrical wiring and appliances
therein contained.
Sec. 3.04.129 Records
The electrical inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a record of permits, licenses, and inspections required
under this article, and shall also keep a record of all condemnations of electrical installations.
Sec. 3.04.130 Termination of work
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/430
(a) The electrical inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any electrical work on
or in any consumer's premises whenever, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being done in a reckless, careless
or unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this code, state law or city ordinances, rules or
regulations relating to electrical work.
(b) Upon determining that any particular work should stop, the inspector shall post a notice to that effect on
the consumer's premises and thereafter no person shall proceed with the installation until the inspector has
cancelled the stop-work notice.
ARTICLE 3.05 MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 3.05.001 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out completely in
detail. A copy of said International Mechanical Code shall be filed with the city secretary and building official,
such copy to be open to public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.05.002 Amendments
The International Mechanical Code is hereby amended in the following sections:
101.1, Title, is hereby deleted.
103, Department of mechanical inspections, is hereby amended to read as follows:
103. Mechanical inspections.
103.1, General, is hereby deleted.
103.3, Deputies, is hereby deleted.
106.3, Application for permit, last sentence, is hereby deleted.
106.4.1, Approved construction documents, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without
authorization from the code official, architect or engineer.
106.4.3. Expiration, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every permit issued by the code official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation
and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90)
days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of ninety (90) days.
106.4.4, Extensions, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The code official shall extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days if there is reasonable cause.
106.5.1, Work commencing before permit issuance, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When work for which a permit is required by this code is begun or performed prior to obtaining said
permit, the fee shall be doubled. Payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/430
complying with the requirements of this code in execution of the work or from any penalties
prescribed herein.
Exception: A person who owns or occupies a single-family dwelling or manufactured housing
dwelling unit will not be charged double for permits on such dwelling if the required permit has been
applied for by the end of the following work day after notification by the code official of the need for
a permit.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
106.5.2, Fee schedule, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay
all associated fees as listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
106.5.2.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
106.5.2.1. Permit exemption. The city, county, state and federal government, or any subdivision
thereof, shall be exempt from paying fees as provided herein. (Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
106.5.3 Fee refunds is hereby deleted. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
106.5.4 is hereby added to read as follows:
106.5.4. License and registration. Any individual, firm, corporation or partnership who performs
mechanical work in the city which is regulated by this code shall be licensed and registered prior to
obtaining a permit for such work, provided, however, that a person who owns a single-family
dwelling and has established his/her legal place of residence may perform work on heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning equipment within said dwelling without a state license for such work.
Said person may be required to submit an affidavit of ownership and residency upon application for a
homeowner's permit to perform such work. A tenant, lessee, landlord or other nonresident owner may
not obtain a permit as a homeowner.
106.5.5 is hereby added to read as follows:
106.5.5. License requirements. Heating and air-conditioning construction and installation which are
regulated by this code or V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1302, or both, shall require such work
to be performed by a person who has either a class A or class B air-conditioning contractor's license
issued by the state. Such air-conditioning contractor shall perform heating and air-conditioning work
appropriate to the class of license held.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
106.5.6 Registration of air-conditioning license is hereby amended to read as follows:
An individual, firm, corporation or partnership who holds a valid state airconditioning contractor's
license, and who performs such work within the corporate limits of the city, shall register such
license, along with copy of required insurance and pay a fee as listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-
008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
108.4, Violation penalties, is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.4. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in
violation of the approved construction documents, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in section
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/430
1.01.009 of the Borger Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
108.5, Stop-work orders, last sentence, is hereby deleted.
109.1, Application for appeal, last sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The application shall be in writing and forwarded to the building standards commission within ten
(10) days after the notice of the code official was received.
109.2, Membership of board, is hereby deleted.
109.2.1, Qualifications, is hereby deleted.
109.2.2, Alternate members, is hereby deleted.
109.2.5, Secretary, is hereby deleted.
109.5, Postponed hearing, is hereby amended to read as follows:
109.5. Postponed hearing. When four members of the building standards commission are not present
to hear an appeal, the board shall not hear an appeal and another hearing date shall be scheduled.
109.6.1, Resolution, is hereby deleted.
201.3, Terms defined in other codes, is hereby amended to read as follows:
201.3. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in
other adopted codes, such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
306.3.1, Electrical requirements, is hereby amended to read as follows:
306.3.1. Electrical requirements. A lighting fixture controlled by a switch located at the required
passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at or within six (6) feet of the
appliance.
306.4.1, Electrical requirements, is hereby amended to read as follows:
306.4.1. Electrical requirements. A lighting fixture controlled by a switch located at the required
passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at or within six (6) feet of the
appliance.
Appendix B is hereby deleted.
ARTICLE 3.06 PLUMBING*
Sec. 3.06.001 Code adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, regulating installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems within the city, is hereby adopted by reference as though
set out completely in detail. A copy of said International Plumbing Code shall be on file with the city secretary
and building official, such copy to be open for public inspection during normal business hours.
State law reference–Adoption of plumbing codes and amendment of codes by municipality, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1301.255(d).
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/430
Sec. 3.06.002 Amendments to code
The International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by the following:
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 101, general, paragraph 101.1 title. Insert “City of Borger.”
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 101, general, paragraph 101.3. is hereby amended to read as
follows:
This code is enacted to protect public health. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this code shall constitute an offense punishable in accordance with section 1.01.009 of
the Borger Code of Ordinances. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103, department of plumbing inspection, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Section 103. Inspections.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103, department of plumbing inspection, paragraph 103.1, general,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 103.1. General. The building official shall be the responsible party in charge of plumbing
inspections.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103, department of plumbing inspection, paragraph 103.2,
appointment, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The building official shall be appointed by the administrative authority of the city, and the building
official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on
specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103, department of plumbing inspection, paragraph 103.3,
deputies, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 103.3. Assistants. In accordance with prescribed procedures of the city and with concurrence
of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint necessary
assistants.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 104, duties and powers of the code official, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Section 104. Duties and powers of the building official.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 104, duties and powers of the code official, paragraph 104.1,
general, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The building official shall enforce all of the provisions of this code and shall act on any questions
relative to the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of all plumbing systems,
devices and equipment except as otherwise specifically provided by the state plumbing license law.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 104, duties and powers of the code official, paragraph 104.3,
applications and permits, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The building official or appointed assistants shall receive applications and issue permits for the
installation and alteration of plumbing, inspect the premises for which permits have been issued, and
enforce compliance with this code, amendments thereto and state law.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/430
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 104, duties and powers of the code official, paragraph 104.5,
identification, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.1, when required, is hereby amended
by adding the following sentences to read as follows:
A homeowner shall be issued a permit, on his or her homestead, for plumbing work requiring a
permit to be done by the homeowner on his or her single-family residence, mobile home,
manufactured home or accessory building associated with the homestead, which are located on the
same property. The homeowner may be required to furnish proof of ownership and residence. A
tenant, lessor, speculative builder, developer or nonresident shall not be issued a homeowner permit.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.5.3, expiration, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by
limitation and become null and void when the work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within 90 days from the date of issuance of said permit, or if the work is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before work may continue, a new
permit shall be first obtained, and a fee for the full amount of such permit shall be paid.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.6.1, work commencing before permit
issuance, is hereby amended to read as follows:
1. When work for which a permit is required by this code is begun or performed prior to obtaining
said permit, the fee specified shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any
person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work or from
any other penalties prescribed herein.
Exception: A person who owns a single-family dwelling, mobile home or manufactured home
will not be charged double permit fee as stated above for permits for work on such dwelling if
the required permit fee has been paid by the end of the next work day after notification of need
for a permit.
2. The city, county, state, or federal government or any subdivision thereof shall be exempt from
payment of permit fees.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
Chapter 1, Administration, section 106, permits, section 106.6.2 fee schedule is hereby amended to read as follows:
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay
all associated fees as listed article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.6.3, fee refunds, item 2, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
2. A permit may be canceled at any time, but in such cases a minimum of $20.00 will be retained.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.6.3, fee refunds, item 3, is hereby
deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.6.3, fee refunds, last sentence, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/430
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written request
filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 107, inspections and testing, paragraph 107.2, required inspections
and tests, is hereby amended by adding item 4 as follows:
4. In accordance with state laws requiring a water service inspection by the water purveyor prior to
initiating water service, the property owner shall allow the property to be inspected for possible cross
connections or other illegal plumbing practices. These inspections shall be conducted prior to
initiating water service or after any changes to the plumbing system which require a permit and
inspections. The property owner shall be notified in writing of any cross connection or illegal
plumbing practice which has been identified during the inspection. The property owner shall
immediately have any cross connections, illegal plumbing installations or illegal plumbing practices
repaired. Failure to do so will result in the water purveyor ceasing water service to the residence or
establishment.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 108, violations, paragraph 108.4, violation penalties, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of approved construction
documents or directives of the building official, or a permit issued under provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fine as set forth in section 1.01.009 of the Borger Code of
Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 108, violations, paragraph 108.5, stop-work orders, fifth sentence,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in paragraph 108.4 above.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.1, application fee appeal, first
sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the building standards
commission.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.1, application for appeal,
third sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The application shall be filed in writing to the building standards commission within ten days after
the notice from the building official.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2, membership of board, is
hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.1, qualifications, is hereby
deleted.
Chapter 1. Scope and Administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.2, alternate members, is
hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.3, chairman, is hereby
deleted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/430
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.4, disqualification of
member, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.5, secretary, is hereby
deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.6, compensation of
members, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.4.1., procedure, is hereby
deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.5, postponed hearing, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
When four members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall be granted a postponement of the hearing.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.6, board decision, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
The board shall modify, uphold, or reverse the decision of the building official by a majority vote.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.6.1, resolution, is hereby
deleted.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 301, general, paragraph 301.4, connections to water supply, is amended
to read as follows:
Every plumbing fixture or appliance requiring or using water for its proper operation shall be directly
connected to the water supply system in accordance with this code and state and local requirements.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 302, exclusion of materials detrimental to the sewer system, paragraph
302.2, industrial wastes, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Waste products from manufacturing or industrial operations shall not be introduced into the public
sewer until it has been determined by the director of utilities that the introduction thereof will not
damage the public sewer system or interfere with the safe operation of the sewage treatment plant.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 304, rodent proofing, paragraph 304.3, meter boxes, is hereby amended
to read as follows:
Only meter boxes approved by the utilities department shall be installed. The meter boxes shall be
installed to prevent rodents from entering a structure by way of the water service piping.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 304, rodent proofing, paragraph 304.4, openings for pipes, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
In or on structures where openings have been made for water service piping, such opening shall be
closed to prevent the entrance of rodents by an approved method.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305, protection of pipes and plumbing system components, paragraph
305.4, freezing, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Exterior water supply system piping shall be installed not less than 18 inches below grade.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/430
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305, protection of pipes and plumbing system components, paragraph
305.4, freezing, is hereby amended by adding a third sentence as follows:
Where water service piping is installed less than 18 inches, the water service piping shall be protected
from freezing by an approved method.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305, protection of pipes and plumbing system components, paragraph
305.4.1, service depth, is amended to read as follows:
Building sewers on private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum 12 inches below finish
grade at point of attachment to the septic tank. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches
below grade.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305, protection of pipes and plumbing system components, paragraph
305.6, protection against physical damage, second sentence, is amended to read as follows:
Protective shield plates shall be a minimum of 0.062-inch-thick steel, shall cover the area of the pipe
where the member is notched or bored, and shall extend a minimum of two inches either side of the
notch or bore.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 306, trenching, excavation and backfill, paragraph 306.2.2, rock
removal, first sentence, is amended to read as follows:
Where rock is encountered in trenching, the rock shall be removed to a minimum of three inches
below the installation level of the bottom of the pipe, if possible, and the trench shall be backfilled to
the installation level of the bottom of the pipe with sand tamped in place so as to provide uniform
loadbearing support for the pipe between joints.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 306, trenching excavation and backfill, paragraph 306.2.3, soft loadbearing
materials, is hereby amended to read as follows:
If soft load-bearing materials are found at the bottom of the trench, stabilization shall be achieved by
over excavating and backfilling to the installation level of the bottom of the pipe with fine gravel,
crushed stone, or a concrete foundation. The concrete foundation shall be a minimum of two inches
thick with a sand cap tamped into place so as to provide uniform load-bearing support for the pipe
between joints.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 311, toilet facilities for workers, paragraph 311.1, general, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Where toilet facilities are provided for construction workers, such facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner. Such facilities of the nonsewer type shall comply with ANSI Z4.3.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 312, tests and inspections, paragraph 312.4, drainage and vent final test,
first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The final test of the completed drainage and vent system shall be visual and in sufficient detail to
determine compliance with the provisions of this code.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 312, tests and inspections, paragraph 312.2 is hereby amended to read as
follows:
A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to
the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and
the system shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each
opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest openings of the section under test, and each
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/430
section shall be filled with water, but no section shall be tested with less than a 5-foot (1524 mm)
head of water. In testing successive sections, a lowest opening head test at each floor level if multiple
floors shall be tested at the plumbing rough-in inspection. This test shall be held for not less than 15
minutes.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 312, tests and inspections, paragraph 312.4, drainage and final test,
second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Where a smoke test is utilized, it shall be made by filling all traps with water and then introducing
into the entire system a pungent, thick smoke produced by one or more smoke machines.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 314, condensate disposal, paragraph 314.2.3, auxiliary and secondary
drain systems, first sentence, is amended to read as follows:
In addition to the requirements of section 314.2.1, a secondary drain or auxiliary drain pan shall be
required for each cooling or evaporator coil where damage to any building components may occur as
a result of overflow from the equipment drain pan or stoppage in the condensate drainpiping.
Chapter 4, Fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings, section 403, minimum plumbing facilities, paragraph 403.2,
separate facilities, exception 1, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Separate facilities shall not be required for residential or private installations.
Chapter 4, Fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings, section 405, installation of fixtures, paragraph 405.3.1, water
closets, urinals, lavatories and bidets, is hereby amended by adding the following:
A water closet, lavatory, urinal or bidet shall not be set closer than 18 inches from its center to any
side walls, partition, vanity or other obstruction, or closer than 30 inches center-to-center between
water closets and adjacent fixtures. There shall be at least a 21-inch clearance in front of the water
closet or bidet to any wall, fixture or door. Water closet compartments shall not be less than 36 inches
wide or 60 inches deep. There shall be at least a 30-inch clearance in front of a lavatory to any wall,
fixture or door.
Chapter 4, Fixture, faucets and fixture fittings, section 417, showers, paragraph 417.3, shower waste outlet, first
sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Waste outlets serving showers shall be at least two inches in diameter and shall have removable
strainers not less than three inches in diameter, with strainer openings not less than 0.25 inch in
minimum dimensions.
Chapter 4, Fixture, faucets and fixture fittings, section 424, faucets and other fixture fittings, paragraph 424.6,
hose connected outlets, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Faucets and fixture fittings with hose connected outlets shall be protected against backflow in
accordance with section 608.
Chapter 5, Water heaters, section 503, connections, paragraph 503.1, cold water line valve, third sentence, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
The required shutoff valve shall be accessible and within three feet of the water heater or hot water
storage tank it serves.
Chapter 6, Water supply and distribution, section 602, water required, paragraph 602.1 general, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/430
Every structure equipped with plumbing fixtures and utilized for human occupancy or habitation
shall be provided with a potable supply of water.
Chapter 6, Water supply and distribution, section 602, water required, paragraph 602.3.2, minimum quantity, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
The combined capacity of the source and storage in an individual water supply system shall be
sufficient to supply required fixtures at rates for proper operation.
Chapter 6, Water supply and distribution, section 605, materials, joints and connections, paragraph 605.4, water
service pipe, fourth sentence, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 6, Water supply and distribution, section 606, installation of the building water distribution system,
paragraph 606.4, valve identification, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Source and hose bib valves shall be identified when installed in commercial, industrial and
institutional type occupancies. All other valves installed in the water supply piping serving
commercial, industrial and institutional type occupancies not adjacent to the fixture or appliance shall
be identified, indicating the fixture or appliance served.
Chapter 7, Sanitary drainage, section 701, general, paragraph 701.2, sewer required, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and all premises having drainage piping shall
be connected to a public sewer, where available, or an approved private sewage disposal system in
accordance with the state department of health.
Chapter 7, Sanitary drainage, table 709.2, drainage fixture units for fixture drains or traps, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Table 709.2. Drainage Fixture Units for Fixture Drains or Traps
Fixture Drain or Trap Size Drainage Fixture Unit Value
1-1/4 inches (32 mm) 1
1-1/2 inches (38 mm) 3
2 inches (51 mm) 4
2-1/2 inches (63 mm) 5
3 inches (76 mm) 6
4 inches(102 mm) 8
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/430
Sec. 3.06.003 Appendix chapters of code
Appendix A, Plumbing permit fee schedule, is hereby deleted.
Appendix B, Rates of rainfall for various cities, is hereby adopted in its entirety and the City of Amarillo shall
be the referenced city for the City of Borger.
Appendix C, Vacuum drainage system, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix D, Degree day and design temperatures, table D101, Degree Day and Design Temperatures for Cities
in the United States, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix E, Sizing of water piping systems, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix F, Structural safety, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Sec. 3.06.004 Plumbing inspector
(a) The person or persons appointed or otherwise selected by the administrative authority of the city as
plumbing inspector or assistant plumbing inspector shall hold and keep in force a state plumbing inspector's
license issued by the state board of plumbing examiners. The plumbing inspector shall not work for or be
associated with any master plumber, plumbing company, plumbing manufacturer, wholesale plumbing and
supply company, or do any plumbing work while employed as a plumbing inspector. It shall be the duty of the
plumbing inspector or assistant plumbing inspector to receive all applications for permits, collect fees and
inspect construction and installation of plumbing work as required by and set forth in the International Plumbing
Code, as adopted, including amendments thereto, within the corporate limits of the city; and to issue certificates
of approval for such installations or work, or if not approved, to direct by written order the corrections or
replacement which would cause such construction and installations to be acceptable for approval.
(b) The plumbing inspector shall have the authority, where any building, premises, installation or construction
contains improper or defective plumbing, or where the same was constructed, installed, altered or repaired
without a permit as required by this code, to give prompt written notice to the utility involved to cut off the water
or gas supply until such improper or defective plumbing work shall be made to comply fully with the provisions
of the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, including amendments, and a certificate of approval shall
have been passed by the plumbing inspector.
Sec. 3.06.005 Licensing of plumbers
(a) All persons who engage in or work at the installation, alteration, repair and renovating of plumbing shall
possess either a master or journeyman plumber license or apprentice registration card in accordance with the
plumbing license law (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1301). Such license and certificate of insurance
shall be submitted yearly during the month of January to the planning and zoning department. No registration
fee is required.
(b) The word “plumbing” as used in the state plumbing license law means and shall include:
(1) All piping fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for supply or recirculation of water, gas,
liquids, and drainage or elimination of sewage, including disposal systems or any combinations
thereof, for all personal or domestic purposes in and about buildings where a person or persons live,
work or assemble; all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances outside a building connecting
the building with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or combinations thereof, on the
premises or the main in the street, alley or at the curb; all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, appliances,
drain or waste pipes carrying wastewater or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service
lateral at the curb or in the street or alley or other disposal or septic terminal holding private or
domestic sewage; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/430
(2) The installation, repair, service, and maintenance of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and
appliances in or about buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble, for a supply of
gas, water, liquids, or any combination thereof, or disposal of wastewater or sewage.
(c) The following acts, work and conduct shall be expressly permitted without a master plumber license:
(1) Plumbing work done by a property owner in a building owned or occupied by him as his
homestead.
(2) Plumbing work done by anyone who is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance
person or maintenance engineer, incidental to and in connection with the business in which he is
employed or engaged, and who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general
public; construction, installation and maintenance work done upon the premises or equipment of a
railroad by an employee thereof who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general
public; and plumbing work done by persons engaged by any public service company in the laying,
maintenance and operation of its service mains or lines to the point of measurement and the
installation, alteration, adjustment, repair, removal and renovation of all types or appurtenances,
equipment and appliances, including doing all that is necessary to render the appliances useable or
serviceable; appliance installations and service work done by anyone who is an appliance dealer or is
employed by an appliance dealer, and acting as an appliance installation man or appliance service
man in connecting appliances to existing piping installation; water treatment installations, exchanges,
services or repair; provided, however, that all work and service herein named or referred to shall be
subject to inspection and approval with the terms of all local valid city ordinances.
(3) Plumbing work done by a licensed irrigator or licensed installer when working and licensed
under V.T.C.A., Water Code, chapter 37. A person holding a valid license from the state board of
plumbing examiners shall not be required to be licensed by any other board or agency when installing
or working on a lawn irrigation system.
(4) Plumbing work done by an LP gas installer when working and licensed under chapter 113,
Natural Resources Code, as amended.
Sec. 3.06.006 Insurance requirements
Any person who is a licensed master plumber in the state and performs plumbing installations within the
corporate limits of the city; or is a licensed landscape irrigator in the state and performs any landscape irrigation
installation within the corporate limits of the city; or is certified by the department of state health services to
install, exchange, service and repair residential water treatment facilities and perform such services within the
corporate limits of the city, shall submit a certificate of insurance provided the issuance:
(1) Is written by a company licensed to do business in the state;
(2) Provides for commercial general liability insurance for claims for property or bodily injury,
regardless of whether the claim arises from negligence or on a contract claim; and
(3) Is in a coverage amount of not less than $300,000.00 for all claims arising in any one-year
period.
ARTICLE 3.07 FUEL GAS CODE
Sec. 3.07.001 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14 the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition,
regulating design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of fuel gas systems within the corporate
limits of the city, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out completely in detail. A copy of said
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/430
International Fuel Gas Code shall be on file with the city secretary and building official, such copy to be open
for public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.07.002 Amendments
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the
International Code Council, 2012 edition, is hereby amended in the following chapters and paragraphs as
follows:
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 101 (IFGC), general, paragraph 101.1, title, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the City of Borger,
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103, department of inspection, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Section 103. Planning and zoning department.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103 (IFGC), Department of inspection, paragraph 103.1, general, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 103.1. General. The planning and zoning department is hereby charged with the enforcement,
implementation, securing the intent thereof and designating an official to enforce the provisions of
this code. The official thereof shall be known as the building official.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 103 (IFGC), department of inspection, paragraph 103.3, deputies,
is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.3. Assistants. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint an
assistant, inspectors and other employees.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 104 (IFCC), duties and powers of the code official, paragraph
104.1, general, is amended to read as follows:
Section 104.1. General. The building official shall enforce the provisions of this code and shall act on
any question relative to the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of systems,
except as otherwise specifically provided for by statutory requirements or as provided for in
paragraphs 104.2 through 104.8.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, paragraph 106.1, when required, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Section 106.1. Where required. An owner, authorized agent or licensed master plumber who desires
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, convert or replace an installation regulated by this code, or
cause such work to be done, shall first obtain a permit for the work.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, paragraph 106.1, where required, exception,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Exception. Where equipment replacements and repairs are required to be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit shall be obtained within the next working business day.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/430
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, paragraph 106.3, application for permit, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form
furnished for that purpose. The permit shall be signed by the owner, authorized agent or licensed
master plumber.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, paragraph 106.5.3, expiration, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Section 106.5.3. Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this
code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 90 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before
such work recommences, a new permit shall be obtained and a full permit fee shall be collected for a
new permit, provided no changes have been made in the original design.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106, permits, paragraph 106.5.4 (IFGC), extensions, second
sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 90
days, if there is reasonable cause.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, section 106.6.2, fee schedule, is hereby
deleted. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 106 (IFGC), permits, paragraph 106.6.3, fee schedule, item 2 and
item 3, are hereby deleted.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 108 (IFGC), violations, paragraph 108.4, violation penalties, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as set forth by
section 1.01.009 of the Borger Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 108, violations, paragraph 108.5, stop-work orders, fifth sentence,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with violation or
unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in section 108.4 above.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.1, application for
appeal, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.1. Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the
building official to the building standards commission. A request for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The request for an appeal shall be in written form and presented to the
building official within ten days after notice was served.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/430
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.2, membership of
board, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.2. Membership of board. The building standards commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the governing authority.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.1, qualifications, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.2.1. Qualifications. The building standards commission shall consist of seven members
with qualifications and term limits as prescribed in section 3.01.001 of the Borger Code of
Ordinances.
Chapter 1, Scope administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.2, alternate members, is
hereby deleted and reserved.
Chapter 1, Administration, section 109, means of appeal, paragraph 109.2.6, compensation, is hereby deleted
and reserved.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.5, postponed hearing,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.5. Postponed hearing. When four members are not present to hear an appeal, either the
appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right for a postponement of the hearing.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.6.1. resolution, is
hereby deleted and reserved.
Chapter 1, Scope and administration, section 109 (IFGC), means of appeal, paragraph 109.7, court review, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 109.7. Court review. Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decision
of the building standards commission shall have a right of appeal to the city council within ten days
of the rendition of such decision, order or requirement by the building standards commission. Said
appeals shall be submitted by written notice of appeal to the city council requesting a hearing before
the city council and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. Due process shall not be
denied and further appeal may be made to the court of proper jurisdiction.
Chapter 2, Definitions, section 201 (IFGC), General, paragraph 201.3, terms defined in other codes, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Section 201.3. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined
in the National Electrical Code, International Building Code, International Residential Code,
Uniform Fire Code, International Mechanical Code or International Plumbing Code, such terms shall
have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Chapter 2, Definitions, section 202 (IFGC), general definitions, code official, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Building official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 301.7, fuel types, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Appliances shall be designed for use with the type of fuel gas to which they will be connected.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/430
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 302 (IFGC), structural safety, paragraph 302.5 [302.4], cutting, notching
and boring holes in structural steel framing, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 302.4. Alterations to trusses. Truss members and components shall not be cut, drilled,
notched, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without the written approval of a registered design
professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of loads to any member of the truss system shall not
be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting such additional loading.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 303 (IFGC), appliance location, paragraph 303.3, prohibited locations,
exception 5, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 303.3. Prohibited locations, exception 5. Appliances installed in an enclosure in which all
combustion air is taken from the outdoors, in accordance with section 304.11.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 303 (IFGC), appliance location, paragraph 303.4, protection from
physical damage, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 303.4. Protection from physical damage. Appliances shall not be installed in a location where
subject to physical damage unless protected by approved barriers meeting requirements of the
Uniform Fire Code.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305 (IFGC), installation, paragraph 305.4 [305.5], private garages, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 305.5. Private garages. Appliances located in private garages shall be installed a minimum of
eight feet above finish floor height. Where motor vehicles exceed six feet in height and are capable of
passing beneath the appliance, the appliance shall be installed a minimum of two feet higher above
the floor than the height of the tallest vehicle.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305 (IFGC), installation, paragraph 305.6, construction and protection, is
hereby added to read as follows:
Section 305.6. Construction and protection. Boiler rooms and furnace rooms shall be protected as
required by the International Building Code.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305 (IFGC), installation, paragraph 305.7, clearances from grade, is
hereby added to read as follows:
Section 305.7. Clearances from grade. Equipment and appliances installed at grade level shall be
supported on a level concrete slab or other approved material or shall be suspended a minimum of six
inches above adjoining grade.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 305 (IFGC), installation, paragraph 305.8, clearances to combustible
construction, is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 305.8. Clearances to combustible construction. Heat-producing equipment and appliances
shall be installed to maintain the required clearances to combustible construction as specified in the
manufacturer's instructions. Clearances may only be reduced in accordance with section 308.
Clearances to combustibles include such considerations as door swing, drawer pulls, overhead
projections or shelving and window swing. Devices such as door stops or limits and closes shall not
be used to provide the required clearances.
Chapter 3, General regulations, section 307 (IFGC), condensate disposal, paragraph 307.2, fuel-burning
appliances, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/430
Liquid combustion byproducts of condensing appliances shall be collected and discharged to an
approved plumbing fixture or other approved disposal area.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 404, piping system installation, paragraph 404.12, minimum burial
depth, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 404.12. Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum
depth of 18 inches below grade, or, because of location and ground conditions, a shallower depth
may be approved by the administrative authority.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 404, piping system installation, paragraph 404.12.1 individual
outside appliances, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 404.12.1. Individual outside appliances. Individual lines to outside lights, grills or other
appliances shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches below finish grade, or, because of location and
ground conditions, a shallower depth may be approved by the administrative authority.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 404, piping system installation, paragraph 404.14, piping
underground beneath buildings, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 404.14. Piping underground beneath buildings. Piping installed underground, beneath
buildings, is prohibited.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 406, inspection, testing and purging, paragraph 406.4.1, test pressure,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 406.4.1. Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be 15 pounds air pressure or six
ounces mercury gauge.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 406, inspection, testing and purging, paragraph 406.4.2, test duration,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 406.4.2. Test duration. Test duration shall be not less than one-half hour for each 500 cubic
feet of pipe volume or fraction thereof. When testing a system having a volume less than ten cubic
feet or a system in a single-family dwelling, the test duration shall be permitted to be reduced to 15
minutes. For piping systems having a volume of more than 24,000 cubic feet of pipe volume, the
duration of the test shall not be required to exceed 24 hours.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 409, shutoff valves, paragraph 409.3, shutoff valves for multiple
house line systems, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 409.3. Shutoff valves for multiple house line systems. Where a single meter is used to supply
gas to more than one building or tenant, a separate shutoff valve shall be provided for each building
or tenant. Each shutoff valve shall be plainly marked with an identification tag attached by the
installer so that the piping systems supplied by such valves are readily identified.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 409, shutoff valves, paragraph 409.3.1, multiple-tenant buildings, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 409.3.1. Multiple-tenant buildings. In multiple-tenant buildings, where a common piping
system is installed to supply other than one- and two-family dwellings, shutoff valves shall be
provided for each tenant. Each tenant shall have easy access to the shutoff valve serving the tenant's
space. Each shutoff valve shall be plainly marked with an identification tag attached by the installer
so that the piping systems supplied by such valve are readily identified.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/430
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 409, shutoff valves, paragraph 409.3.2, individual buildings, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 409.3.2. Individual buildings. In a common system serving one building, shutoff valves shall
be installed outdoors, readily accessible and be within three feet of the piping entrance to the
building.
Chapter 4, Gas piping installations, section 412, liquefied petroleum gas motor vehicle fuel-dispensing stations,
paragraph 412.8, private fueling of motor vehicles, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
In addition to the requirements in the International Fire Code, self-service LP gas dispensing systems
shall be provided with an emergency shutoff switch located within 75 feet of, but not less than 25 feet
from, dispensers, and the owner of the dispensing facility shall ensure the safe operation of the
system and the training of users.
Chapter 6, Specific appliances, section 614 clothes dryer exhaust, paragraph 614.3.6.4, transition ducts, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Clothes dryer transition ducts used to connect the appliance to the exhaust duct system may be metal
and limited to a single length, not to exceed six feet in length, and shall be listed and labeled for the
appliance.
ARTICLE 3.08 MOVING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.08.001 Permits required for moving buildings
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any building into, within, or out of the city
limits without first filing with the city a bond as required herein and making application for and obtaining a
moving permit and a foundation permit for each separate building and any other permits that may be required to
ensure compliance with the code.
(b) A foundation permit shall not be required when a building is to be moved out of the city limits.
Sec. 3.08.002 Insurance requirements for persons moving buildings
(a) Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of moving buildings, structures or houses into or
within the corporate limits of the city shall execute and deliver to the planning and zoning department proof of
general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000.00 for the use and benefit of the city, the property owner or
any person injured or damaged by any act or neglect of the principal or his agents or employees, or by reasons of
failure to repair any damages, defective work, device or installation, or for failure to remedy any defects,
damages or faulty workmanship or material within the time prescribed by a city inspector for the completion of
such remedial work without additional cost to the individual for whom the work or moving was done and
guaranteeing compliance with the requirements of this code, of all work done by the principal, his agents or
employees. Suspension or revocation of a permit of the principal shall not affect the liability of the principal or
the insurance underwriter. Said insurance shall further save, indemnify and keep harmless the city against all
judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of a
permit.
(b) No permit for the moving or relocation of any building shall be issued until the certificate of insurance has
been filed with the city as required herein.
Sec. 3.08.003 General requirements for moving buildings; issuance of moving permit
(a) Buildings or structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of this code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/430
(b) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move a building into or within the city limits shall make
application for a moving permit on the forms provided to the planning and zoning department. A moving permit
may be issued when the following have been complied with:
(1) That an inspection of the building to be moved within or into the city has been made by the
building inspector to determine if the building complies with the building, plumbing, electrical and
other applicable codes of the city and that the inspector's report is on file with the city and a copy has
been received by the owner. The inspector's report shall specify the repairs and/or changes if any
which must be accomplished in order for the building to be in compliance with city codes. Any
permits required for such repairs and/or changes shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a moving
permit and such repairs shall be completed within 180 days of the date of issuance of the moving
permit. An inspection of the building shall not be required for buildings being moved out of the city.
(A) Any building, structure or portion thereof if determined to be substandard as defined in
this code shall not be moved within or into the city.
(B) A moving permit may be issued for an existing building or structure to be moved within
or into the city provided such building or structure was constructed in conformance with the
city building code in effect at the time of construction and the electrical wiring, plumbing and
mechanical equipment was installed in conformance with all applicable ordinances or codes in
effect at the time of installation and the structure, electrical wiring, plumbing, and mechanical
equipment have been maintained in good condition and are being used in a safe manner.
(2) That the lot is described by a plat of record as required by this code, that a site plan has been
filed with the city, showing the proposed location of the building on the lot, property lines, streets,
alleys, setbacks, and the location of any existing buildings on the lot, and that the building and
proposed occupancy comply with the zoning regulations of the district in which the building is to be
located.
(3) That a foundation permit has been issued and such foundation has been inspected and is
complete and ready for the building to be moved within or into the city.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
(4) A cash bond as listed in article 5.000 is required to insure lot cleanup and the removal of the
foundation off of the lot from which the building is to be moved. The cash bond will be refunded
when the lot has been cleared, all excavations and low areas have been filled with approved material,
the sewer line has been plugged, and the other utilities disconnected to the satisfaction of the building
inspector. A cash bond will not be required for buildings being moved into the city limits. (Ordinance
O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(5) That the proper permits have been obtained from the state department of transportation and that
the proposed route for moving the building has been approved by the appropriate city official. No
building or portion thereof shall be moved from one site to another or through the city along any
public way within the city if such moving requires the removal or moving of a traffic signal mast
arm.
(6) That any person, firm or corporation desiring to move into the city limits a building or structure
of new construction containing more than 120 square feet shall comply with subsection (b)(1) of this
section prior to the issuance of a moving permit. in lieu of an inspection as required in subsection (b)
(1), a letter from the building inspector of the city where the building was constructed certifying that
the building was constructed in compliance with that city's building ordinances, or a letter from a
registered professional architect or engineer certifying that the building complies with the provisions
of a recognized building code, plumbing and mechanical code, and electrical code, will be accepted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/430
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
Sec. 3.08.004 Permit and inspection fees for moving buildings
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay all associated fees as
listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 3.08.005 Demolition of buildings
(a) Permit required; standards for work. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to demolish
any building or structure or cause the same to be demolished within the city without first making application for
and obtaining a demolition permit from the planning and zoning department and complying with the following:
(1) Provide protection for adjoining property and pedestrians in compliance with the provisions of
the International Building Code and request approval of the protection provided from the building
inspector prior to beginning any demolition work. The building inspector may require additional or
lesser protection depending upon the circumstances or the degree of hazard to adjoining properties or
pedestrians.
(2) All utilities shall be disconnected by the utility companies prior to the issuance of the
demolition permit with the exception of the sewer lateral which shall be plugged as directed by the
building inspector after the building has been demolished.
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
(3) A cash bond as listed in article 5.000 is required to insure lot cleanup and the removal of the
foundation off of the lot. The cash bond will be refunded when the lot has been cleared, all
excavations and low areas have been filled with approved material and the lot will drain properly.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) Permit fee; expiration of permit. No fee shall be required for a demolition permit; however, each permit
shall expire within 90 days from the date of issuance and all demolition and lot cleanup shall be completed by
the expiration date. The building inspector may grant an extension of not more than 30 days when weather
conditions or other circumstances in the opinion of the inspector justify the granting of an extension.
(c) Forfeiture of bond. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days of a written notice
to the permittee by the building inspector shall result in the cash bond being forfeited and used to complete the
demolition and lot cleanup.
ARTICLE 3.09 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 3.09.001 Adopted
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012
edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out
completely in detail. A copy of said International Property Maintenance Code shall be filed with the city
secretary, such copy to be open to public inspection during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.09.002 Amendments
Section 101, General, paragraph (A) 101.1 title. Insert “City of Borger.”
Section 102, Applicability, paragraph 102.3, application of other codes, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Repairs, alterations or additions to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance
with procedures and provisions of other applicable codes as legally adopted and amended by the city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/430
council.
Section 107, Notices and orders is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph to read as follows:
107.1.1 Citations. The building official and/or code enforcement officer may exercise the option of
serving the owner, or person in control of the property, with a citation to appear in municipal court.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.1, application for appeal, first sentence, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this
code shall have right of appeal to the building standards commission, provided a written application
for appeal is filed within ten days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.2. membership of board, first sentence, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
The building standards commission shall consist of a minimum of seven members who are qualified
by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not
employees of the jurisdiction.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.2.1, alternate members, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.2.5, compensation of members, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.5, postponed hearing, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When a quorum of four members is not present to hear an appeal, the meeting shall be postponed
until the next regular scheduled meeting date or not earlier than ten days from the date of the
postponed meeting.
Section 111, Means of appeal, paragraph 111.7, court review, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building standards commission may make appeal to the
city council. Further appeal may be to the court of jurisdiction to hear such appeals.
Section 201, General, paragraph 201.3, terms defined in other codes, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in other applicable codes as legally adopted
by the city council, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Section 304, Exterior structure, paragraph 304.14, insect screens, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every door, window, screened porch or patio fitted with screens shall be provided with screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
Section 402, Light, paragraph 402.1, habitable spaces, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 1/20 (5 percent) of the floor area of
such room.
Section 403, Ventilation, paragraph 403.3, cooking facilities, exception, is hereby deleted.
Section 502, Required facilities, paragraph 502.3, hotels, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/430
Where private water closets, lavatories and bathing facilities are not provided, then the number of
such facilities shall comply with the International Plumbing Code and have access from a public
hallway.
Section 505, Water system, paragraph 505.4, water heating facilities, second sentence, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
A gas burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, or bedroom unless the
water heater is located in an approved enclosure as required in the International Plumbing Code.
Section 602, Heating facilities, paragraph 602.3, heat supply, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every owner or operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units,
rooming units, or dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either expressed or implied, shall furnish
necessary heating facilities to the occupants thereof. The supply shall maintain a temperature of not
less than 65° F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Section 602, Heating facilities, exceptions, is hereby deleted.
Section 602, Heating facilities, 602.4, occupiable work spaces, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Indoor occupied work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of 65° F during
the time the work space is occupied.
Section 604, Electrical facilities, paragraph 604.2, service, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served
by a three-wire, 120/240-volt, single-phase service having a rating of 100 amperes.
Section 605, Electrical equipment, paragraph 605.2, receptacles, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall contain the number and spacing requirements of
receptacles in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Every bathroom shall contain at least
one ground fault circuit interrupter receptacle.
Section 702, Means of egress, paragraph 702.2, aisles, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Building Code and International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall be unobstructed.
Section 704, Fire protection systems, paragraph 704.1, smoke detectors, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Existing group R occupancies which are rented, leased or let, rooming units, dormitories or guest
rooms which are rented, leased or let, on terms, either expressed or implied, shall be provided with
approved single-station smoke alarms.
Sec. 3.09.003 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provisions of this article, or failing to comply
therewith, or with any requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof be punished according to section 1.01.009.
ARTICLE 3.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sec. 3.10.001 Adopted
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/430
From and after the effective date of Ordinance O-003-14, the International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment,
use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the city, is hereby adopted by reference as
though set out completely in detail. A copy of said International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings shall be filed with the director of administrative services, such copy to be open for public inspection
during normal business hours.
Sec. 3.10.002 Amendments
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby amended to read as follows:
Part I, Scope and application, section R101.l title, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Insert “City of Borger.”
Part 2, Administration and enforcement section R103, department of building safety, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Section R103. Building official.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, paragraph R103.1 is hereby deleted and reserved.
Part 2, administration and enforcement, paragraph R103.3, is hereby amended to read as follows:
R103.3. Assistants. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint
assistant building inspectors, code enforcement officers and other office personnel.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, paragraph R104.5 is hereby deleted and reserved.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, paragraph R104.8, liability, first sentence is hereby amended to read as
follows:
The building official, members of the building standards commission or any employee charged with
the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not be rendered
liable personally and are hereby relieved from personal liability for any damages incurred to persons
or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement section R105, permits, paragraph R105.2, work exempt from permit,
item 1, is hereby amended to read as follows:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square
feet.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement section R105, permits, paragraph R105.3, application for permit, item 2,
is hereby amended to read as follows:
2. No permit for the alteration or construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or lot shall
be issued until a building site, building tract or lot has been created in compliance with one of the
following conditions:
1. The lot or tract is described as a separate lot or tract by a plat of record, properly approved
by the planning and zoning commission and city council and filed in the plat records of the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/430
county; or
2. The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to
February 21, 1967, or prior to annexation to the city, whichever is applicable, in which event
only one main building may be constructed and a permit issued therefor, on such original.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, section R105, permits, paragraph R105.5, expiration, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Every permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced in 90
days after its issuance, or if the work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the
work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for
a period not more than 90 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement R108, fees, paragraph R108.6, work commencing before permit
issuance, is hereby deleted and replaced as follows:
When any work requiring a permit as authorized by this chapter is commenced prior to the issuance
of a permit by any contractor, such fee for the permit shall be doubled and an administrative fee of
$100.00 shall be assessed. The double permit fee or administrative fee shall not be assessed for a
homeowner permit if such permits is obtained within 24 hours of notification by the building official
that the need for a permit is required.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, section R108, fees, paragraph R108.5, refunds, is hereby deleted and
replaced as follows:
Permit may be cancelled at any time, but in such case the minimum permit fee of $20.00 shall be
retained.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, section R110, certificate of occupancy, paragraph R110.3, certificate
issued, items 7, 8 and 9, are hereby deleted.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, section R112, board of appeals paragraph R112.1, general, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders decisions or determinations made by the building
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created
the building standards commission. The building official shall be an ex officio member of the
commission but shall have no vote on any matter before the commission. The building standards
commission shall be appointed by the governing body. The commission shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
Part 2, Administration and enforcement, section R112, board of appeals, paragraph R112.2, limitations on
authority, last sentence, is hereby deleted.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, table R301.2(1), climatic and
geographical design criteria, is amended to read as follows:
Ground Snow Load - 20 Seismic Design Criteria – B
Weathering - Moderate Termite - Slight to moderate
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/430
Wind speed - 90 mph Decay - None to slight
Topographic Effects - No Ice Barrier Underlayment Required – No
Frost line depth - 18" Winter design temperature - 10º F
Air Freezing Index - 211 Mean Annual Temp -57.2
Flood hazard - (a) 1988
(b) FIRM #480374-005C, 1996
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R302, location on lot,
paragraph R302.1, exterior walls, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Exterior walls with a fire separation of three feet or less shall have not less than a one-hour fire
resistive rating with exposure from both sides.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R309, garages and carports,
paragraph R309.1.1, duct penetrations, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Ducts in garages and ducts penetrating the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling from the garage
shall be constructed of a minimum no. 26 gauge sheet steel. There shall be no return air openings in
the garage. Supply air openings in the garage shall be equipped with fire dampers.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R310, emergency escape and
rescue openings, section R310.1.1, minimum opening area, exception, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable emergency escape and rescue window or
exterior door opening for emergency escape and rescue.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R310, emergency escape and
rescue openings, section R310.1.3, minimum opening width, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The minimum net clear opening width shall be 24 inches.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R319, protection against
decay, paragraph R319.1, location required, item 2, is hereby amended to read as follows:
2. All sills or plates that rest on concrete or masonry exterior wall and are less than 6 inches from
exposed ground.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R319, protection against
decay, paragraph R319.1, location required, item 3, is hereby deleted.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/430
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 3, building planning, section R322, accessibility, paragraph
R322.1, scope, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Accessible dwelling units shall comply with chapter 11 of the International Building Code and the
Texas Accessibilities Standards as applicable.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 4, foundations, section R403, footings, paragraph R403.1.4,
minimum depth, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
All exterior footings of single-story one- and two-family dwellings shall extend a minimum of 24
inches below the ground elevation.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 4, foundations, table 402.2, minimum specified
compressive strength of concrete, moderate weathering potential column, is hereby amended to read as follows:
3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 4, foundations, table R403.1, minimum width of concrete or
masonry footings, 3,000 pound column, is hereby amended to read as follows:
10, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12,
12 12 24
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 6, wall construction, section R602, wood wall framing,
paragraph R602.5, interior nonbearing walls, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Studs shall be no. 1 or no. 2 standard or stud grade lumber.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 6, wall construction, section R602, wood wall framing,
paragraph R602.5, interior nonbearing walls, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Interior nonbearing walls shall be permitted to be constructed with 2-inch by 4-inch studs spaced 24
inches on center or when not on a braced wall line, 2-inch by 4-inch flat studs space at 16 on center.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 8, roof-ceiling construction, section R802, wood roof
framing, paragraph R802.11, roof tie-down, is hereby amended by adding an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Roof tie-downs shall be required on structures where the mean height of the roof is 45'
and in Exposure C as defined in paragraph R301.2.1.4, Exposure category.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, paragraph R905.2.8.1, base and cap
flashing, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Base flashing shall be of either corrosion-resistant metal of minimum nominal 0.019-inch (26 gauge)
thickness or mineral surface roll roofing weighing a minimum 77 pounds per 100 square feet.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, section R905, requirements for roof
coverings, paragraph R905.2.8.1, base and cap flashing, third sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/430
Cap flashing shall be corrosion-resistant metal of minimum 0.019-inch (26 gauge) thickness.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, section R905, requirements for roof
coverings, paragraph R905.7.1, deck requirements, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Wood shingles shall be applied on solid sheathing.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, section R905, requirements for roof
coverings, table R905.7.4, wood shingle material requirements, minimum grade column, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Minimum grades No. 1
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, section R905, requirements for roof
coverings, table R905.7.5, wood shingle weather exposure and roof slope, is hereby amended by adding footnote
(a) to read as follows:
a. Only grade no. 1 wood shingles are allowed for roof coverings.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 9, roof assemblies, section R905, requirements for roof
coverings, table R905.8.6, Wood shake weather exposure and roof slope, is hereby amended by adding footnote
(b) to read as follows:
b. Only grade no. 1 wood shakes are allowed.
Part III, Building planning and construction, chapter 10, chimneys and fireplaces, section R1001, masonry
fireplaces, paragraph R1001.10, hearth extension dimensions, second sentence, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Where the fireplace opening is 8 square feet or larger, the hearth extension shall extend at least 20
inches in front of and at least 12 inches beyond each side of the fireplace opening.
Part VI, Fuel gas, chapter 24, fuel gas, section G2417, inspection, testing and purging, paragraph G2417.4.1, test
pressure, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum
working pressure, or no less than 5 psi gauge.
Part VI, Fuel gas, chapter 24, fuel gas, section G2417, inspection, testing and purging, paragraph G2417.4.2, test
duration, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The test duration shall not be less than 15 minutes.
Part VII, Plumbing, chapter 26, general plumbing requirements, section P2603, structural and piping protection,
paragraph P2603.6.1, sewer depth, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum 24 inches below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum 18 inches
below grade.
Part VII, Plumbing, chapter 29, water supply and distribution, section P2903, water supply systems, paragraph
P2903.9.1, service valve, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/430
Each residential dwelling unit may have an accessible main shutoff valve near the entrance of the
water service.
Part VII, Plumbing, chapter 29, water supply and distribution, section P2903, water supply systems, paragraph
P2903.9.1, service valve, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Each multifamily dwelling served by one water meter shall have an accessible main shutoff valve
near the entrance of the water service.
Part VII, Plumbing, chapter 31, vents, section P3103, vents, paragraph P3103.1, roof extensions, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six (6) inches above the
roof or six (6) inches above the anticipated snow accumulation, except where a roof is to be used for
any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extension shall be at least seven (7) feet above
the roof.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 33, general requirements, section E3306, electrical conductors and connections,
paragraph E3306.3, minimum size of conductors, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The minimum size of conductors for branch circuits shall be no. 12 copper. The use of aluminum
conductors is prohibited.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3501, general services, paragraph E3501.6.2, service
disconnect location, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
The service disconnecting means shall be located outside the structure and be maximum of six (6)
feet from the meter and within sight of the meter.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3503, service, feeders and grounding electrode conductor size,
paragraph E3503.2, underground service conductors for accessory buildings and structures, exception, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
1. For loads consisting of not more than 2 two-wire branch circuits, the minimum size shall be no.
8 copper.
2. For loads limited by demand or by source supply, the minimum size shall be no. 8 copper.
3. For limited loads of single branch circuit, the minimum size shall be no. 12 copper.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section 3504, overhead service drop and service conductor installation,
paragraph E3504.2.2, vertical clearance from grade, number 1, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
1. For service drop cable supported on and cabled together with a grounded bare messenger wire,
the minimum vertical clearance shall be 12 feet at the electric service entrance to buildings, at the
lowest point of the drip-loop of the building electrical entrance, and above areas of sidewalks
accessed by pedestrians only.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section 3510, grounding electrode conductors, paragraph E3510.1,
continuous, is hereby amended by adding the following sentence to read as follows:
A no. 6 or larger grounding conductor shall be in rigid metal conduit, rigid nonmetallic conduit,
electrical metallic conduit or cable armor and be securely fastened in place.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/430
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3510, grounding electrode conductors, paragraph E3510.2,
securing and protection against physical damage, first sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
A grounding electrode enclosure shall be securely fastened to the surface on which it is carried.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3510, grounding electrode conductors paragraph E3510.2,
securing and protection against physical damage, second sentence, is hereby deleted.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3510, grounding electrode conductors, paragraph E3510.2,
securing and protection against physical damage, third sentence, is hereby amended to read as follows:
A minimum no. 6 AWG grounding conductor shall be in rigid metal conduit, rigid nonmetallic
conduit, electrical metallic conduit or cable armor and be securely fastened in place.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3510, grounding electrode conductors, paragraph E3510.2,
securing and protection against physical damage, fourth sentence, is hereby deleted.
Part VII, Electrical, chapter 35, services, section E3510, grounding electrode conductors, second paragraph, is
hereby deleted.
Appendix E, Manufactured housing used as dwellings, section AE304, fees, paragraph AE304.2, plan review
fees, is hereby deleted.
Appendix E, Manufactured housing used as dwellings, section AE304, fees, paragraph AE304.3.1, expiration of
plan review, is hereby deleted.
Appendix F, Radon control method, is hereby amended by adding the following sentence to the title to read as
follows:
(This appendix is information and is not part of the code.)
Appendix G, Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix H, Patio covers, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix J, Existing buildings and structures, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix K, Sound transmission, is hereby amended by adding the following sentence to the title to read as
follows:
(This appendix is information and is not part of the code.)
Appendix L, Permit fees, is hereby deleted and reserved.
Appendix M, Home day care - R-3 occupancy, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix N, Venting methods, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix O, Gray water recycling systems, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
Appendix P, Sprinkling, section AP101, fire sprinklers, is hereby amended to read as follows:
AP101 Fire sprinklers. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed in new one- and twofamily
dwellings and townhouses shall be in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International
Building Code.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/430
(Ordinance O-003-14 adopted 4/1/14)
ARTICLE 3.11 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.11.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings given below:
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, that is designed or used
for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal, or property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles
situated on private property and used for purposes of a building.
Building inspector. The building official and the building inspector designated to inspect buildings or
construction or designated to enforce the provisions of this article.
Dangerous building, unsafe building or unfit dwelling. Any structure or building located within the incorporated
limits of the city that is:
(1) In such a state or condition of repair or disrepair that all or any of the following conditions
exist:
(A) Walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle;
(B) Damage or deterioration exists to the extent that the building is unsafe;
(C) Loads on floors or roofs are improperly distributed or the floors or roofs are of
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purposes used;
(D) Damage by fire, wind, or other cause has rendered the building or structure dangerous to
life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city;
(E) The building or structure is so dilapidated, substandard, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise lacking in the amenities essential to decent living or use that the same is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or is likely to cause sickness, disease or injury or otherwise to
constitute a detriment to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those persons
assembled, working, or living therein or is a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare;
(F) Light, air, and sanitation facilities are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or
general welfare of persons who assemble, work, or live therein;
(G) Stairways, fire escapes, and other facilities of egress in case of fire or panic are
inadequate;
(H) Parts or appendages of the building or structure are so attached that they are likely to fall
and injure persons or property;
(2) Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health,
safety, and welfare of the city's residents;
(3) Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is
unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
(4) Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/430
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building to the extent it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited
persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children.
Demolish. To tear down the building or structure and remove all building materials and debris from the property
leaving the property in a clean and sanitary condition so as to receive the approval of the building official.
Dwelling. The entirety or any portion of any building that is not an apartment house or lodging house, and that
contains one or more dwelling units or guest rooms that are used, intended, or designed to be built, used, rented,
leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied, for living purposes.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Occupant. Any person who rents, leases or appears to reside in, rent or lease a building, structure or property
through custody of the premises or who has the legal right to possession of such premises.
Owner. Any person who holds any interest in the legal title of a building, structure or property or who has the
legal right of possession thereof.
Person. An individual human, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
Repair. The reconstruction, renovation, or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its
maintenance. This term shall not apply to any change or construction, alteration, or additions to a building other
than for the purpose of reconstruction, renovation, or renewal.
Responsible party. The owner or occupant, including the person in custody of the building, property or structure
and any mortgagee or lienholder.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.002 Violations; penalty
(a) The responsible parties for any unsafe building, unfit dwelling or dangerous building who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building or structure, such notice or order
given by the authority of the board of appeals or the city council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Any responsible party in possession of any unsafe building, unfit dwelling or dangerous building who fails
to comply with any notice or order to vacate such building and fails to repair such building in accordance with
an order given by the board of appeals or the city council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) Any person removing a posted notice of any unsafe building, unfit dwelling or dangerous building from
any building that is posted pursuant to posting notice requirements of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(d) The violation of any provision of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a
fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.003 Prima facie evidence of responsibility for violation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/430
In any prosecution charging a violation of this article governing the failure to comply with any notice or order to
repair, vacate, remove, or demolish any building or structure, proof that the particular property described in the
complaint was substandard in violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such notice or order, the registered owner of such property shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such property was the person who failed to
comply with the notice or order to repair, vacate, remove, or demolish, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.004 Adoption of state law; prohibition; declaration of nuisance
(a) Chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, is hereby adopted by the city and made a part of this article.
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the terms and provisions of this article and chapter 214, the
terms and provisions of chapter 214 shall govern and control.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe building, unfit
dwelling or dangerous building in the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit same to remain in
such condition.
(c) All unsafe buildings, unfit dwellings or dangerous buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures provided in
this article.
(d) The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.005 Inspections; duties of building inspector
The building inspector shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, every building, or portion thereof, reported to be
unsafe. If such building, or any portion thereof, is determined to be unsafe, the building inspector shall give the
responsible parties notice in accordance with the notice requirements set forth in this article. The building
inspector shall further:
(1) Inspect or cause to be inspected, when necessary, any building or structure within the
incorporated limits of the city, including public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels,
tenements, apartments, multifamily residences, single-family residences, garages, warehouses, and
other commercial and industrial structures of any nature whatsoever, for the purpose of determining
whether any conditions exist which render such places a “dangerous building” as defined herein.
(2) Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints have been filed by any person to
the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article.
(3) Report to the board of appeals any noncompliance with the minimum standards set forth in this
article. The building inspector shall obtain from the secretary of the board of appeals a hearing date
for a public hearing by the board of appeals on any structure believed to be a dangerous building and
shall provide the secretary of the board of appeals with copies of the written notice to persons with
interests in the property as provided for in section 3.11.006 hereof.
(4) Appear at all hearings conducted by the board of appeals and testify as to the conditions of
dangerous buildings within the city.
(5) Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: “This building has been found to
be a dangerous building by the city building inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until
it is repaired, removed, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/430
the owner(s), occupant(s) and person(s) with interests in the property. It is unlawful to remove this
notice until such notice is complied with.”
(6) Perform the other requirements with respect to notification of public hearings as are set forth
more specifically in this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.006 Notice to repair
(a) Written notice required; contents. Should the building inspector determine that any building or structure
within the incorporated limits of the city is a dangerous building or unsafe building, he/she shall cause written
notification to be sent, by certified mail or personal delivery, to the owner and all other persons having an
interest in the building after a diligent effort to discover each owner, mortgagee, and lienholder. Such notice
shall be served upon the responsible parties as set out in this article and shall contain:
(1) A description of the building or structure deemed unsafe and its location;
(2) A statement of the particular violation which makes the building or structure a dangerous
building;
(3) Notice of the date and time of a public hearing before the board of appeals to determine
whether the building complies with the standards set out in this article;
(4) A statement that the owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or persons with a legal interest in the
building will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required
to comply with this article and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(b) Sufficiency of notice. Notwithstanding any other term or provision of this article or the code, notice given
pursuant to this article shall be sufficient and deemed properly served upon the responsible parties if a copy
thereof is:
(1) Served upon him/her personally;
(2) Sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such
person as shown on the records of the city and the tax appraisal district;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown;
or
(4) Posted on or near the front door of the building affected by the notice if personal service cannot
be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
(c) Posted notice on dwelling. Where the building is a dwelling, the posted notice shall include the following
statement: “THIS DWELLING IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION; THE USE OF THIS DWELLING
FOR HUMAN HABITATION IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.”
(d) Compliance with notice. The responsible parties of the dangerous building shall have ten (10) days from
the date of service of the notice to bring the unfit dwelling into compliance with the provisions of this article.
(e) Further occupancy restricted. Once the occupants of a dwelling which is condemned have been notified
and a placard declaring the building unfit for human habitation is in place, no person shall again use said
premises for human habitation until approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the building
inspector. The building inspector shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/430
(f) Refused or unclaimed mail. All mailed notices shall be deemed sufficient and delivered even if returned
“refused” or “unclaimed.”
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.007 Search of records for address of persons with legal interests
Notices sent pursuant to this article shall be sent to the address of the owner, lienholder, mortgagee or persons
with legal interests in the building as determined by a reasonable search of records, to include:
(1) County real property records;
(2) Appraisal district records;
(3) Records of the secretary of state, if the property owner or lienholder is a corporation,
partnership, or other business association;
(4) Assumed name records;
(5) Tax records; and
(6) Utility records of the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.008 Duties and procedures of board of appeals
The board of appeals, as such term is used herein, shall mean the board of adjustments and appeals, and such
board shall:
(1) Hearings. Schedule and hold a hearing and hear testimony from the building inspector, the
owner and other persons having an interest in the dangerous building and any person desiring to
present factual evidence relevant to the dangerous building. Such testimony shall relate to the
determination of the question of whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building
and the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the amount of time it
will take to reasonably perform the work. The owner or a person having an interest in the dangerous
building shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to
comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(2) Voting and issuance of order. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall
determine by majority vote whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building.
Upon a determination that the building or structure in question constitutes a dangerous building, the
board of appeals shall issue a written order:
(A) Containing an identification of the building and the property on which it is located,
which is not required to be a legal description;
(B) Making written findings of the violations of the minimum standards that are present at
the building;
(C) Containing a statement of the particular violation which makes the building or structure a
dangerous building;
(D) Requiring the owner and persons having an interest in the building to repair, vacate, or
demolish the building within thirty (30) days from the issuance of such order, unless the owner
or a person with an interest in the building establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/430
reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days, in which instance the board of appeals shall
specify a reasonable time for the completion of the work; and
(E) Containing a statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the
dangerous building and remove the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken
within the time specified by the board of appeals.
(3) Notice of order. If repair or demolition is ordered, the board of appeals shall send a copy of the
order by certified mail to the owner and all persons having an interest in the property, including all
identifiable mortgagees and lienholders, within ten (10) days after the hearing. Within ten (10) days
after the date that the order is issued, the city shall:
(A) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(B) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the building is
located a notice containing:
(i) The street address or legal description of the property;
(ii) The date of the hearing;
(iii) A brief statement indicating the results of the order (may be a copy of the order);
and
(iv) If not provided in the notice, instructions stating where a complete copy of the
order may be obtained.
(C) If repair or demolition is ordered and notice of public hearing was not filed in the official
public records of real property of the county, the city may file and record a copy of the order in
such records of the county.
(4) Securing of property. If the board of appeals allows the owner or a person with an interest in
the dangerous building more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the
board of appeals in its written order shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement
and performance of the work and shall require the owner or person to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. The securing of the
property shall be in a manner found to be acceptable by the city building inspector.
(5) Time limit for completing work; extension of time. The board of appeals may not allow the
owner or person with a legal interest in the dangerous building more than ninety (90) days to repair,
remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the written order
unless the owner or person:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety
(90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(6) Compliance with time schedules. If the board of appeals allows the owner or person with an
interest in the dangerous building more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work
required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the board of appeals shall require the owner or
person to regularly submit progress reports to the board of appeals to demonstrate that the owner or
person has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the
work. The written order may require that the owner or person with an interest in the building appear
before the city building inspector to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/430
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.009 Appeal to city council
Any owner or person having a legal interest in a building or structure who is aggrieved by the decision of the
board of appeals may appeal such decision to the city council within ten (10) days from the date of the decision
appealed. In such event, the city council shall set a time and date for hearing such appeal and hold such hearing
within thirty (30) days from the date of the appeal or as soon as practicable.
(1) Notice of public hearing. In the event the board of appeals has determined that demolition of a
residential structure is the proper action and such decision is appealed, written notice of such public
hearing shall be sent to owners of real property lying within two hundred feet (200') of the property
on which the appeal is made not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing. Such
notice may be served by depositing the same properly addressed and postage paid in the United
States post office. All other public hearings on appeals shall be noticed as provided in chapter 551 of
the Tex. Gov't Code. Notice shall also be given by publishing the same prior to the date set for the
hearing, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing.
(2) Purpose of public hearing. The purpose of the public hearing of the appeal shall be to
determine whether or not the building is an unsafe building or a dangerous building in accordance
with the standards set forth in this article and to uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the board
of appeals.
(3) Conduct of public hearing. The matter shall be set for hearing before the city council at the
earliest practicable date, and notice of said hearing shall be served on the responsible parties, each
known mortgagee and lienholder, and the building inspector not less than ten (10) days prior to date
of said hearing. All interested persons shall have the opportunity to be heard and may introduce
evidence to the city council for its consideration.
(4) Findings. After the public hearing, the city council shall make such findings and orders as it
shall deem appropriate. Following the public hearing determining that a building or structure is unfit
for human habitation, the city council shall immediately adopt a resolution condemning the building
or structure and requiring the occupants to vacate the building or structure.
(5) Order. After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of standards set out in this
article, the city council may order that the decision of the board of appeals be affirmed, reversed or
modified and, in the latter instance, that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished by the owner within a reasonable time. The city council also may order that the
occupants be removed within a reasonable time. The city secretary shall send to each identified
mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing:
(A) A legal identification and/or address of the building and the property on which it is
located;
(B) A description of the violation of the Code of Ordinances (if any) that is found by the city
council to be present at the building; and
(C) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, repair, or demolish the building or
remove the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time,
or that the city will take no action.
(6) Alternative procedure. As an alternative to the procedure prescribed by subsection (5),
described above, the city council shall make a diligent effort to contact each mortgagee and
lienholder before conducting the public hearing and shall give them a notice of, and an opportunity to
comment at, the hearing. If the city proceeds under this subsection, the order issued by the city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/430
council shall specify a reasonable time for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished and an additional reasonable time for the ordered action to be taken by any of the
mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner or other responsible person fails to comply with the
order within the time provided for action. Under this subsection, the city is not required to furnish
any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner or other
responsible party fails to timely take the ordered action.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.010 Assessment of expenses and penalties
(a) Order. If an appeal has been made to the city council by any interested party, and if the city council has
held a hearing pursuant to section 3.11.009(3) and the time allotted for the repair, removal or demolition of a
building under section 3.11.009(5) or section 3.11.009(6) has expired, then the city council may, in addition to
the authority granted under chapter 214, Local Government Code, and the foregoing sections of this article:
(1) Order the repair of the building at the city's expense and assess the expenses on the land on
which the building stands or to which it is attached;
(2) Assess a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day against the responsible party for failure to
repair, remove or demolish the building;
(3) The city building inspector shall invite at least two (2) or more building contractors to make
estimates pertaining to the needed repair, removal or demolition of a building. The building inspector
shall cause to be made an assessment of expenses or civil penalty based on such estimates. The
building inspector shall endeavor to minimize the expenses of any building repair, removal or
demolition order pursuant to this article; and
(4) Authorize and take such other action as contemplated by this article, or chapter 214, as is
necessary or advisable in the judgment of the city council to protect the public health, safety or
welfare.
(b) Abatement by city authorized. In the event the owner or a person with an interest in a dangerous building
fails to comply with the order within the time specified therein, the city may cause any occupants of the
dangerous building to be removed, and may cause the dangerous building to be secured, removed, or demolished
at the city's expense. The city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead
as protected by the state constitution, the property on which the dangerous building was located. The lien is
extinguished if the property owner or a person having an interest in the building reimburses the city for the
expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in
the office of the county clerk. The notice of lien must contain the name and address of the owner of the
dangerous building, if that information can be determined by a diligent effort, a legal description of the real
property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due.
Such lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens
attached to the real property.
(c) Repair by city. In addition to the authority set forth in subsection (b) above, after the expiration of the time
allotted in the order for repair, removal or demolition of a dangerous building, the city may repair the building at
its expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or to which it is attached. The
repairs contemplated by this section may only be accomplished to the extent necessary to bring the building into
compliance with the minimum standards established by this article, and to the extent such repairs do not exceed
minimum housing standards. This subsection (c) shall be applicable only to residential buildings with ten (10) or
fewer dwelling units. The city shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (b) above for filing a lien on the
property on which the building is located.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/430
(d) Filing of lien. The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it
is a homestead as protected by the state constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal or demolition
expenses or the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city shall file for record, in recordable
form, in the office of the county clerk, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice shall contain a
legal description of the land.
(e) Priority of lien. The city's lien to secure the payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repair, removal or
demolition is inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property to which
the city's lien attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the county clerk before the date
the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal or demolition is begun by the city. The city's lien is superior to
all other previously recorded judgment liens. If the notice is given and the opportunity to repair, remove or
demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and the lienholder as provided herein, the lien is a
privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches.
(f) Interest on penalties and assessments. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section
accrues interest at the rate of 10 percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. The city may
further file with the district clerk a copy of an ordinance assessing a civil penalty pursuant to this article.
(g) Attorney fees and other costs of judicial proceedings. In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of
the city's rights under this section, if the decision of the city is affirmed or not substantially reversed, but only
modified, the city shall be entitled to all attorney fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it.
(h) Homestead exception for persons 65 years of age and older. A lien acquired under this section by the city
for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a
residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.12.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in Tex. Water Code section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. (1998 Code, sec. 152.01)
Sec. 3.12.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.02)
Sec. 3.12.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/430
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that the property is in a flood area.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.03)
Sec. 3.12.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood
or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
damage;
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.04)
Sec. 3.12.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and characterized by high velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/430
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is
refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE and V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood-protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building.
(1) A nonbasement building:
(A) Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to
have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water; and
(B) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2) In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, “elevated building” also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE or V,
“elevated building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the
standards of 44 CFR 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report
contains flood profiles, and the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/430
map.
Flood or flooding. The general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management regulations. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/430
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of 44 CFR 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act, being 16 USC 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/430
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements, see 44 CFR 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.05)
Sec. 3.12.006 Lands to which article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (1998 Code, sec.
152.06)
Sec. 3.12.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM), Community No. 480374A, dated June 28, 1974, revised February 2, 1996, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. (Ordinance O-003-14
adopted 4/1/14)
Sec. 3.12.008 Compliance
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/430
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (1998 Code, sec. 152.08)
Sec. 3.12.009 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (1998 Code, sec. 152.09)
Sec. 3.12.010 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.10)
Sec. 3.12.011 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.11)
Secs. 3.12.012–3.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
Sec. 3.12.041 Development permit required
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. (1998 Code,
sec. 152.25)
Sec. 3.12.042 Application
(a) The application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but shall not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations and existing and proposed structures and
the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
(b) Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/430
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.12.072(2);
(4) A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) [The floodplain administrator shall] maintain a record of all such information in accordance
with section 3.12.102(1).
(1998 Code, sec. 152.26)
Sec. 3.12.043 Approval or denial
Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.27)
Secs. 3.12.044–3.12.070 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.12.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/430
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.40)
Sec. 3.12.072 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in section
3.12.007, 3.12.073(c), or 3.12.102(8), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to
the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.12.042(a), is
satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/430
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's
FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that
either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.12.042(a), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.41)
Sec. 3.12.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/430
(a) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with
sections 3.12.002 through 3.12.004.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall meet the development permit requirements of sections 3.12.041, 3.12.042 and 3.12.043 and the provisions
of sections 3.12.071 through 3.12.073.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.12.007 or section 3.12.102(8).
(d) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.42)
Sec. 3.12.074 Standards for areas of shallow flooding
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.007 are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified).
(1998 Code, sec. 152.43)
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. (1998 Code, sec. 152.43; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.12.042(a), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.43)
Sec. 3.12.075 Floodways
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/430
Floodways are located within areas of special flood hazards established in section 3.12.007. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 3.12.071 through 3.12.073.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a
community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in
an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.44)
Secs. 3.12.076–3.12.100 Reserved
Division 4. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 3.12.101 Designation of floodplain administrator
The director of the planning and zoning department is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood
Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (1998 Code, sec. 152.55)
Sec. 3.12.102 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by the adoption of
this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed developments to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, being 33 USC 1344) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state commission on environmental quality, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/430
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with section 3.12.007,
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions
of sections 3.12.071 through 3.12.073.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a
community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the community's
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.56)
Sec. 3.12.103 Variance procedures
(a) The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 152.57; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustment may appeal such
decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.12.043 have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the zoning board of adjustment
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this article (section 3.12.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/430
(j) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) above are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1998 Code, sec. 152.57)
ARTICLE 3.13 MANUFACTURED HOUSING, MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.13.001–3.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Location and Installation of Manufactured Housing
Sec. 3.13.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning: (1998 Code, sec. 154.01)
HUD-code manufactured home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet;
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(3) Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
A HUD-code manufactured home is not a mobile home for any purpose under state law.
Manufactured home or manufactured housing. A HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Manufactured housing park. A unified development of three (3) or more manufactured home spaces arranged on
a tract of land, containing not less than two (2) acres, under private ownership. (Ordinance O-010-03, sec.
154.01, adopted 6/3/03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/430
Mobile home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed before June 15, 1976;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
A mobile home is not a HUD-code manufactured home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Modular housing. A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or more families, that
is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location
other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a permanent residential structure
when the nodules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or
installed on a permanent foundation system. This term shall not mean or apply to:
(1) Housing constructed of sectional or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or
(2) Any ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is contained in a single
unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location.
Skirt or skirting. Skirting shall be installed around the exterior perimeter of a manufactured home located inside
the perimeter of a manufactured housing park to enclose the under-floor area from the bottom of the unit to the
ground. Skirting shall be of materials approved for exterior exposure and shall be installed and fastened to
withstand damage from wind and exposure to the elements. The skirting materials shall be a material intended
for use as a finished exterior surface and shall be painted if required for protection of the material. Panel type
skirting material shall be securely attached to wood stud or metal stud frame structures that are anchored to the
ground and to the bottom of the manufactured home at not more than six (6) feet on centers with approved
anchors. Wood stud frames and panel materials of wood products that are in contact with the ground and within
six (6) inches of the ground shall be preservative treated in accordance with the building code. Wood or metal
stud frames shall consist of a bottom plate, a top plate and studs not more than twenty-four (24) inches on center.
Panel materials shall be attached to stud frames with fasteners appropriate for and compatible with the material
used, and the fasteners shall be approved for exterior exposure, both in accordance with the building code.
Fasteners in panel materials shall be spaced around the perimeter or each panel not more than six (6) inches on
center and in the field of the panel at not more than twelve (12) inches on center.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.01, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.032 Installation permit required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, move onto or install any manufactured
home or modular home on any tract of land within the city limits without first obtaining a permit for the
installation of each manufactured home or modular home.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/430
(b) This section shall not apply to the location, movement or installation of manufactured homes or modular
homes onto lots used for the retail sale of manufactured homes or modular homes.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.02, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.033 Application for permit
An application for a permit shall be filed in writing on a form furnished for that purpose to the planning and
zoning department. Unless already created or exempted, each applicant shall create a lot in compliance with the
Code of Ordinances. Each applicant shall provide the following information:
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.03)
(2) Describe the land or lot on which the proposed manufactured home or modular home is to be
located by legal description, street address or similar information that will identify and definitely
locate the proposed site.
(3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed manufactured home or modular home
installation is intended.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.03, adopted 6/3/03)
(4) Be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to
indicate such authority.
(5) Give such other data and information as may be required by the building inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.03)
(6) Include a plot plan showing the location of property lines, streets, alleys, driveways and
parking areas, placement of the manufactured home or modular home on the lot or tract and all
existing buildings or structures on the lot.
(7) Provide details of the anchorage system and foundation.
(8) The foundation fascia shall form a complete brick or stone enclosure under exterior walls
except where needed for normal ventilation or ingress/egress as approved by the city.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.03, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.034 Issuance of permit
The application, plans and other data filed by an applicant shall be reviewed by the building official and,
provided the information is in order and the fees have been paid as required by the schedule of building permit
fees, the permit may be issued. The installation of the manufactured home shall be done in compliance with the
plans submitted and approved with the application. The permit card shall be displayed on the manufactured
home until installation is complete. (Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.04, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.035 Permit conditions
(a) The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not be construed to be a permit for, or
approval of, any violation of any provisions of this code or any other law or ordinance. No permit presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel any provision of this code or any other law or ordinance shall be valid.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/430
(b) The building inspector may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit whenever issued in error or when
incorrect information was furnished or when in violation of the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of
the city.
(c) Utilities may be withheld by the building inspector with the exception of those needed for construction
power until such time as the provisions of this code and other applicable ordinances are complied with.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.05)
Sec. 3.13.036 Expiration of permit
(a) Every permit issued for a manufactured home installation shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the manufactured home is not fully installed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
issuance. (Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.06, adopted 6/3/03)
(b) In the event the installation has not been completed, an extension may be approved by the building
inspector provided it can be shown that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee prevented the
completion of the installation; otherwise, an additional fee shall be required to renew the permit. (1998 Code,
sec. 154.06)
Sec. 3.13.037 Manufactured home district
It is recognized that certain areas of the city may be suitable for the development of manufactured home parks
and manufactured home subdivisions. It is for this reason that the MH zoned district is designed. The MH zoned
district is not intended to be utilized for the placement of a single manufactured home. Any zoning application
for the MH zoned district shall include an area not less than two (2) acres unless it is immediately adjacent to an
existing MH zoned district containing not less than two (2) acres. All manufactured home park development
shall comply with division 3 of this article. (Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.07, adopted 6/3/03)
Secs. 3.13.038–3.13.060 Reserved
Division 3. Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks
Sec. 3.13.061 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and phrases and their derivatives shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Agent. Any person authorized by the licensee of a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park to
operate or maintain such park.
Building code. The building code adopted with amendments by the city council, elsewhere in this code.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.20, adopted 6/3/03)
HUD-code manufactured home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/430
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet;
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(3) Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
A HUD-code manufactured home is not a mobile home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Licensee. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured housing park or recreational vehicle park
under the provisions of this article. (Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.20, adopted 6/3/03)
Manufactured home or manufactured housing. A HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Manufactured home (new). A new manufactured home meeting the definition of manufactured home above
which shall meet the site requirements in section 3.13.062 (manufactured home standards). For the purposes of
this division, a new manufactured home is defined as having never been occupied for any reason, including as a
sales office, temporary residence or commercial use, having never been involved in an accident, having never
received weather-related damage that at any time has affected its structural integrity, and having no visible signs
of damage.
Manufactured home park. A unified development of three (3) or more manufactured home spaces arranged on a
tract of land containing two (2) or more acres under private ownership.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.20, adopted 6/3/03)
Mobile home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed before June 15, 1976;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
A mobile home is not a HUD-code manufactured home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/430
Park occupant. One who occupies a manufactured home or recreational vehicle within a licensed park.
Parking space. A minimum space nine (9) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length located with the boundary
of the manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park for the purpose of automobile storage.
Permit. A written permit or certification issued by the building official permitting the construction, alteration or
extension of a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this article and
regulations hereunder.
Plot plan. A graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land
included in the plot plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned and indicating the relationship
of each use.
Recreation area. A tract or parcel of land which is reserved and designed primarily for a children's play area and
equipped with conventional playground facilities equipment and in addition to other facilities such as ballfields,
adult recreation facilities or other recreational facilities.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular, portable structure, built on a single chassis that is self-propelled or
permanently towable behind an accessory vehicle and is primarily designed not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. Such vehicle shall be four
hundred (400) square feet or less in area when measured at the largest horizontal projection. (This dimension
does not include the tongue or any towing apparatus.) This definition includes campers, motor homes, fifth
wheels and travel trailers, but does not include mobile homes.
Recreational vehicle park. A unified development under private ownership designed primarily for transient
service on which recreational vehicles are parked, situated or used for the purpose of supplying to the public a
temporary parking space for such vehicles described in this division.
Screening device. A solid masonry or wooden wall or fence, a woven wire or chainlink fence with metal strips,
woven through the mesh to form a solid screen, or a woven wire or chainlink fence with evergreen shrubs or
hedges, forming a solid screen.
Service building. A structure housing toilet, lavatory, shower and such other facilities as may be required by this
article.
Space. An area within a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park which has been improved for the
placement of a single manufactured home or recreational vehicle as provided in this article.
Zoning ordinance. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.20, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.062 Standards for placement and appearance of manufactured homes
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth standards for the placement and architectural
appearance of manufactured housing within the city. The intent of this section is to insure that manufactured
housing is compatible with other dwellings in residential neighborhoods and meets minimum placement and
architectural standards while providing an alternative means of affordable house ownership for the residents of
the city.
(b) Site requirements. Each manufactured home placed on an individual lot shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) For specific use permit approval, a manufactured home shall have a minimum width of
fourteen (14) feet measured at any point perpendicular to the length of the manufactured home
located on a twenty-five-foot lot.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/430
(2) A manufactured home is allowed in a manufactured home zoned district and a specific use
permit is required for the installation of a manufactured home in the estate/agricultural, singlefamily-
1, single-family-2, general residential and commercial zoned districts of the city. A
manufactured home shall not be located in the central business, retail, neighborhood service, planned
development, light industrial, or heavy industrial zoned districts of the city.
(3) A manufactured home square footage shall be comparable to that of existing housing units in
the immediate residential neighborhood or subdivision.
(4) The main roof of the manufactured home shall not be less than 3:12 pitch, with eaves
projecting not less than six (6) inches, and be of asphalt shingle or metal.
(5) A manufactured home shall be permanently attached or affixed to a permanent foundation
system. The permanent foundation system shall be as follows:
(A) A continuous concrete slab with a minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
(B) A below-grade continuous concrete beam shall be an integral part of the slab placed
under the perimeter of the unit, and under those portions of the chassis that bear the structural
load of the housing unit, and under those portions of the chassis that bear the structural load of
the unit. The minimum beam dimensions shall be 10" wide and 12" high or as designed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer. Concrete support piers from the slab foundation to
the chassis shall be installed according to the installation manual for the unit or as required by
the state.
(C) State-approved tie-down anchors shall be installed in the continuous concrete beam.
(D) The distance between finished grade and the bottom of the exterior walls shall not exceed
thirty (30) inches.
(6) A manufactured home shall have all towing equipment, i.e., tongue, axle, wheels, lighting or
other such conditions which are not an integral part of the structure, removed before the housing is
permanently attached or affixed.
(7) The housing unit shall have a covered entry or dormer on any entry visible from a public street
or right-of-way.
(8) Proof of HUD-code inspected manufactured home shall be submitted prior to installation or
issuance of a specific use permit.
(9) A manufactured home shall have a habitability inspection performed and certificate of
occupancy issued prior to the connection of permanent utilities.
Note: Development standards such as setbacks, lot size, and off-street parking requirements set forth by the city
subdivision ordinance shall be enforced. Nonconforming mobile homes or manufactured homes removed from a
site may only be replaced with a manufactured home that complies with this article.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.19, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.063 Location and licensing
(a) Permitted locations. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks may be located in any zoned
district of the city permitted by the zoning ordinance schedule of uses located elsewhere in this code.
(b) Licensing and fee requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any manufactured home
park or recreational vehicle park within the city limits unless the person possesses a valid license issued the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/430
current year by the building official. All applications for a license shall be made in writing on forms provided by
the building official, who shall issue a license when compliance with this article has been achieved.
(1) Application for original license. Application for an original license shall be in writing, signed
by the applicant as to the truth of the application and by deposit of the license fee, and shall contain:
(A) Name and address of applicant;
(B) Location and legal description of the park;
(C) Plot plan of the park showing all spaces of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles,
structures, roads, walkways and other service and utility facilities.
Before an original license is issued, the building official shall inspect the park for compliance
with the provisions of this article.
(2) Application for renewal. Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the
licensee on forms provided by the building official, on or before October 1 of each year. The
application will contain any change in the information submitted on the original license.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.21, adopted 6/3/03)
(3) License fee. All original license applications or renewals shall be accompanied by a fee as
listed in article 5.000 for each manufactured home or recreational vehicle space in the park.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(4) Licenses not transferable. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall not be
transferred. A new license will be issued to any new owner upon compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(5) Notice of violation; suspension of license. Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured
home park or recreational vehicle park, the building official finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of applicable provisions of this article, he shall give notice to the licensee.
Such notice shall (1) be in writing; (2) include a statement of the reason for such notice; (3) allow a
reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; (4) be served on the licensee or his agent
either by personal service or mail to the last known address, or when notified by any method
authorized or required by state law; and (5) contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this article. Unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period of time, the building official shall immediately suspend the license, and
give notice in writing of such suspension. The licensee shall cease operation of such park, except as
provided in subsection (6).
(6) Appeals. Any person affected by any notice issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of this section by the building official may request and be granted a hearing before the
building standards commission, provided such person affected by the decision of the building official
files a written request within fifteen (15) days after the notice was served to the secretary of the
building standards commission requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor. Upon receipt of the request, the secretary of the building standards commission
shall set a time and place for such hearing and give the petitioner written notice thereof. The filing of
the request for a public hearing shall act as a stay of notice and of suspension. Should the petitioner
be aggrieved by the decision of the building standards commission, then a request for a public
hearing before the city council may be requested for their consideration and final decision. The
petitioner shall be given written notice of the time and place of such hearing. The petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and show cause as to why the decision of the building standards
commission should not be modified or withdrawn.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/430
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.21, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.064 Inspections
(a) The building official or code enforcement official is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances. Such
officials shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any public or private property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article and for maintenance of utilities,
provided that either permission of the owner or occupant has been obtained, or if such owner or occupant refuses
or cannot be located after due diligence, that probable cause exists to believe that a violation of this article has
occurred and a search warrant has been obtained from the judge of the municipal court, based upon an affidavit
as to the facts of probable cause.
(b) It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home or recreational vehicle in a park to give the
owner or his agent or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.21.1, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.065 Responsibilities of park management and park occupants
(a) The responsibilities of the manufactured home park and recreational vehicle park management shall be as
follows:
(1) The park owner or agent shall operate the manufactured home park or recreational park in
compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision
to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) The park owner or agent shall notify each and every park occupant of all applicable provisions
of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities hereunder.
(3) The park owner or agent shall maintain a register of the park occupancy which shall contain the
following information:
(A) Name and space number of occupant;
(B) Make, model and license number of all recreational vehicles;
(C) Location of each manufactured home and recreational vehicle within the park by space
number.
(b) The responsibilities of manufactured home and recreational vehicle occupants shall be as follows:
(1) The park occupants shall comply with the requirements of this article and shall maintain the
space and its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean, sanitary condition.
(2) The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the manufactured home or
recreational vehicle on its space and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with
all applicable building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical codes.
(3) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good
repair. The use of space immediately under the manufactured home or recreational vehicle for storage
shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
(A) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/430
(B) Stored items shall not interfere with the inspections of the manufactured home or
recreational vehicle nor be a fire hazard.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.21.2, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 3.13.066 Development standards
Any development, redevelopment, alteration or expansion of a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle
park within the city limits shall be done in compliance with the following minimum requirements:
(1) Location. A manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park shall be located only in a
designated zoning area as provided and defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
(2) Screening. A manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park shall be visually screened
from any immediately adjacent EA, GR, IF-1, IF-2, CB or any residential zoned PD zoned district.
The screening device shall be constructed and maintained not less than six (6) feet in height.
(3) Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park
or recreational vehicle park shall be paved, covered with stone or other solid material, or protected
with vegetation that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust.
(4) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of the manufactured home park or recreational
vehicle park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Each
space shall be graded to ensure the proper drainage of water from the space. The adequacy of
drainage facilities shall be certified by a state-licensed professional engineer.
(5) Additional development standards.
Minimum size 3 manufactured
home spaces
3 RV
spaces
Minimum
area/space
3,500 sq. ft. 500 sq.
ft.
Minimum
setbacks
As required by zoning ordinance, 10
feet from any space
Minimum distance
between
manufactured
home and/or RV
As required by zoning ordinance, 10
feet to other RVs
Minimum
storage facilities
200 cu. ft. None
required
Minimum offstreet
parking
2 spaces/space None
required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/430
for each space
Minimum offstreet
parking for
offices/accessory
buildings
As required by zoning ordinance
Common area
for boats or
other vehicles
50 sq. ft. per
space
None
required
Minimum
recreation area
8% of gross
park area
None
required
Public showers,
toilets,
lavatories
None required Male: 2
toilets, 1
lavatory,
1 shower
per 50
RV
spaces
Female:
2 toilets,
1
lavatory,
1 shower
per 50
RV
spaces
Laundry
facilities
None required 1 clothes
washer, 1
clothes
dryer per
30 RV
spaces
Tank disposal
facility
None required 1 dump
station
minimum
per RV
park
Potable water None required 1 per RV
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/430
source for
holding tanks
park
(6) Access and traffic circulation and parking.
(A) Internal street, no parking area signs and street name signs shall be privately owned, built
and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to
facilitate for common use of park residents.
(B) Emergency vehicles shall have access to all areas of the manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park.
(C) All traffic-control signage along internal streets of the manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park shall conform to the state manual on uniform traffic-control devices
and be approved by the city traffic engineering prior to installation or placement.
(D) The primary vehicle entrance to a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park
and the off-street parking area required adjacent to the office building and public facilities shall
be paved.
(E) All other internal streets and off-street parking spaces at the manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of
emergency vehicles. Manufactured homes, plus towing vehicles, and recreational vehicles, shall
be provided with a surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Streets and parking
spaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards.
(7) Street dimensions and parking.
(A) An internal street shall be provided to each manufactured home or recreational vehicle
space. Such internal street shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet when parking is not
allowed on both sides of the street, twenty-eight (28) feet when parking is allowed on one (1)
side of the street only, and thirty-two (32) feet when parking is allowed on both sides of the
street. This dimension does not include standard stand-up curb. Internal streets shall be
continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided
with a cul-de-sac having a minimum radius capable of handling the largest emergency vehicle
of the city. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed four hundred (400) feet in
length.
(B) Off-street parking spaces shall be located so as to not interfere with access to parking
areas provided for other manufactured homes or recreational vehicle spaces and for public
parking provided in the manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park.
(C) Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width
to within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any portion of each manufactured home, recreational
vehicle, building and storage area.
(D) Within each manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park all streets shall be
named and manufactured home park spaces numbered to conform with block numbers on
adjacent streets. Street name signs and manufactured home numbers shall be of reflective type.
The signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by
emergency vehicles.
(E) Internal streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety (90)
degrees and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/430
public streets.
(8) Area lighting. Area lighting shall be approved by the traffic engineer.
(9) Semipublic phone. A minimum of one (1) semipublic telephone shall be provided in an easily
accessible location twenty-four (24) hours a day seven (7) days a week.
(10) Recreation area. All manufactured home parks shall have at least one (1) recreation area
located as to be free of traffic hazards, accessible to all park residents and centrally located.
(A) Extent. Recreation areas and facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools and
community buildings shall be provided which will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele
the manufactured home park is designed to serve.
(B) Size. Not less than eight (8) percent of the manufactured home park area shall be
dedicated to recreational facilities. This does not include vehicle parking, commercial,
maintenance and utility areas.
(C) Playground location. When playground area is provided it shall be designed to be
protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. It shall be in a central location to
provide accessibility to all residents of the manufactured home park. Such playground area shall
be maintained in a sanitary and safe condition.
(11) Utility services and distribution. Water, sewer, natural gas and electrical utility services to a
manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park, the means of distribution of those utilities
within the park, the utility connections at each space, and the provision of utilities to and within
buildings and other structures shall comply with applicable state and city standards, regulations and
construction codes.
(12) Buildings and other structures. New or existing buildings and other structures in a
manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park shall comply with construction codes.
(13) Recreational and cooking fires located outside of buildings. No open fires shall be permitted
except in facilities approved by the fire marshal. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall
be used which emits dense smoke or objectionable odor. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, woodburning
stoves and incinerators shall be located, constructed, maintained and used in compliance with
local construction codes to minimize fire hazard and smoke nuisance on the property on which used
and on neighboring property.
(14) Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In parks where LPG is stored or dispensed,
the handling and storage of such gases shall comply with the requirements of the fire code and the
state railroad commission regulations.
(15) Refuse and garbage handling. All refuse and garbage handling shall conform to requirements
as specified elsewhere in this code.
(16) Skirting of manufactured homes. All manufactured homes shall be skirted as required in
section 3.13.031.
(17) Unoccupied, abandoned or unsafe manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Unoccupied, abandoned or unsafe manufactured homes or recreational vehicles located in a
manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park may be abated by the city as specified
elsewhere in this code.
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.22, adopted 6/3/03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/430
Sec. 3.13.067 Applicability
(a) Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b) of this section, the provisions of this article shall apply to
all manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks established or created subsequent to the effective
date of this section (ordinance adopted July 3, 2003). Any reconstruction, alteration, extension or expansion of
any manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park shall be in full compliance with all provisions of this
article.
(b) Except as set forth in subsection (a) above, the provisions of sections 3.13.063 and 3.13.066 shall not
apply to manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks in existence upon the effective date of this
section (ordinance adopted July 3, 2003).
(Ordinance O-010-03, sec. 154.23, adopted 6/3/03)
ARTICLE 3.14 SIGNS*
Sec. 3.14.001 Scope; conflicts with state law
The provisions of this article shall apply to all signs, as that term is defined herein, within the corporate limits of
the city and the established ETJ (extraterritorial jurisdiction). The city elects to exercise its authority to regulate
outdoor advertising signs located in the ETJ of the city as provided by Texas Local Government Code section
216.902 as the same may hereafter be amended. Therefore, new advertising signs shall be prohibited in the ETJ
of the city except as provided herein. This law is subject to Tex. Local Gov. Code, chapter 216, entitled
“Regulation of signs by municipalities.” Any conflict between provisions of this article and chapter 216 shall be
resolved in favor of chapter 216 and its amendments. All signs that are electrically operated or contain one or
more electrical components must obtain an additional permit as required by the city electrical code. (Ordinance
O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
Sec. 3.14.002 Definitions
Certain terms are defined for the purpose of this article as follows:
Abandoned sign. A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner,
product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
Advertising. To convey information, to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of the public to any
location, event, person, activity, goods, services or merchandise.
Animated sign. A sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or
scene (compare “flashing sign”).
Awning. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid
materials on a supporting framework (compare “marquee”).
Awning sign. A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
Banner sign. A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
Bench sign. Any sign affixed or painted in any manner to a bench.
Billboard. See “off-premises sign.”
Building. Any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering an occupancy. Each portion of a building
separated from other portions by a firewall shall be considered as a separate building.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/430
Building official. The officer or other designated authority or their duly authorized representative, charged with
the administration and enforcement of this article.
Cabinet. A four-sided compartment that houses the other components of a sign.
Changeable copy sign (automatic). A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through
mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units.
Changeable copy sign (manual). A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with
changeable letters.
Clearance (of a sign). The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street or street curb and
the lowest point of a sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over the grade.
Construction sign. A temporary sign identifying an architect, engineer, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material
supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.
Copy. The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form.
Curbline. An imaginary line drawn along and parallel to the outermost part or back of the curb and gutter on
either side of a public street; or, if there is no curb and gutter, along and parallel to the outermost portion of the
paved street; or, if there is no paved street, along and parallel to the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the
street.
Directional information sign. An on-premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and
which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy, e.g., parking and exit or
entrance signs.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.02)
District. Any section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk,
height and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building therein.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Double-faced sign. A sign with two faces.
Electrical sign. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used.
Facade. The entire building front including the parapet.
Face of sign. The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels.
Flashing sign. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract
attention. Does not include changeable copy signs, animated signs, or signs which, through reflection or other
means, create an illusion of flashing or intermittent light (compare “animated sign” or “changeable copy sign”).
Freestanding sign. A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building.
Frontage. The length of the property line of any one premises along a public right-of-way on which it borders.
Frontage (building). The length of an outside building wall along or on a public right-of-way.
Government sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state, or federal
government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/430
service, property, or facility.
Height (of sign). The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding decorative
embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less
(compare “clearance”).
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity conducted within a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the premises for the dwelling purposes (see chapter 14).
Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this code and/or applicable state laws.
Illuminated sign. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of
illuminating the sign.
Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on
the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business and not exceeding two square feet.
Any sign located within the confines of a project which is not legible from any public right-of-way.
Lot. A parcel of land legally defined on a subdivision map recorded with the appraisal district, or a parcel of land
defined by a legal record or survey map.
Maintenance. For the purposes of this article, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of
a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
Marquee. A permanent canopy, awning, or roof-like structure of rigid materials supported by and extending
from the facade of a building. A marquee is considered to be part of the building.
Marquee sign. Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure.
Nameplate. A nonelectric, on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of
an occupant or group of occupants.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.02)
Nonconforming signs. Signs legally existing at the adoption date of Ordinance O-001-08, but which do not
conform to the provisions of this article. (Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
Occupancy. The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use.
Office, retail, central business district. Names of city zoning districts; refer to zoning map for location of
districts.
Off-premises sign. A sign advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not
sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, e.g., billboards or
outdoor advertising.
On-premises sign. A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located.
Owner. A person recorded as such on official records or the on-premises person in control of the premises. For
the purposes of this article, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the
sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the building
official, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company.
Painted wall sign. Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall.
Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/430
Pennant. A triangular shaped or other shaped ribbon or device which is greater than one inch in length and used
either singularly or in groups on a line or pole for advertising purposes or for attracting the attention of the
public.
Person. For the purposes of this article, any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly
defined interest.
Political sign. For the purposes of this article, a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national
election or referendum.
Portable sign. Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another and not
permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building, including signs mounted upon or designed to be
mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other nonmotorized mobile structure. A portable sign which
has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. For the purpose of this article, trailer
signs and signs on benches are portable signs.
Projecting sign. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall or
other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.02)
Public right-of-way (public street). That land dedicated for public use commonly as a street, roadway, alley,
bridge, or thoroughfare, and most often extends the entire width between property lines of any roadway, street,
alley, bridge, or other similar thoroughfare, not privately owned or controlled, when any part thereof is open to
the public for vehicular traffic. (Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
Real estate sign. A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent,
lease, or sale.
Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons,
chimneys, or minor projections.
Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building (compare “wall sign”).
Rotating sign. A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner.
Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy.
Searchlight. An apparatus containing a strong light source and reflector for projecting a bright beam of light,
usually truck or trailer mounted.
Shopping center. See “strip center.”
Sign. Includes but is not limited to any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or
written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any person, persons, political
party, event, establishment, product, goods, or services.
Sign, area of.
(1) Projecting and freestanding signs. The area of the sign shall be measured as follows if the sign
is composed of one or two individual cabinets:
(A) The area around and enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module shall be summed
and then totaled to determine total area. The perimeter measurable area shall not include
embellishments such as framing, decorative roofing, and the like, provided that there is not
written advertising copy on such embellishments.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/430
(B) If the sign is composed of more than two sign cabinets or modules, the area enclosing the
entire perimeter of all cabinets and/or modules within a single, continuous geometric figure
shall be the area of the sign.
(C) Only one face of a double-faced sign will be used to figure the total square footage.
(2) Wall signs. The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight
line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. If the sign is
composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added
decoration, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each
symbol or letter. The combined area of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area.
Snipe sign. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, pole, and the like.
Strip center. A building plot developed or ultimately to be developed with three or more stores, shops, or
commercial enterprises, and which has shared parking facilities or spaces.
Subdivision identification sign. A freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium
complex, or residential development.
Temporary sign. Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plastic, metal, or other
light materials, not to exceed six square feet in size and not intended for long-term use. A portable sign shall not
be considered a temporary sign.
Under-canopy sign. A sign suspended underneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
Use. The purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or structure is intended, designed, occupied, or maintained.
Wall sign. A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches in front of the wall of a building.
This definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard.
Window sign. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. Such sign shall be
made of wood, paper, paint, or vinyl and not illuminated.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.02)
Sec. 3.14.003 Penalty; appeals
Any violation of city sign regulations will constitute an offense punishable by a fine as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code. Appeals of decisions by the building official concerning signs shall be directed to the
zoning board of adjustment or the planning and zoning commission, depending on the nature of the appeal.
Sec. 3.14.004 Compliance with article
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain a sign in the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction except in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.14.005 Compliance with zoning ordinance
(a) All signs and sign structures erected, installed, or constructed and the location thereof shall comply with
the provisions of the city zoning code, chapter 14 of this code.
(b) Any sign with an overall height of twenty-five (25) feet or more shall have plans sealed by an architect or
engineer licensed to practice in this state.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/430
(c) Any roof sign with an overall height of twenty (20) feet or more from the top of the sign to the roof below
shall have plans sealed by an architect or engineer licensed to practice in this state.
(Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
Sec. 3.14.006 Signs prohibited in all districts
The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
(1) Abandoned signs.
(2) Banners, except as allowed in retail, central business, and commercial zoned districts.
(3) Signs imitating or resembling official traffic signs, signals, or devices.
(4) Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, utility poles, public benches, or streetlights.
(5) Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of
displaying the sign.
(6) Signs on public right-of-way:
(1998 Code, sec. 156.16; Ordinance adopting Code)
(A) With the passage of this article (on April 7, 2001), it shall be unlawful to place a sign
upon a public street, public sidewalk, public alley, public park, public bridge or part of same,
utility pole, or on any public building belonging to the city unless express consent therefor shall
have been first granted by the city council. (Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
(B) Any unlawful sign found within a public right-of-way of a public street, sidewalk, or
alley shall be seized and the removal thereof is hereby authorized. The building official,
employees of the police department, the department of public works, and the department of
transportation are hereby authorized to impound any signs found on a public street, public
sidewalk, or public alley and transport or cause the same to be transported to a location
designated by the building official for storage. The building official shall maintain records of
where such signs were located when they were so impounded and shall hold the same in storage
for a period of not more than 30 days. Any sign so held may be redeemed by the owner thereof
upon the payment of a fee to the city through the building official, consisting of a total of $25
for hauling the sign to storage plus $5 per day storage fee for each day the sign is stored. Such
fee shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any fine imposed upon such owner for violation of
this article.
(7) Lighted signs where not properly shielded to prevent glare at any portion of the traveled
roadway and are of such brilliance as to impair the visibility of motor vehicle operators and such
lighting projects onto other private or public property as to create a nuisance.
(8) Pennants, searchlights, and festoons.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.16; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.14.007 Insurance requirements
(a) No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, install, paint, or replace any sign for which a permit is
required within the corporate limits of the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until such person has presented
proof of insurance as required by city ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/430
(b) Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000.00 must be filed with the office of planning
and zoning and made conditional for the erection of signs in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the
laws of this state. The insurance is to provide for the compensation of the city for any and all damages or
liabilities that may occur to or against the city by reason of the erection, maintenance, demolition, repair,
removal, defects in, or collapse of any sign erected by or under the direction of any such person. The insurance
is to further provide for the compensation of any person who, while upon public property of the city, incurs
damages for which the person erecting such signs is legally liable by reason of the erection, maintenance,
demolition, repair, removal, defects in, or collapse of any such sign. Such insurance shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance.
(c) Insurance is not required for the following:
(Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
(1) A property owner or business owner may obtain a permit for a sign which he or she proposes to
construct or install on property under his or her control.
(2) Attaching to a structure letters or numbers the dimensions of which do not exceed 24 inches.
(3) Placement of any painted or poster wall sign.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.17)
Sec. 3.14.008 Permit required; exceptions; electrical permit
(a) Before any sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, painted or replaced, a permit for the sign
must be obtained. Sign permits are issued by the office of planning and zoning of the city. Permits are not
required for the following:
(1) Any sign being repainted where the painting constitutes the only alteration to the sign.
(2) Any singular wall sign, not exceeding five square feet in area and not projecting more than six
inches from the wall of the building.
(3) Real estate development signs not exceeding 32 square feet per side.
(4) (A) All signs erected by the municipal, state, or federal government for the purpose of
public instruction, street or highway designation, control of traffic and similar uses relating to
the public interest.
(B) All signs for public protection of a warning, directive, or instructional nature, not
exceeding 30 square feet of surface display area, erected by a public utility or transportation
organization which operates under a franchise from the city permitting the use of public
property for the display of such signs.
(5) Political signs not exceeding 32 square feet of surface display area.
(6) The replacement of plastic face signs or panels or other materials containing the same
advertising message where the original or identical frame is used and the frame size is not altered and
substructure is not altered or moved.
(7) The replacement of bulbs that illuminated the sign where the original or identical frame is used
and the frame size is not altered and the substructure is not altered or moved.
(8) A sign located on private property which displays a warning, instructions, or directions not
exceeding 32 square feet of surface display area on each side and on which no other form of business
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/430
promotion or advertising appears.
(9) Portable signs of less than 12 square feet.
(10) Portable signs displaying personal messages and on site for no longer than three days.
(11) Signs which are mounted on the face of a building no higher than the roofline or which form
an integral part of a canopy or marquee entrance and state only the street number.
(12) Window signs.
(13) Balloons or gas-filled objects may be used for display or advertising for special events;
maximum height to be 35 feet. One use allowed for three days maximum time per premises per 30-
day period.
(14) Handheld signs or signs, symbols, or displays on persons.
(15) Signs not visible from any public street.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.18)
(b) The changing of an off-premises sign to an on-premises sign by a change in the copy, except for messages
advertising the sign for sale or lease, or the changing of an on-premises sign to an off-premises sign shall require
a permit and shall fully comply with this article. In either event, nonconforming status will be terminated.
(Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
(c) A sign permit may be obtained from the office of planning and zoning at city hall or by telephone. It shall
be the permittee's duty to ascertain that the proposed sign meets all requirements of this code. A separate
electrical permit shall be obtained for electrical service to a sign as required by this code and shall comply with
the most recent edition of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 156.18)
(d) The building official shall have the power to revoke permits at any time for failure by the permittee to
comply with any provision of this article. In such cases, all work on such sign shall immediately cease, save and
except that necessary to remove that portion of the sign or sign structure erected at the time of such revocation.
(Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
Sec. 3.14.009 Permit fees
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay all associated fees as
listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 3.14.010 Inspection; maintenance; and nonconforming
(a) Any person who erects or installs a sign shall notify the building official and request a sign location
inspection. When the sign work is completed, the person shall require a final inspection from the building
inspector. Where an electrical sign is erected or constructed, an inspection by the electrical inspector shall be
made.
(b) Any person occupying a location with a sign will be subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the
owner of the location on which the sign is located, with respect to keeping the site clean, sanitary, inoffensive,
and free and clear of all debris, trash, junk, or other noxious substances. All signs, together with all necessary
supports, braces, guy wires, and anchors, must be kept in repair.
(c) Any sign, support, or appurtenances sustaining damage to the extent of 40% of the sign display area,
support, or appurtenances will be immediately removed or repaired.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/430
(1998 Code, sec. 156.20)
(d) A nonconforming sign existing as of the effective date of Ordinance O-001-08 that violates this article or
any other ordinance, and a sign that comes under the jurisdiction of this article due to expansion of the city is a
legal nonconforming sign and may be continued, repaired, and maintained in good condition, but may not be
otherwise altered.
(e) Except as permitted for specific types of signs, voluntary removal of a nonconforming sign for purposes
other than maintenance terminates nonconforming rights for the sign.
(f) Any sign existing as of the effective date of Ordinance O-001-08 that violates a spacing or location
restriction in section 3.14.011, is a legal nonconforming sign and may be continued, repaired, and maintained in
good condition, but may not be otherwise altered. A nonconforming sign will have its nonconforming status
terminated if the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed, or dismantled for any
purpose other than routine maintenance or for changing of the copy or advertising message on the sign. For
purposes of this subsection, a sign is considered to have been destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign is more
than sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type, material, and dimensions at the same
location.
Sec. 3.14.011 Location; height limit; construction standards; abandoned signs
(a) No sign shall be erected in any public right-of-way, alley, or easement and signs shall comply with
projection and clearance requirements as set forth in the most recently adopted sign code. No temporary signs,
banners, and the like shall be placed across a public right-of-way without prior consent of the city council. Such
temporary signs, banners, and the like shall have a minimum clearance of sixteen (16) feet, six (6) inches above
the public right-of-way. Projecting signs, marquees, awnings, and the like shall have a minimum clearance above
a public street or public sidewalk of eight feet and project no closer than two feet of the curb; or, if there is no
curb and gutter, along and parallel to the outermost portion of the paved street.
(b) Freestanding on-premises or off-premises signs are hereby restricted to fifty (50) feet height in zoning
districts where such signs are allowed.
(c) New freestanding off-premises signs are to be of metal monopole design and are restricted to a maximum
sign face area of three hundred seventy-eight (378) square feet per side. A maximum of two sign faces, front and
back, are permitted. Multiple sign faces, whether stacked or side-by-side, at the same location and facing the
same direction are prohibited. Existing signs with more than two faces may continue as nonconforming signs,
subject to the provisions of section 3.14.010.
(d) No freestanding off-premises advertising sign, regardless of direction, shall be located within three
hundred (300) feet of any property line of any public park, or playground or within three hundred (300) feet of
any property line of property on which a public school or church is located.
(e) No freestanding off-premises advertising sign shall be located within seven hundred (700) feet as
measured along the right-of-way to any other freestanding off-premises advertising sign, or permitted location,
regardless of which direction the sign is facing, and regardless of which side of the street the sign is located.
(f) No illuminated freestanding off-premises advertising sign shall be located within three hundred (300) feet
of the zoning line of any residential zoned district.
(g) No freestanding off-premises advertising sign shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the
zoning line of any residential zoned district.
(h) With the passage of Ordinance O-001-08 (on February 5, 2008), it shall be unlawful to place a bench sign
in the corporate city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/430
(Ordinance O-001-08 adopted 2/5/08)
(i) Portable signs shall comply with the requirements of the zoning code for the zoning district in which they
are located. In addition to the zoning requirements, no portable sign over 12 square feet in area shall be located
within 50 feet of another portable sign over 12 square feet in area.
(j) No portable sign, regardless of size, shall be located in such a manner that the sign creates a sight
obstruction on any public street, intersection, or public/private driveway.
(k) All portable signs shall be securely anchored to the ground to resist movement or overturning from wind
or other forces.
(l) The source of electrical power for any portable sign shall be an approved electrical outlet with ground fault
protection located not more than six feet from the sign. Power cords or extension cords shall be of sufficient size
to provide safe electrical power to the sign. No power cords or extension cords shall be laid across or over
pedestrian or vehicular pathways.
(m) Portable signs shall display the sign owner's name and address. The information shall be permanently
affixed or painted on the frame of the portable sign facing the street and be maintained in a legible manner as
long as the sign remains on the site. The characters shall be block style, no smaller than one inch in height, and
be legible without removing any portion of the sign.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.21)
(n) Any portable sign without the proper identification shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be
removed by the building official. Any portable sign so removed, if unclaimed by the identified owner shall be
responsible for the cost of removing the sign, along with any storage fees assessed. Any portable sign so
removed shall be sold at public auction, if unclaimed, and the cost of removal and storage fees shall be charged
against the proceeds of the sale. (1998 Code, sec. 156.21; Ordinance adopting Code)
(o) All electric signs and outline lighting shall comply with the National Electrical Code and ordinances of the
city. If the electrical inspector suspects or has reasonable belief that the electric sign or outline lighting
constitutes a hazard to the safety of life or property, the inspector shall require the sign or outline lighting
installation be revised to meet the minimum standards established by the electrical code. The inspector shall
notify the owner of the sign, or person controlling operation of the sign, of a specific time to revise the electrical
installation of the sign. If the required revisions are not made within the specified time as established by the
electrical inspector, the sign shall be disconnected from the power source. Failure to comply with such a
disconnect order shall constitute a violation of this article.
(p) Any electrical installation of an electric sign and outline lighting shall be performed by a licensed
electrician. All new electric signs or outline lighting shall require a separate electrical permit, inspection, and
approval by the city electrical inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.21)
Sec. 3.14.012 Code adopted
From and after the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted April 7, 2001), the Uniform Sign Code, 1997
edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, regulating the erection, construction,
design, quality of materials, location, electrification and maintenance of all signs and sign structures not located
within a building in the city, is hereby adopted by reference as though set out completely in detail. A copy of the
Uniform Sign Code shall be filed with the city secretary, such copy to be open to public inspection during
normal business hours. (1998 Code, sec. 156.22)
Sec. 3.14.013 Amendments to Code
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/430
The 1997 Uniform Sign Code is hereby amended in the following sections to read as follows:
Chapter 2, Definitions and Abbreviations, section 216-U, UBC Standards, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 3, Permits, Fees, and Inspections, section 304, Fees, is hereby deleted.
Chapter 14, Temporary Signs, section 1402.02, is hereby deleted.
(1998 Code, sec. 156.23)
ARTICLE 3.15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.15.001–3.15.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curbs†
Sec. 3.15.031 Handicap ramps required
(a) Section 228 of the Highway Safety Act of 1973, being 23 USC 402(b)(1)(D), was amended to read as
follows:
(D) Provide adequate and reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of individuals
with disabilities, including those in wheelchairs, across curbs constructed or replaced on or after July
1, 1976, at all pedestrian crosswalks throughout the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.15; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Pursuant to that act, and to be in accord with both federal and state guidelines for the installation of
handicapped access ramps, the city sets forth the following requirements:
(1) Curbs constructed after June 30, 1976, with accompanying sidewalks shall have curb ramps
(depressions in the sidewalks and curb to accommodate a wheelchair user).
(2) Curbs constructed after June 30, 1976, without accompanying sidewalks will not require curb
ramps, but ramps will be required if sidewalks are added later.
(3) Curbs constructed prior to June 30, 1976, are not required to have ramps even though
sidewalks are constructed after June 30, 1976. However, should a curb constructed before June 30,
1976, require altering after June 30, 1976, to fit new construction, then curb ramps shall be installed.
(4) If a property owner or his representative chooses to extend or install a driveway curb across the
sidewalk, the walk shall be ramped.
(c) A permit shall be obtained for removal of a curb for the installation of handicapped access ramps as
required in section 3.15.032(a). New commercial buildings or developments shall be required to install
handicapped access ramps. Ramps shall be installed according to construction details furnished by the building
inspector's office.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.15)
Sec. 3.15.032 Permits for curb removal
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/430
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any curb from a street located in the city
without obtaining a permit from the building inspector.
(b) Application for permit. Any person desiring to remove a portion of curb on a public street shall make
application to the building inspector's office for a permit. The purpose for the curb removal, the location and
length of the proposed curb removal, and such other information as may be determined necessary by the
building inspector for enforcement of this division shall be indicated on the permit. If adequate access to the
property exists or the proposed driveway would increase the hazard, or result in a hazard, to the safe movement
of traffic, the building inspector has the authority to prohibit the removal of a curb in a requested location for a
driveway. If the driveway is part of new construction, the driveway permit may be considered as part of the
building permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.16)
(c) Bond required. A permit shall not be issued for the removal of any curbing until the property owner or
contractor making application for a permit has executed a performance or cash bond in favor of the city to insure
compliance with the requirements of this division. The amount of the bond shall be as listed in article 5.000.
After the provisions of this division have been complied with and so authorized by the building inspector, the
performance or cash bond shall be returned to the property owner or contractor. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted
9/18/18)
Sec. 3.15.033 Removal generally
The removal of any curb pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be done in such a manner as prescribed
by the building inspector. Damage to the curb greater than that necessary to prepare it for the desired opening
shall not be permitted. Such damaged curb shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the building inspector. Failure
to comply with the above shall be deemed a violation of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 96.17)
Sec. 3.15.034 Removal at intersection or turn
It shall be unlawful to remove any portion of a curb at any point on a radius of an intersection or turn, except for
the authorized replacement thereof or the installation of ramps to provide access for physically handicapped
persons, for which a permit has been obtained as required in section 3.15.032(a). (1998 Code, sec. 96.18)
Sec. 3.15.035 Notice prior to slab installation
The property owner or contractor shall notify the building inspector of the proposed pouring of concrete
immediately prior thereto whereby such inspector may determine that the provisions of this division are being
complied with. (1998 Code, sec. 96.19)
Sec. 3.15.036 Slab installation at curb removals
The area between the curbline and property line of the adjacent property shall be concreted the width which such
curb is removed. The minimum distance shall be ten feet. The concrete installed shall be elevated to curb height
at a point between the property line and the curbline with a sloping decrease in the direction of the street from
which the curb was removed and such concrete area shall have a curb on both sides thereof to prevent side
drainage. Sidewalks shall be ramped where the driveway curb is extended across the walk such that it will
provide safe movement of the physically handicapped. Care shall be taken to assure a uniform grade on the ramp
with no short grade changes. The concrete shall be 2500 psi concrete and reinforced with six-inch by six-inch
no. 10 welded wire mesh. Residential driveways shall have a minimum thickness of six inches at the back of the
curb, a minimum thickness of four inches at the property line and shall be placed on well-compacted soil.
Commercial driveways shall have a minimum thickness of six inches. Curb removal for residential driveways
shall be limited to a maximum of 30 feet per opening with a minimum distance along the curb between openings
on each lot of 20 feet. Curb removal for commercial driveways shall be limited to a maximum of 45 feet with a
minimum distance along the curb between openings of 25 feet. (1998 Code, sec. 96.20)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/430
Sec. 3.15.037 Permits and slab installation for curb leave-outs and lay-down type curb openings
In areas where curb and gutter are to be installed by subdividers, developers, contractors, or whomever, the
owner or such person, firm, or corporation desiring curb leave-outs or lay-down type curb openings for
driveways on adjacent property shall be required to install a concrete slab extending from the back of the curb to
the adjacent property line. Before such leave-outs or lay-down type curbs shall be permitted, the owner or such
person, firm or corporation desiring such shall make application for a permit to the building inspector (section
3.15.032(b)) and shall deposit with the city a surety bond or certified check in an amount sufficient to cover the
cost of the installation of the concrete slab, conditioned that applicant shall, within six months from issuance of
permit, or if applicable within six months of completion of the curb adjacent to the property, complete the
installation of the concrete slab to the property line, otherwise to be forfeited as provided herein. The amount of
the surety bond or certified check shall be determined by the building inspector of the city. (1998 Code, sec.
96.21)
Sec. 3.15.038 Time limits for slab installation
Installation of the concrete slab as described in section 3.15.036 or 3.15.037 shall be completed within six
months from the date of the curb permit or the date the curb and gutter installation is complete adjacent to the
property for which the leave-out or lay-down type curb is provided. Failure to complete the installation of the
concrete slab in the specified time shall result in the forfeiture of the surety bond or certified check and the
driveway installation shall be accomplished by the city, using city personnel or the hiring of a contractor. (1998
Code, sec. 96.22)
Sec. 3.15.039 Obstruction or alteration of gutter restricted
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, elevate, diminish or change the elevation of a
gutter line of any street.
(b) Exception. The flow line of a gutter may be changed upon written authorization from the responsible city
official or city manager after submission of evidence that such change would improve or not diminish the flow
characteristics of the gutter.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.23)
Sec. 3.15.040 Angle parking after curb removal restricted
The provisions of this division shall not be construed to authorize angle parking where a curb is removed in
compliance with this division. (1998 Code, sec. 96.24)
Sec. 3.15.041 Conflicts with state transportation commission regulations
In the event provisions of this division are in conflict with the regulations of the state transportation commission,
insofar as they govern and control removal of curbs on state highways, the provisions of the state transportation
commission shall be controlling. (1998 Code, sec. 96.25)
Secs. 3.15.042–3.15.070 Reserved
Division 3. Vegetation Bordering Streets
Sec. 3.15.071 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/430
Street gutter flow line. The street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted
area; in the event there is no such curb, the height restrictions set forth in this division shall be based upon the
actual level of the paved or used portion of the public street adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted
area.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.35)
Sec. 3.15.072 Restricted areas
(a) The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this division are as follows:
(1) All of that portion of land lying within a triangular-shaped area on each street corner within the
city described by metes and bounds as follows: Beginning at the precise corner of the intersection
point of the curbs of each of the two streets forming each corner and extending 20 feet along each
such curbline from said curb intersection point, the third side being determined by the drawing of a
straight line from the ends of such 20-foot extensions; whether said land be privately owned or
unpaved or untraveled street right-of-way property.
(2) Where no curbs are in existence at such street intersections, said 20-foot lines shall coincide
with the central flow line of the ditches paralleling such uncurbed streets as shall be determined by
the city engineer.
(b) Provided, however, that the provisions of this division shall apply only to those areas of the city designated
and classified by the city's zoning ordinance requiring construction of lots in zoned sections to be set back from
the property line of each such lot.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.36)
Sec. 3.15.073 Maximum height of shrubs, hedges, etc.
No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant, hedge, shrub or other growth, except
trees, at a height greater than three feet from the street gutter flow line. (1998 Code, sec. 96.37)
Sec. 3.15.074 Minimum clearance of trees
Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not have branches or foliage extending from
the trunk thereof at a height lower than the heights provided in section 8.01.002(a)(6). (1998 Code, sec. 96.38)
Sec. 3.15.075 City's right of entry and removal
In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this division, the city shall be entitled to
enter upon and remove from the triangular corner areas described in this division any of the growth prohibited
by this division. Such entry and removal shall be without liability to the owners thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 96.39)
Secs. 3.15.076–3.15.100 Reserved
Division 4. Use of Poles, Wires, Pipes and Other Appurtenances*
Sec. 3.15.101 Right of city to regulate property, equipment and fixtures in public ways
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the
erection and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes, and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and
other public ways of the city and from time to time to require such poles, pipes, wires and other property,
equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such
terms as the city may deem proper. (1998 Code, sec. 96.50)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/430
Sec. 3.15.102 Inspection; notice to correct condition
The building inspector, electrical inspector, police officers, and such other persons designated by the city shall
have power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time to time all telegraph, telephone, electric
light or other poles, gas pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures in the public places within the city for the purpose of
seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or
unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be
notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. (1998 Code, sec. 96.51)
Sec. 3.15.103 Compliance with other laws and ordinances
Nothing contained in the provisions of this division is intended to relieve any person of any condition,
restriction, or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 96.53)
Sec. 3.15.104 Provisions do not grant franchise
The provisions of this division shall not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets, easements,
alleys and other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise. The city reserves the
right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. (1998 Code, sec.
96.54)
ARTICLE 3.16 SHIPPING, CARGO, AND STORAGE CONTAINERS
Sec. 3.16.001 Scope
The provisions of this article shall apply to all shipping, cargo, and storage containers, as that term is defined
herein, within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 3.16.002 Definitions
Certain terms are defined for the purpose of this section as follows:
Active building permit. An unexpired and unrevoked building permit for which the building inspector has not
performed a final inspection.
Anchorage system. A system that is designed to make a customary portable storage container become locked to a
permanent placement and to prevent the container from moving.
Applicant. An owner, occupant or authorized agent, or a contractor or person with control of a property or lot.
Non-steel storage container. A portable or moveable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the
storage or shipment of household goods, wares, valuables, or merchandise (typically known as PODS, MODS,
etc.).
Shipping or cargo container. Generally, an all steel container with strength to withstand shipment, storage and
handling. Such containers include reusable steel boxes, freight containers and bulk shipping containers;
originally a standardized reusable vessel that was designed for and used in the parking, shipping, movement,
transportation or storage of freight, articles of goods or commodities; generally capable of being mounted or
moved on a rail car, truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
Sec. 3.16.003 Temporary shipping or cargo container and non-steel storage container use
(a ) No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a shipping or cargo container or non-steel storage
container temporarily on any lot or parcel of property within the city without having obtained and possessing an
active building permit issued by the city planning and development services department related to a permit for
placement of a shipping or cargo container or non-steel storage container; or, possessing an active building
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/430
permit with the shipping or cargo container or non-steel storage container being associated with that permit for
the work being done.
(Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/17)
(1) A permit fee as listed in article 5.000 is required. Exception, permits are provided at no charge
if they are associated with an existing active building permit for work being done (refer to zoning
requirements). (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(2) Permits are valid for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days and can only be purchased one (1)
time per year, unless utilizing an existing active permit for work being done.
(3) Permits that are associated with an existing active building permit for work being done are not
to exceed the existing active building permit's timeframe.
(4) Upon review of a request for an extension; the city may grant one (1) ninety (90) day
extension.
(b) Temporary shipping or cargo containers and non-steel storage containers must abide by building codes in
addition to the following requirements:
(1) A foundation is not required because of temporary status;
(2) Ventilation is not required;
(3) Electricity is an option but not required (must inform the planning and development services
department if electricity is added);
(4) Tie-downs are not required unless electricity is installed.
(c) Temporary shipping and cargo containers and non-steel storage containers must be located on private
property, not on or in any portion of a city right-of-way and must not create a site obstruction for neighboring
properties.
(d) Temporary shipping and cargo containers and non-steel storage containers must be painted a neutral color
that do not create a blight to the community.
(e) Temporary shipping and cargo containers and non-steel storage containers may only be used for storage;
human habitation is strictly prohibited.
(f) Any permit issued for a temporary shipping or cargo container or non-steel storage container use may be
revoked upon ten (10) days' written notice to the applicant, owner, occupant or person in control of the property
if such person is storing, maintaining or otherwise keeping a container in violation of this article. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the planning and development services department to revoke a permit may appeal to
the building standards commission.
(Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/17)
Sec. 3.16.004 Permanent shipping, cargo, and storage container use
(a) No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a shipping or cargo container or nonsteel storage
container permanently on any lot or parcel of property within the city without having obtained and possessing an
active building permit issued by the city planning and development services department related to a permit for
placement of a shipping or cargo container or nonsteel storage container. A permit fee as listed in article 5.000 is
required. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/430
(b) Permanent shipping and cargo containers and non-steel storage containers must abide by building codes in
addition to the following requirements:
(1) A foundation is required for permanent establishments;
(2) A pre-designed anchoring system is required and must be approved by the city;
(3) Ventilation is not required;
(4) Electricity is an option but not required (must inform the planning and development services
department if electricity is added);
(5) All setbacks are to be respected and adhered to.
(c) Permanent shipping and cargo containers and non-steel storage containers may be installed in all zoning
districts (see chart in section 14.03.006) and shall adhere to the following restrictions and requirements:
(1) No shipping or cargo container, or a non-steel storage container can be stacked on top of one
another or on top of any other object.
(2) Shipping or cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers must be behind the main or
primary structure on the lot or parcel of land and are subject to all setback requirements.
(3) Shipping or cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers must be placed toward the rear
half of the property.
(4) Shipping or cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers shall not be used to store
hazardous materials.
(5) Shipping or cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers shall not be used to store and
keep refuse or debris in, against, on, or under the container.
(6) Any shipping or cargo container and/or non-steel storage container shall be secure, structurally
sound, stable, and in good repair.
(7) Shipping and cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers must be painted a neutral
color that does not create a blight to the community.
(8) Permanent shipping and cargo containers and/or non-steel storage containers may only be used
for storage; human habitation is strictly prohibited.
Sec. 3.16.005 Penalties
A violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation
convicted hereunder, shall be punished as specified in section 1.01.009, general penalty for violation of code.
(Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/17)
ARTICLE 3.17 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 3.17.001 Purpose and scope
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of node
support poles and network nodes in the public rights-of-way and on service poles within the city's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and
visual qualities of the city's public rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/430
(b) Intent. In enacting this article, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by
network nodes, including without limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not adversely
affect:
(1) Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) The operation of other facilities lawfully located in public rights-of-way or public property;
(4) The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees;
(5) The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in which network nodes may be
installed; and
(6) The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services.
(c) Conflicts with other chapters. This article supersedes all chapters, parts of chapters, articles, or rules
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict with this article, to the extent that a conflict exists (including article
3.15).
Sec. 3.17.002 Definitions
All terms used in this article, not specifically defined herein, have the meaning provided in chapter 284 of the
Texas Local Government Code.
Applicable law. Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Applicant. Any person who submits an application and is a network provider.
Application. A request submitted by an applicant:
(1) For a permit to collocate network nodes;
(2) To install a transport facility; or
(3) To approve the installation, replacement or modification of a pole.
City code. Those ordinance provisions relevant to use of the public rights-of-way where compliant with
applicable law.
Collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation or replacement of network nodes
in public rights-of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Day. Calendar day.
Design manual. The City of Borger, Texas Public Rights-of-Way Communication Facilities Design Manual. The
design manual is incorporated by reference into this article and the terms and conditions of the design manual
are binding upon any entity acting under any portion of this article. In the event of any discrepancy or ambiguity
between this article, this code, or the design manual, the design manual will control.
Director. The city planning and development services department director or authorized designee.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network. The term includes, but is not limited to: equipment associated with wireless
communications; a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, or comparable equipment,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/430
regardless of technological configuration; and coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a particular collocation. The term does not include: an electric generator; a pole; or a
macro tower.
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network
node.
Permit. A wireless communication facility permit issued by the city, authorizing the installation, removal,
modification, or other work in accordance with the design manual.
Person. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
organization, including the city.
Pole. A service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole.
Rights-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or
waterway. The term does not include a private easement, private property, publicly owned property, or the
airwaves above the city's rights-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Routine maintenance.
(1) Work in the public rights-of-way that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public rights-of-way;
(2) Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar
in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a
public rights-of-way; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes
that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles, in the public rights-of-way.
Technical grounds. In light of prevailing industry and engineering standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity,
safety, reliability and/or generally applicable engineering purposes consistent with applicable law and city code.
Sec. 3.17.003 Design manual incorporated into this article
The design manual is incorporated by reference into this article, and the terms and conditions of the design
manual are binding upon any entity acting under any portion of this article. In the event of any discrepancy or
ambiguity between this article or the design manual and chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code,
chapter 284 shall control.
Sec. 3.17.004 Penalties and correction of deficiencies
(a) Any entity that violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with
section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the
amount specified by state law for such offenses. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Said penalty is cumulative, and not exclusive, of any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(b) Any entity who shall perform work on or about public rights-of-way and in violation of any provision of
this article shall cause said work to be subject to a cease work order and revocation of permit and/or civil legal
remedies as provided by this article.
Sec. 3.17.005 Permitted use; application and fees
(a) Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node support poles, meeting the
parameters set forth in section 3.17.008 below and in applicable law, shall be a permitted use. No zoning or land
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/430
use review shall apply to the collocation of network nodes and/or the placement of node support poles that are
permitted under the requirements of section 3.17.008.
(b) Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport facility or node support pole in the public
rights-of-way, without first filing a permit application and obtaining a permit therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this article.
(c) Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or
electronic, provided by the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly
marking each page of such materials accordingly. (No guarantee of confidentiality is made if a valid request for
information under the Texas Public Information Act is received by the city.)
(d) Application requirements. The permit application shall be made by the network provider or its duly
authorized representative, and shall contain the following:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address.
(2) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any,
acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application.
(3) Construction and engineering drawings and information confirming that the construction will
be consistent with city code.
The director or authorized designee may, in his/her sole discretion, require additional information from the
applicant of a permit, before the director issues said permit.
(e) Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be required for:
(1) Routine maintenance; or
(2) The replacement of a node with another node that is substantially similar.
(f) Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted
in writing to the city within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.
(Ordinance O-010-17 adopted 11/21/17)
(g) Application fees. All applications for nodes and/or support poles in the public rights-of-way permits
pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee as listed in article 9.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted
9/18/18)
Sec. 3.17.006 Insurance
The applicant for a permit shall furnish a certificate of insurance for public liability and property damage, issued
by a solvent insurance company or companies authorized to do business in this state, or evidence of selfinsurance
satisfactory to the city, evidencing that the city is adequately protected from any liability or damages
resulting by virtue of applicant's construction. The insurance requirements of this article are subject to the
insurance requirements listed in the design manual which is incorporated into this article by reference. Upon
receipt of the permit, an applicant assumes the insurance and indemnity requirements provided in the design
manual.
Sec. 3.17.007 Action on permit applications
(a) Review of applications. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and
transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable law and city code and shall issue such permits on
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/430
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, subject to the following requirements:
(1) Within 30 days of receiving an application for a network node or node support pole, or 10 days
for a transport facility, the city shall determine and notify the applicant whether the application is
complete; or if incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information in such
notification. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and resubmit the application within 30 days of
the notice that the application is incomplete without paying an additional application fee.
(2) The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a complete application no later than:
(A) 21 days after receipt of a complete application for a transport facility;
(B) 60 days after receipt of a complete application for a network node; and
(C) 150 days after receipt of a completed application for a new node support pole.
(3) The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for
that denial, including specific provisions of city code or applicable law on which the denial was
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the
application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the
application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall
approve or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended application. The
subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial.
(4) If the city fails to act on an application within the review period specified in this section, the
application shall be deemed approved and a permit issued.
(5) An applicant seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the applicant's discretion, file a
consolidated application and receive permits for up to 30 network nodes. Provided however, the city's
denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same
application. The city shall grant permits for any and all nodes in a single application that it does not
deny, subject to the requirements of this section.
(b) Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city shall
approve and may not deny applications for eligible facilities requests within sixty (60) days according to the
procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c).
Sec. 3.17.008 Network nodes in the public rights-of-way; maximum height; other requirements
(a) Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network nodes in the public rights-of-way
shall be subject to the size limitations specified in chapter 284.003 of the Local Government Code.
(b) Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding
requirements, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that
prohibit installing aboveground structures in public rights-of-way. This requirement or restriction shall not be
interpreted to prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure.
(c) Historic areas and design districts. Subject to the permit application approval time frames in section
3.17.007, a network provider must obtain advance approval from the city before collocating new network nodes
or installing new node support poles in any areas zoned or designated as a historic district or as a design district
if the district has decorative poles. Such installations shall be subject to the design and aesthetic standards of
such areas.
(d) Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node
support pole in a public rights-of-way without the city's nondiscriminatory written consent of the planning and
development services department, but not city council, unless required by state law, if the public rights-of-way is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/430
located in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: (1) not more than 50 feet wide; and
(2) adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is
designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. A network provider shall comply with private deed
restrictions and other private restrictions when installing network nodes in parks and residential areas.
(e) Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace or modify a pole or node in the public rights-ofway
that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this section, shall be subject to applicable zoning
requirements.
Sec. 3.17.009 Effect of permit
(a) Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge
upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
(b) Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation for which a permit is granted not later
than six months after final approval, and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion. Provided,
however, the city may place a longer time limit on completion or grant reasonable extensions of time as
requested by the network provider.
(c) Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated a network node or placed a node support pole
pursuant to a permit, the provider shall be permitted to continue to maintain such collocation or such pole unless
required to remove or relocate under the terms of this article.
(d) Interference with network nodes. An applicant is not entitled to a permit for a network node or other
wireless facility if a previous permit has been issued and the previous applicant's use is still in operation;
provided, however, that if the new applicant can provide evidence that its use of the requested network node or
other wireless facility will not adversely affect or interfere with the use and operation of the existing and
operational network node, or if permission for co-use is obtained from the previous permit holder, then a permit
may be issued.
Sec. 3.17.010 Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the ROW
(a) Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a network provider shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
network node or node support pole within the public rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or
installation of any city improvement in or upon, or operations of the city in or upon, the public rights-of-way.
(b) Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. No permit is required for emergency responses by a
network provider for existing facilities, under circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the
restoration of customer service. Under such circumstances, the party performing the emergency response shall
immediately notify by telephone the planning and development services director and the network provider must
apply to the city for a permit within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response,
including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the rights-of-way and an updated map of
any facilities that were moved or repaired. The city retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any
network node located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall
notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the
city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider after disconnecting or removing a
network node or node support pole.
(c) Abandonment of facilities. The network provider shall notify the city within 90 days of abandonment of a
network node or node support pole within the public rights-of-way. Following receipt of such notice, the city
may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if the city,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/430
or any of its departments, determines, that such removal is necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare
of its citizens.
(Ordinance O-010-17 adopted 11/21/17)
Sec. 3.17.011 Permit fee and public rights-of-way rate
(a) Application fee. The city council may establish a fee for issuance of a permit under this article and any
such fee may be listed in article 9.000 as adopted by the city council. For any entity that is governed by chapter
284 of the Texas Local Government Code, the fee shall be the maximum allowed under said chapter.
(b) Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and made operational a network node in the public
rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay to the city compensation for use of the public rights-of-way in an
amount as listed in article 9.000 for any and all nodes in the city public rights-of-way. For all other utilities, the
fee shall be governed by applicable law or, for entities governed by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government
Code, by the design manual.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(c) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from the public
rights-of-way and cease paying the city compensation for use of the public rights-of-way following removal and
notification to the city of such removal.
(d) Franchise agreements. For any utility that has a franchise agreement with the city, the fee for the use of the
rights-of-way shall be governed by the terms and conditions of the franchise.
(e) Other utilities. For all other utilities, the fee shall be governed by applicable law or, in the event there is no
existing franchise or applicable law, the city council may establish a fee for the use of the city's rights-of-way
that is nondiscriminatory as compared to other utilities and comparable to the fee charged to other utilities.
Sec. 3.17.012 Attachment to service poles in the public rights-of-way
A network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned service poles, consistent with
applicable law and city code, and subject to the requirements specified herein.
(1) Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the terms of this article, prior to
collocating network nodes on service poles.
(2) Make ready. A network provider shall be responsible for costs for make ready work on city
service poles upon which provider seeks to place a network node.
(3) Technical limitations. In the event the city determines, based upon technical grounds, that
inadequate space exists on a service pole to accommodate the proposed network node, such pole may
be replaced by network provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with adequate
space to accommodate the proposed network node.
(4) Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would have to rearrange or adjust any of its
facilities to accommodate a new network node, the city shall use reasonable efforts to work with the
affected providers to coordinate such activity. All make ready work shall comply with NESC, and
other applicable codes. The applicant shall not be responsible for any third-party costs, including
those of other network providers, to adjust existing attachments that are non-compliant with the
NESC and other applicable codes at the time of the application.
(Ordinance O-010-17 adopted 11/21/17)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/430
(5) Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a network node on a service pole in the
public rights-of-way shall be as listed in article 9.000 per pole per year. Subject to the provisions of
section 3.17.011, such compensation together with the application fee and the public rights-of-way
rate as specified in section 3.17.011 shall be the sole compensation that the network provider shall be
required to pay to the city. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(6) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a
service pole in the public rights-of-way and cease paying the attachment fee to the city upon
notification to the city that the facilities have been removed.
Sec. 3.17.013 Transport facilities
Installation of transport facilities, including applicable compensation to the city for such facilities, shall be
governed by chapter 284.055 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance O-010-17 adopted 11/21/17)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.02.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, all definitions of words, terms, and phrases as set forth in the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof. (1998 Code, sec. 110.01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.02.002 Municipal regulation
(a) Residential areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or deliver, or cause to be sold,
dispensed or delivered, any beer, liquor, or any other intoxicating beverage within a residential area in the city.
(b) Approved locations. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on any parcel of land in the city
limits which is not a part of any residential zoned district according to the official zoning map and zoning
ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance O-005-11 adopted 12/20/11)
(c) Hours for sale or serving. No person may sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages at any time not
permitted by this section.
(1) Alcoholic beverages may be sold between 7:00 a.m. and midnight on any day except Sunday.
(2) On Sunday alcoholic beverages may be sold between midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between
10:00 a.m. and midnight with the provision that alcoholic beverages served to customers between
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/430
10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon must be served with food.
(3) A holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license or a private club late hours permit
issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission may also sell or offer for sale alcoholic
beverages between 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any
other day.
(Ordinance O-001-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
(d) Sacramental wine. Nothing in this subsection limits the right of a minister, priest, rabbi, or religious
organization from dispensing sacramental wine for sacramental purposes only.
(e) On/off premises distinction. Retailers selling alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption may be
distinguished from retailers, manufacturers, or distributors who do not sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption.
State law references–Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 105.03; hours of sale of wine and beer retailers, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage
Code, sec. 105.04; hours of sale of beer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 105.05; city's authority to regulate hours of sale of
beer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.32.
Sec. 4.02.003 Sales near a school, church, or hospital
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or engage in the business of selling intoxicating liquor, beer or
wine within the city, whose place of business is within:
(1) 300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospitals; or
(2) 1,000 feet of a private school, if the city council receives a request from the governing body of
a private school.
(3) Subsection (a)(2) above does not apply to the holder of:
(A) A retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross
receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
(B) A retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross
receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or
(C) A wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or
manufacturer's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or
manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in TABC, chapter 102.
(b) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in direct line across intersections.
(c) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/430
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(d) Application of distance requirements:
(1) If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted for a premises the
premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from schools, churches, and other types of
premises established in this code and any other law of the state in effect at that time, the premises
shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or
permit.
(2) On the sale or transfer of the premises or the business on the premises in which a new original
license or permit is required for the premises, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy any distance
requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license were a renewal of a previously
held permit or license.
(3) Subsection (d)(2) does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement prescribed by
subsection (a)(2) for a public school, except that on the death of a permit or license holder or a person
having an interest in a permit or license subsection (d)(2) does apply to the holder's surviving spouse
or child of the holder or person if the spouse or child qualifies as a successor in interest to the permit
or license.
(4) Subsection (d)(1) does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement prescribed by
subsection (a)(2) for a public school if the holder's permit or license has been suspended for a
violation occurring after September 1, 1995, of any of the following provisions of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code:
(A) Sections 11.61(b)(1), (6)–(11), (13), (14), or (20); or
(B) Sections 61.71(a)(5)–(8), (11), (12), (14), (17), (18), (22), or (24).
(e) The city council may also allow variances to the regulations of subsection (a) of this section if the city
council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the
public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant
for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason
after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines a
variance would be in the best interest of the community.
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
(Ordinance O-005-11 adopted 12/20/11)
Sec. 4.02.004 City permit required for dealers, manufacturers, etc.; fee; transferability
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, brew, distill, sell or distribute any wine, beer, liquor or
other alcoholic beverage within the city, or engage in any other activity for which a license or permit is required
by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (this includes a private club permit), without first obtaining a license or
permit to do so from the city. (Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 110.04.1, adopted 7/1/03)
(b) Except as otherwise provided by V.T.C.S., Alcoholic Beverage Code, each holder of a state permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a fee as listed in article 5.000 for
such permit. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(c) All fees levied by this section are due and payable at the time at which the state license and permit fees are
due.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/430
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail, other than a manufacturer
or distributor, to use or display a license or to exercise any privilege granted by a license except at the place,
address, premises and location for which the license is granted. The license shall be displayed at all times in
some conspicuous place at the business so licensed to operate.
(e) No permit or license may be assigned or transferred by the holder thereof.
(Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 110.04.1, adopted 7/1/03)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 4.02.005 Certificate of occupancy or building permit required prior to applying for state license
When applying for an original state license or state permit, any person seeking to carry on a business within the
city required to be licensed under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code shall first obtain from the building official
either a certificate of occupancy (for an existing structure to be used) or a building permit (for construction,
expansion or modification of a structure) for the establishment. (Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 110.05.1, adopted
7/1/03)
Sec. 4.02.006 Hours for consumption
(a) In this section:
(1) A licensed or permitted premises is a public place.
(2) “Standard hours area” means an area which is not an extended hours area.
(3) “Extended hours area” means an area subject to the extended hours of sale provided in section
4.02.002(c)(3) of this code.
(b) In a standard hours area, a person commits an offense if he consumes or possesses with intent to consume
an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., or
on any other day between 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. On Sunday, if any alcoholic beverage is served to customers
between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, then it must be served with food.
(c) In an extended hours area, a person commits an offense if he consumes or possesses with intent to
consume an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and
10:00 a.m., or on any other day between 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. On Sunday, if any alcoholic beverage is served
between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, then it must be served with food.
(d) Private clubs located within the city holding a private club late hours permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission may not permit persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages on club premises at
any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., or on any other day between 2:15 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. On Sunday, if any alcoholic beverage is served between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, then it must be
served with food.
(Ordinance O-001-14, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
State law reference–Hours of consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 105.06.
Sec. 4.02.007 Park alcohol permit
Consumption is permitted in city-owned parks with the issuance of a park alcohol permit. The permit may be
obtained by an individual to allow consumption of alcoholic beverages in city-owned parks for special
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/430
occasions. The permit is obtained through the office of planning and zoning. The following shall be conditions
for issuance of a park alcohol permit:
(1) Consumption of alcohol is not allowed after 11:00 p.m.
(2) Parties of 50 or more shall provide security. Name of security agency shall be required.
(3) Notice to the city police department shall be given three days prior to the event.
(4) No glass containers permitted during the event.
(5) Permittee shall pick up all rubbish and litter prior to the refunding of the permit fee. Inspection
of the area will be conducted by park department personnel the following day after the event.
(6) Police shall have the right to revoke the permit upon any illegal activity reported during or
associated with the event. Any illegal activity shall constitute forfeiture of permit fee.
(Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 11.006.1, adopted 7/1/03)
(7) All park alcohol permits require payment of a fee as listed in article 4.000. (Ordinance O-008-
18 adopted 9/18/18)
(8) Permittee shall remain on site during the event.
(9) No park alcohol permit will be issued at the following parks:
(A) Johnson Park Youth Facility (Dawg House).
(B) Johnson Park Swimming Pool.
(C) Agnes Howe Youth Park.
(D) Huber Baseball Stadium.
(E) Huber Park Community Building.
(Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 11.006.1, adopted 7/1/03)
Sec. 4.02.008 Prima facie evidence of consumption
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Open container. Includes bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages which have had the seal broken, but
have the cap or lid on the container, and shall also include containers such as cups, mugs, glasses, thermos
bottles and flasks.
Possession. Includes being in close proximity to an open container of alcoholic beverage and not just the
physical possession of said container.
(Ordinance O-008-03, sec. 110.07, adopted 7/1/03)
ARTICLE 4.03 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Division 1. Generally
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/430
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police department, which is designed either to be
initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized
intrusion.
Alarm site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are
under the control of one owner.
Alarm system. Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal
acts or unauthorized entries by warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry, through the emission of a
sound or the transmission of a signal or message. Alarm systems do not include an alarm installed on a vehicle
unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site.
Automatic alarm notification. An alarm notification sent over telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise,
a prerecorded voice message, synthesized voice message, or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
Central station. An office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and/or where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
Chief. The chief of police of the city or his authorized representative.
False alarm notification. An alarm notification to the police department, when the responding officer finds no
evidence of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to
take a person hostage.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a
structure.
Permit holder. The person designated in the application as required in section 4.03.031 who is responsible for
responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also responsible for proper maintenance and
operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.01, adopted 9/21/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.03.002 Implementation of provisions; exemptions
(a) This article shall apply to any person who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system at any alarm
site.
(b) This article shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state, or federal governmental entities and
shall not apply to those private alarm systems which do not summon the police or fire department by direct
connection via an electrical device.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.02, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.003 Nonliability of city
The application to the city or its designated agent shall contain a provision that the city shall not be liable for any
failure of service or damages, including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, that might result from
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/430
the installation or operation of any receiving station alarm, automatic dialing device, or local alarm. All
applicants must agree to indemnify the city for all claims, demands, judgments, or other liability in a form
satisfactory to the city attorney. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.03, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.004 Violations; penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, or other association to violate any of the provisions
of this article, and any such person, corporation, partnership or other association which violates a provision of
this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.04,
adopted 9/21/04)
Secs. 4.03.005–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.03.031 Required; fee; application; transferability; false statements; cancellation
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm
permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm system. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec.
98.15, adopted 9/21/04)
(b) An initial fee as listed in article 5.000 shall be charged for the issuance of each permit. (Ordinance O-008-
18 adopted 9/18/18)
(c) Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required fee, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to
an applicant, unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 4.03.068 or has had an
alarm permit for the alarm system revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected.
(d) Each permit application must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the permit holder who will be responsible for the
proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this
article.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.15, adopted 9/21/04)
(2) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, such as
burglary, robbery, or personal hostage. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.15, adopted 9/21/04; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(3) Other information required by the chief which is necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(e) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit
shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit.
(f) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another alarm system except by authorization of the chief. A
permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application
within two business days. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
(g) A permit holder shall cancel a permit for any alarm system which is removed from an alarm site or which
otherwise ceases to come under the permitting requirements of this article. Cancellation may be accomplished
by returning the permit to the chief.
(h) All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/430
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.15, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.032 Duration; renewal
A permit is issued for an indefinite period and must be renewed only if installing a new alarm system, or if an
existing alarm system is significantly modified. (Ordinance O-002-05, sec. 98.16, adopted 2/1/05)
Sec. 4.03.033 Revocation
(a) The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit;
(2) The permit holder has violated any part of this article;
(3) The permit holder has failed to make payment of a service fee assessed under section 4.03.068
within 30 days of receiving notice to do so.
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is
revoked.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.17, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.034 Appeal from denial, revocation, or suspension
(a) If the chief refuses to issue a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The
applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city secretary by written request for a
hearing, setting forth the reason for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the chief. The
filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city secretary stays an action of the chief in revoking a permit
until the city secretary or his or her designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal
hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief is final. (Ordinance 002-05 adopted 2/1/05)
(b) The city secretary shall set a time and place for the hearing which shall be served upon the applicant or
permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city secretary, or his or her representative, shall
serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of
evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence and
shall have the right of cross examination. The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence within 15 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The time for
hearing an appeal may be extended by agreements of the parties. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or
modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the
city. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.18, adopted 9/21/04)
Secs. 4.03.035–4.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Operation and Maintenance
Sec. 4.03.061 Proper operation and maintenance required
(a) A permit holder shall:
(1) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that insures proper operation of
the alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/430
(3) Respond within 30 minutes or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of
time when requested by the chief to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide
access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than occurrence of an event that the alarm
system was intended to report;
(5) Notify the police department prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance purposes.
(b) A permit holder shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal
will sound for no longer than 30 minutes after being activated.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.30, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.062 Alarm reset required
A permit holder of an alarm system that utilizes a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the
mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation, the local alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without
first being reset. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.31, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.063 Indirect alarm reporting
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief.
(2) Comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the
chief.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.32, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.064 Recorded message alarm notification prohibited
Following the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted September 21, 2004), no permit will be issued for
the use of systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded
message directly to the police department. (Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.33, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.065 Operating instructions to be maintained at alarm site
A permit holder shall maintain, at each alarm site, a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm
system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions. (Ordinance O-
011-04, sec. 98.34, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.066 Alarm dispatch records
(a) The police dispatcher receiving the alarm notification and/or the officer responding to a dispatch resulting
from a burglary, robbery or personal hostage notification shall cause to be recorded in the police information
systems such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including but not limited to the
following information:
(1) Identification of the permit holder,
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Dispatcher-received time, dispatch time, and officer-arrived-at-scene time;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/430
(4) Date of occurrence;
(5) Name of permit holder's representative on premises, if any.
(b) The responding police officer shall prepare and submit the appropriate reports in regard to any criminal
offenses, attempts, or other incidents which contributed to the alarm notification as determined by investigation.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.35, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.067 System performance reviews and consultations
(a) If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that insures
proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder to
review circumstances of each false alarm.
(b) If there is belief that an alarm is the result of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the permit
holder, the permit holder or the permit holder's representative may request a conference with the chief.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.36, adopted 9/21/04)
Sec. 4.03.068 Service fee
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, the holder of an alarm permit or alarm
site, responded to upon call, shall pay a fee for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm system as
listed in article 5.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) If a person notifies the chief and applies for an alarm permit before a new alarm system is put into service,
no service fee will be assessed during the first 60 days after the system is put into service, and alarm
notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee shall be assessed.
(c) If the responding police officer determines that an alarm notification was caused by unauthorized
intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to take a person hostage, that
notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.
(d) An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the
permittee can prove that the alarm notification was the result of a severe weather condition, such as a tornado,
earthquake, or other weather condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of a
malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals, proof of the latter being
documented in the form of telephone company work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company
showing the periods of interrupted service.
(e) In the event a permit holder or alarm site which is responded to by the police department does not timely
pay a service fee charge called for in this section, the police chief shall file a complaint in the proper court to
force collection.
(Ordinance O-011-04, sec. 98.37, adopted 9/21/04)
ARTICLE 4.04 JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Junk. Scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead, zinc and all metallic substances, secondhand watches, knives, guns,
cameras, jewelry, fishing equipment and similar items, handled, purchased, received or offered for sale by
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/430
dealers in junk, and shall mean and include secondhand plumbing and electric fixtures, wires, globes, brass pipe,
lead pipe and pipe of other metals, melted metals of any kind, such parts of machinery or machines that may be
identified as such, any fixture pertaining to a residence, business house or other house of any kind, automobile
accessories, including horns, hubcaps, prestolite tanks, tires and all detached and detachable parts of any
automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or motor vehicle of any kind, or any vehicle of any kind, hydrants, faucets, lawn
hoses, lawn sprinklers, gas fixtures, fittings and appliances, garden tools, mechanical tools of every description,
harnesses, rags, rubber, rope, bottles and utensils of every description. The enumeration of the articles above
shall not be held to exclude other articles that may be reasonably included under the general definition of junk,
when given its usual trade meaning.
Junk dealer. Any person primarily engaged in collecting, handling, buying or selling any of the articles defined
as “junk,” but shall not include licensed pawnbrokers nor any person purchasing junk from licensed dealers
exclusively.
(1998 Code, sec. 112.01)
Sec. 4.04.002 Purchases of junk from intoxicated persons and minors
No junk dealer shall receive or purchase any junk from any intoxicated person or from any person under the age
of 18 years, except upon the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor, and in that event, such
writing shall be preserved by such junk dealer for a period of not less than six months thereafter for public
inspection. When any such purchase is made from any minor with such consent, a notation of the same shall be
made in the book or register required by section 4.04.003 to be kept by such dealer. (1998 Code, sec. 112.02)
Sec. 4.04.003 Records required to be kept by dealers
(a) Each junk dealer shall keep an accurate daily record of each article purchased, and the time when
purchased, and also an accurate description of the person selling the article, giving his name, color, sex, age and
residence. All such entries shall be made at the time of the purchase.
(b) Every junk dealer is hereby required to keep and maintain a record, used exclusively for such purposes, in
which at the time of the transaction and coincident therewith shall be explicitly, plainly and intelligently written
in ink and in the English language, without alterations or erasure, the name, residence and street number of the
person or the agent, messenger or drayman of such person, and the race of the person from whom such junk was
purchased or obtained, the nature of the junk and, if the same is a finished product or several parts of the same,
then each of such parts shall be separately listed and described, including serial number if any and any other
descriptive marks or symbol. There shall also be recorded the day of the week, month and year when such
purchase was made, and whether or not the person from which such junk was obtained was male or female. Such
record shall further contain the source and place from which the junk came or was obtained. When any junk
dealer shall receive junk from any common carrier from a point without the limits of the city, the record herein
required to be kept by junk dealers shall be sufficient if it shows the name of such common carrier, and the
nature of the material received, and gives the name and address of the person from whom the same was received.
(1998 Code, sec. 112.03)
Sec. 4.04.004 Examination of records and junk by police
(a) Inspection of records. The records specified in section 4.04.003 shall be accessible at all reasonable times
to the police of the city or any other peace officer, and all such police officers and peace officers shall have the
right, at all reasonable times, to examine such records when searching or looking for lost or stolen articles or in
determining whether or not the provisions of this article are being kept and observed. Any person who refuses to
permit any such officers to inspect such records shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Examination of junk. Every junk dealer shall at all reasonable times allow the chief of police or some
other police officer the privilege of examining all articles of junk he may have received, whether at his place of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/430
business or elsewhere, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the articles are lost or stolen property.
(1998 Code, sec. 112.04; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.05 OIL, GAS, DISPOSAL, OR INJECTION WELLS*
Sec. 4.05.001 Drilling permit
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, acting either for himself or acting as agent,
employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill a disposal or injection
well or to drill for oil or gas within the city without a permit for the drilling of such well having first been issued
by the chief building and utility inspector.
(b) Limited to one well. Each permit issued for the drilling of an oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within the
city shall be limited to only one such well, and no such permit shall be issued for more than one such well.
(c) Applications.
(1) Generally. Every application for a permit to drill an oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within
the city shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign the
same on his behalf and it shall be filed with the office of the chief building and utility inspector.
(2) Contents. The application for a permit to drill an oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within the
city shall include and contain full and complete information relative thereto, which such information
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(A) Name and address of drilling contractor or person drilling the well;
(B) Description of land where well is to be located and authorized location;
(C) Location of tank batteries and treaters;
(D) Location of lines to batteries and treaters.
(Ordinance O-007-12 adopted 8/21/12)
(d) Filing fee. A filing fee as listed in article 5.000 shall accompany each application for a permit to drill an
oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within the city. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(e) Insurance. Prior to the issuance of any permit for the drilling of an oil, gas, disposal, or injection well
within the city, the person engaged in such drilling operation or making application for such permit shall file
with the chief building and utility inspector a certificate of insurance providing coverage of $100,000.00 for
bodily injuries or death for one person; $300,000.00 for one accident; and $50,000.00 for property damages.
Also, a certificate reflecting such insurance to be in full force and effect during the life of the well shall be filed
with the city.
Sec. 4.05.002 Location
(a) Wells. No oil, gas, disposal, or injection well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any such
well to be drilled within the city, at any location which is nearer than 300 feet from any church, school,
residence, or building where a business is carried on therein.
(b) Batteries; treaters. Tank batteries and treaters constructed in connection with any oil, gas, disposal, or
injection well shall not be located within 300 feet of any church, school, residence or building where business is
carried on therein.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/430
(c) Open pits. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an open pit within 300 feet of any church,
school, residence or building where business is carried on therein, and all pits located within the city shall be
enclosed with a fence in accordance with the provisions of section 4.05.007.
Sec. 4.05.003 Prohibited equipment
(a) Wooden derricks. It shall be unlawful for any person to use connection with the drilling or reworking of
any oil, gas, disposal, or within the city any wooden derrick.
(b) Steam-powered rigs. It shall be unlawful for any person to use connection with the drilling or reworking of
any oil, gas, disposal, or within the city any steam-powered rig.
Sec. 4.05.004 Required equipment
(a) Rotary rigs. All drilling operations conducted at any oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within the city
shall be done by rotary rigs only.
(b) Mufflers for engines. All engines used in the drilling of oil, gas, disposal, or injection wells shall be
equipped with adequate mufflers.
Sec. 4.05.005 Requirement of electric power
The motive power for all pumping operations connected with the drilling of oil, gas, disposal, or injection wells
shall be electricity.
Sec. 4.05.006 Pits
Only one earthen pit shall be permitted in connection with the drilling of any oil, gas, disposal, or injection well.
All pits shall be removed within 60 days from completion of the well. Earthen pits shall be filled and leveled.
Sec. 4.05.007 Fences
(a) Required.
(1) Any person who shall construct, erect or operate any oil, gas, disposal, or injection well shall
enclose such well, together with its surface facilities, by a substantial smooth net wire fence at least
six feet high, with an additional ten inches in height with three strands of barbed wire, properly built
so as to keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. Such fence shall be constructed within 60
days following completion of the well.
(2) After removal of the drilling rig from the drilling location of an oil, gas, disposal, or injection
well, the operator, driller or lessee of the oil and gas rights shall erect a substantial, smooth net wire
fence six feet high, which fence shall enclose all temporary tanks, equipment and other surface
fixtures. Such fence shall be erected within three days after removal of the rig from the well.
(b) To be locked. All fences required to be constructed around an oil, gas, disposal, or injection well shall be
provided with gates, which such gates shall be kept locked when no work is being performed at such well by
authorized persons.
Sec. 4.05.008 Escaping gas
No person engaged in drilling or operating any oil, gas, disposal, or injection well shall permit gas to escape or
be vented into the air unless such gas be flared and burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe, or any
other burning device within the city must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any
property.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/430
Sec. 4.05.009 Sanitary standards for premises
The premises of each oil, gas, disposal, or injection well within the city shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the city code enforcement officer, at all
times drilling operations or reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as the well is in
operation.
(Ordinance O-007-12 adopted 8/21/12)
Sec. 4.05.010 Reservation of city's right to injunctive relief
By the enforcement of the provisions of this article, the city does not waive any rights to institute proceedings in
a district court for injunctive relief by reason of violation hereof. (1998 Code, sec. 113.10)
ARTICLE 4.06 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Agent. A person who undertakes to transact some business or manage some affair for another person by the
authority and on the account of the latter.
Canvasser. A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without prior
specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to enlist support for
or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such
purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause; a person distributing a handbill
or flyer advertising a noncommercial event or service.
Charitable purpose. A philanthropic or other nonprofit objective, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, or
handicapped persons; the benefit of patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal,
social or civic organization; or the benefit of any educational institution.
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires real property, service, money or credit for personal, family, or
household purposes.
Consumer transaction. A sales transaction in which one or more of the parties is a consumer.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Distributor. Any person who attempts only to distribute handbills, advertising flyer or printed information
pertinent to political, religious or other community issues. Distributor may not knock on doors or attempt to
make face to face contact with citizens. (Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Fixed business location. A location within the city which complies with the zoning ordinance and building codes
and which is occupied by the same business for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. (Ordinance O-003-13
adopted 3/19/13)
Home solicitation. The engaging or the attempt to engage personal contact with a person at his or her residence
without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident for any of the purposes listed under “peddlers,
solicitors, canvassers and distributors.” (Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/430
Home solicitation transaction. A consumer transaction for the purpose of the sale or rental of goods, services, or
realty, payable either in installments or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the
sale to the consumer at a residence, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence
to the merchant. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a preexisting revolving
charge account or retail charge agreement, or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a
business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale, or a sale
made pursuant to prior negotiations by phone where the consumer initiates the transaction and requests home
delivery of the goods, or a sale of realty in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate
broker.
Ice cream truck. Any motor vehicle in which ice cream, ice milk, sherbet, yogurt, water ices, snow cones, frozen
confectionery products, or other frozen dairy or nondairy products of any kind are carried for the purpose of
retail sale on the streets and/or public rights-of-way of the city.
Ice cream truck vendor. A roving peddler offering for retail sale: ice cream, ice milk, sherbet, yogurt, water ices,
snow cones, frozen confectionery products, or other frozen dairy or nondairy products of any kind with the sale
being consummated on a public right-of-way. For the purpose of permitting pursuant to this article, a person
operating an ice cream truck is considered to be a “peddler.”
Itinerant vendor or hawker. All persons, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in a transient retail
business in the city, by selling or offering for sale any goods, merchandise, services, including food products, or
taking orders for any of the aforementioned, who set up and operate a transient retail business, whether it is from
a stand, vehicle, or is freestanding, on privately owned property, whether the property is improved or
unimproved.
Local retail business. A fixed business located and operated within the boundaries of the county.
Merchant. A party to a consumer transaction, other than the consumer.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Mobile street vendor. Persons who offer food or drink or other commodities for sale from a motor vehicle or any
other conveyance in a public place. (Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Occupant. A person who resides in a residence permanently, or for an extended period of time. (Ordinance O-
003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Peddler. Any person who engages in commercial activities within the city limits by carrying goods or
merchandise and selling or offering for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from door-todoor.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Person. An individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
Police department. The police department of the city.
Political purpose. Any form of communication related to a political issue, a particular candidate to a position or
nonpartisan office, a political committee as defined by state law, or to a political party.
Religious purpose. Any form of communication related to a church, religious society, or other religious sect,
group, or order.
Residence. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within
any type of building or structure.
Resident. Shall have the same meaning as “occupant.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/430
Solicitation. The engaging or the attempt to engage in personal contact with a consumer including, but not
limited to the purposes listed under “itinerant vendor or hawker.”
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Solicitor. Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit, door-to-door, funds or orders for services, commercial
goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions or publications to be delivered at a future date or time. (Ordinance O-
011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Special event. Any occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows, exhibitions, citywide celebrations,
farmers markets, festivals, market days, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city for a period
established and/or approved by the city council (or its duly authorized representatives) and/or the appropriate
organizing body.
Sunset. The time of day identified by the National Weather Service as the time of sunset on that day in the city.
Transient retail business. A business that sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, services or merchandise,
including food products, to the general public without utilizing a fixed business location.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Sec. 4.06.002 Exceptions
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Vendors of newspapers, farmers and growers of farm and garden produce.
(2) Persons selling agricultural products, which are raised or produced by them, within the city
farmer's market.
(3) Any federal, state, or local government employee.
(4) Special events as from time to time authorized by the city council.
(5) Persons distributing nonprofit pamphlets, handbills or other printed material for the purpose of
disseminating news or other information of public interest.
(6) Persons conducting fundraising activities for local nonprofit organizations, qualified civic
organizations or educational institutions.
(7) Persons conducting proselytizing activities or distributing religious material or literature.
(8) Persons engaged in a business or activity regulated under the exclusive authority of the state or
federal government.
(9) Persons engaged in business activity and going to a house or business at the express invitation
of the occupant or owner of such house or business.
(10) Canvassers who attempt only to distribute “nonadvertising for profit” handbills or to solicit
political support or to determine opinions or sentiments.
(11) Individuals who are engaged in, belonging to, or member of, an entity of the Borger
Independent School District, Frank Phillips College District, a qualified civic organization; nonprofit
organization; or religious organization, as determined by a city official, for the express purpose of
fundraising, when no other permits are required.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/430
(b) Persons who are exempt from the permitting requirements are encouraged to notify the city official of the
approximate dates of door-to-door activities and the areas in which they will be working.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. 4.06.003 Home Solicitation Sales Act
A peddler or solicitor shall comply with the requirements of the Home Solicitation Sales Act provided for in
chapter 601 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code. In addition to any other rights or remedies available, a
consumer may cancel a consumer transaction not later than midnight of the third business day after the date the
consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase. A solicitor must provide a consumer notice and a complete
cancellation form, as provided for in sections 601.052 and 601.053 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code,
at the time a consumer signs an agreement.
Sec. 4.06.004 Issuance of receipts
A transient retail business shall, if requested by the customer, issue the customer a receipt in the name of such
business, as shown on the permit application, and it must include the address and current phone number of said
business.
Sec. 4.06.005 Prohibited conduct and misrepresentation
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Peddle or solicit goods, wares, merchandise, food, or service with the city without first having
obtained a peddler or solicitor's permit and paid all fees that are applicable in obtaining said permit.
(2) Make physical contact with a potential customer unless that customer's permission is obtained,
or unless that customer's permission is reasonably implied under the circumstances.
(3) Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation.
(4) Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the activity of a peddler or solicitor.
(5) Continue efforts to peddle or solicit from any individual once that individual informs the
peddler or solicitor that he or she does not wish to give anything to or to buy anything from that
peddler or solicitor.
(6) Represent the issuance of any permit under this article as an endorsement or recommendation.
(7) Make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of his or her goods,
services, wares, merchandise, or food for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.
Secs. 4.06.006–4.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Peddlers, Solicitors, Canvassers, Distributors, and Mobile Street Vendors
Sec. 4.06.031 Exceptions
The provisions of this division (unless specifically prohibited by citation within a specific section) shall not
apply to the following:
(1) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares, merchandise, services,
and food to persons engaged in the business of buying, selling, and dealing in the same within the
city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/430
(2) Any federal, state, or local government employee or an employee of a public utility company
operating under a franchise granted by the state or the city, in the performance of his or her official
duties.
(3) Noncommercial solicitations, sales, or distributions for purposes for fundraising or generating
profits by religious, nonprofit, charitable, political, business, or educational organizations which have
their principal place of activity within the county.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Sec. 4.06.032 Posting of signs refusing peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, and distributors
It shall be lawful for the owner or occupant of any property desiring that no peddlers, solicitors, canvassers,
distributors or other persons engage in a home solicitation at his or her residence, to exhibit in a conspicuous
place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a weatherproof sign, not less than three (3) inches by four
(4) inches in size, containing the words, “no solicitors.” The letters shall not be less than two-thirds (2/3) of an
inch in height.
Sec. 4.06.033 Restricted entrance to premises
(a) Every peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or distributor upon going onto the premises upon which a residence is
located, shall first examine the residence to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited upon or
near the main entrance to the residence. If notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the peddler, solicitor,
canvasser, or distributor shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant, unless the
visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
(b) No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door, or
create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose
of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation
transaction, if a sign as described in subsection (a) of this section is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or
near the main entrance to the residence, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
(c) No peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or distributor shall use or attempt to use an entrance other than the front or
main entrance to the residence, or step from the sidewalk or other indicated walkway (where one exists) leading
from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of
the residence.
Sec. 4.06.034 Identification required
Every peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or distributor shall identify himself or herself upon initiating uninvited
contact with a person at a residence, and explain his or her purpose in initiating said contact with the resident.
Sec. 4.06.035 Hours of operation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or distributor to engage in any business of
peddling, soliciting, canvassing, or distributing within the city at any time on Sunday and prior to 8:30 a.m. or
after 7:30 p.m., on Monday through Thursday, or prior to 8:30 a.m. or after 8:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, or
after sunset on any day, whichever is earlier.
(b) No peddling, soliciting, canvassing, or distributing shall be permitted between sunset and 8:30 a.m. the
following day. This prohibition applies to every person, including those associated with institutions, groups or
organizations with a principal place of activity in the county.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/430
(c) Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, or distributors shall not engage in solicitation activities at any time on
New Year's Day, July 4th, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve or Christmas Day.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. 4.06.036 Solicitation by minors
No person under thirteen (13) years of age shall peddle or solicit, even if the minor is exempt from this article,
unless such minor is actively supervised by an adult individual of at least eighteen (18) years of age. The
supervising adult shall be within one hundred (100) yards of the minor peddler or solicitor at all times. This
section also applies to persons associated with those institutions, groups or organizations which have their
principal place of activity within the county. (Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Sec. 4.06.037 Distribution of handbills or flyers
In addition to other regulations contained herein, a peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or distributor that distributes
handbills, flyers, or other printed literature shall observe the following regulations: (Ordinance O-011-16
adopted 9/20/16)
(1) No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any sign, utility pole, or other structure
within the public right-of-way. Law and code enforcement personnel are authorized to remove any
handbill or flyer found within the right-of-way.
(2) No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any privately owned property in a manner
that causes damage to such privately owned property.
(3) Any person observed distributing handbills, flyers or other printed literature shall be required to
identify himself or herself to law or code enforcement personnel, either by producing a municipally
issued license or other federal or state issued form of identification. This identification is required for
the purpose of documentation of the identity of those responsible for damage caused, in the event that
the city receives a complaint of damage to private property during the distribution of handbills,
flyers, or other printed literature.
(4) This section also applies to persons associated with those institutions, groups or organizations
which have their principal place of activity within the county.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Sec. 4.06.038 Special requirements for mobile street vendors
(a) Mobile street vendors shall be required to comply and it shall be an offense not to comply with any of the
following special instructions:
(1) A person shall vend only when the motor vehicle is lawfully stopped.
(2) A person shall vend only from the side of the motor vehicle away from moving traffic and as
near as possible to the curb or side of street.
(3) A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway.
(4) A person shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to vend.
(5) A person shall not stop or park in a congested area where vending might impede or
inconvenience the public.
(6) A person shall not vend in a street adjacent to a public school.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/430
(7) A person shall not stop or park for the purposes of vending within one hundred feet of a street
intersection.
(b) A mobile food vendor shall not use any outcry, sound, speaker, amplifier, or any instrument, or device
which can be heard from a distance greater than three hundred feet.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Secs. 4.06.039–4.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Itinerant Vendors
Sec. 4.06.061 Exceptions
The provisions of this division (unless specifically prohibited by citation within a specific section) shall not
apply to the following:
(1) Solicitation of charitable contributions in a roadway by employees or agents of the city, which
are permitted by the Texas Transportation Code, chapter 552.0071(a).
(2) The sale of frozen dairy or nondairy products from ice cream trucks by a properly permitted ice
cream truck vendor on the streets and rights-of-way of residential areas and public parking lots
adjacent to city parks.
Sec. 4.06.062 Solicitation on streets and rights-of-way
(a) For the purpose of solicitation under this section, a “roadway” is defined to include the roadbed, shoulder,
median, curbs, gutters, safety zones, sidewalks, and utility easements located adjacent to or near the roadway.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, hawk, sell, solicit, or distribute, or in any manner sell, barter
or exchange, or offer to sell, barter or exchange, any goods, wares, services, food items, patent medicines, or
nostrums of any character upon any roadway, public rights-of-way, or any other public property.
(c) No person may stand in a roadway or other public right-of-way to solicit a contribution, employment or
business from an occupant of a vehicle. This section also prohibits the solicitation of a charitable contribution in
a roadway or other public right-of-way from an occupant of a vehicle.
(d) It shall be lawful to stop or park trucks or other vehicles in the streets or alleys of the city for the purposes
of delivering produce, products, or merchandise to the occupants of any business, residence, or other structure
not specifically prohibited by some other ordinance or statute.
Sec. 4.06.063 Solicitation on vacant lots or tracts
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit business from a lot or tract of land within the city that is vacant,
without having previously obtained written permission for the solicitation from the owner or person in control of
said lot or tract; and without having applied and met all requirements under this article to obtain a peddlers
permit that must be carried at all times while engaging in such solicitation.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Secs. 4.06.064–4.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Permits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/430
Sec. 4.06.091 Permit required for peddlers, solicitors, itinerant vendors, hawkers, distributors, and
mobile street vendors; available for canvassers
(a) No person shall act as a peddler, solicitor, hawker, distributor, mobile street vendor, or operate a transient
retail business in the city without having been issued a permit from the city. A canvasser is not required to have
a permit; however, any canvasser wanting a permit for the purpose of reassuring city residents of the canvasser's
purpose for conducting a canvas, shall be issued a permit upon request.
(b) Each person acting as in or attempting to act as peddler, solicitor, hawker, distributor, mobile street vendor,
or operate a transient retail business in the city must have a permit issued under the terms of this section. Such
permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced, assigned, or transferred to any other
person. Any such attempt to reproduce, assign, or transfer shall render the permit void.
Sec. 4.06.092 Application
(a) There are two types of permits, a master's permit and an individual permit. A master's permit is required in
every instance to act as a peddler, solicitor, hawker, distributor, mobile street vendor, or operate a transient retail
business. In addition, for partnerships, corporations, associations, etc. in which multiple persons will be acting as
a peddler, solicitor, hawker, distributor, mobile street vendor, or operate a transient retail business, individual
permits must be issued for each individual engaging in said conduct.
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
(b) Applications for a master's or individual permit under this article must be filed in writing on the forms
prescribed and furnished by the city. A separate application for a master permit must be completed for each
location requested and shall include the following information:
(1) Whether the applicant applying for a permit is an individual, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
(A) If an individual, the individual's business or residence address and telephone number;
(B) If a partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address, and telephone
number of each partner;
(C) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether the corporation is organized
under the laws of this state or is a foreign corporation, the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, names of all officers, directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if a
foreign corporation, the place of incorporation and registered agent for this state.
(2) The driver's license number and state of issuance, date of birth, or similar information obtained
from another form of government-issued picture identification.
(3) If required by law, a copy of the person's Texas Sales and Use Tax permit and any health
permits or licenses required to conduct business by the state.
(4) A physical description of the applicant including height, weight, color of hair, and color of
eyes.
(5) The applicant's principal place of business including address and phone number.
(6) The kinds of goods, wares, merchandise, food, or services that the applicant wishes to sell,
barter, or trade within the city.
(7) Description of each motor vehicle including current registration and current insurance that is to
be used by the peddler or solicitor in the course of the peddling or soliciting activity.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/430
(8) Names of other communities in the state in which the applicant has applied for and received a
permit to act as a peddler, solicitor, hawker or to operate a transient retail business.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
(9) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude in the past ten (10) years. (Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
(10) In the case of a transient retail business, the location and dates for which business is to be
conducted; and the name, address, and contact phone number of the property owner. The applicant
must also show that he or she has the expressed written consent from the property owner upon which
the transient retail business will be located. (Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
(11) If a person applying for a master permit intends to contract with, employ, or otherwise retain
individuals which will act as a peddler, solicitor, hawker, distributor, mobile street vendor, or operate
a transient retail business, the applicant must identify and furnish sufficient information to process an
application for an individual permit on each individual.
(12) A copy of each person's computerized criminal history.
https://records.txdps.state.tx.us/DpsWebsite/CriminalHistory
(Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. 4.06.093 Applicable fees
There shall be no permit fees for a canvasser's master or individual permit. For all other permits granted under the
provisions of this division, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as listed in article 3.000 for the type and
validity period of the permit desired. This fee shall not be prorated, shall be paid at the time the application is made, and
shall not be returned to the applicant regardless of whether a permit is issued. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 4.06.094 Validity period
Canvassers permits are valid from the date of issuance through sunset on December 31st of any given year. All
other permits expire the earlier of the seventh (7th), fourteenth (14th), thirtieth (30th), or ninetieth (90th) day, or
at sunset on December 31st of any given year.
Sec. 4.06.095 Properly zoned location
Before a transient retail permit may be issued to an applicant under the provisions in this article, the city must
certify that the location is properly zoned for commercial use and that the location has adequate parking for
customers and agents exclusive of any public right-of-way. Any property owner, tenant, or lessee who allows a
transient retail business to utilize their private property shall be responsible, along with the transient retail
business, for compliance with any zoning ordinances pertaining to such property.
Sec. 4.06.096 Permit displayed
Every transient retail business having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business
within the city, shall display the valid permit in full view at all times while engaged in said business. In addition,
the transient retail business must also display in full view his or her current Texas Sales Tax and Use permit, and
if selling or distributing food or other items requiring a state or federal permit, all of those permits as well.
Sec. 4.06.097 Maximum number of annual permits
A maximum of two (2) permits may be granted under this article in any period from January 1st through
December 31st of any given year, provided that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions in this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/430
article, the applicant has not violated this article in a previous issuance, and the applicant pays all fees required
to obtain each permit.
Sec. 4.06.098 Issuance
The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit no later than ten (10)
business days after the filing of a completed application for a permit under this article.
Sec. 4.06.099 Denial, suspension, and revocation
(a) Any application for permit may be denied, and any permit issued under this article may be suspended, or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting business as outlined in this article.
(3) Conducting business in any way contrary to the provisions of this article.
(4) Conducting business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to
public health, safety, or welfare.
(5) Suspension or cancellation of health department authorization for food and beverage peddlers.
(b) An applicant is not qualified to receive a permit if the applicant:
(1) Is currently, or has been within ten (10) years preceding date of application on parole,
probation, or deferred adjudication for sexual assault, armed robbery, kidnapping, burglary, assault,
weapons violations, or felony theft (each as defined in the Texas Penal Code and includes offenses of
a different name in another state but with similar elements and penalties), unless the applicant has
had no subsequent conviction or deferred adjudication for a period of ten (10) years (excluding class
C offenses) following the applicant's release from prison or completion of probation, community
supervision, or parole, whichever is later.
(2) Is currently a registered sex offender or a person subject to registration.
(3) Has affiliation, membership, or associates with a known street gang or criminal enterprise.
(4) Has been convicted of violating this article within one (1) year prior to the date of the
application or has two (2) or more charges of violating this article then pending in court as of the date
of application.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
(5) Has an active arrest warrant in any jurisdiction. (Ordinance O-011-16 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. 4.06.100 Appeals
Any person who is denied a permit under this article, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, may
appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the city council. All appeals must be filed with the city
secretary within ten (10) days after a notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. The appeal shall be
heard by the city council within thirty (30) days after receipt. At least five (5) days' notice of the date of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant or permit holder. Based on the hearing of the appeal and the facts relative
thereto, the city council will either sustain or reverse the decision to deny, suspend, or revoke the permit. The
decision of the city council shall be final.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/430
Sec. 4.06.101 Penalties
Any person, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity found to have violated any provision of this
article or to have failed to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in
accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. The imposition of a fine shall be in addition to all other remedies
provided in this article. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. A culpable mental
state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense under this article.
Sec. 4.06.102 Exceptions
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division, a single master's permit is required for noncommercial
solicitations, sales, or distributions for purposes of fundraising or generating profits by religious, nonprofit,
charitable, political, business, or educational organizations which have their principal place of activity within the
county, and may be issued at no charge.
(Ordinance O-003-13 adopted 3/19/13)
ARTICLE 4.07 TAXICABS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Definition
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning:
Taxicab. Every vehicle operated for the transportation of passengers for hire within the city limits.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.01)
Sec. 4.07.002 Nonliability of city
The city shall not be liable for any sum on account of any claim or on account of any act or omission of any
officer of the city in connection with any matter relating to taxicabs. (1998 Code, sec. 116.02)
Sec. 4.07.003 Certain proofs unnecessary in prosecution for violations
In a prosecution for violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege, or for proof to
be made, that the act was knowingly done; nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any exception
contained in this article concerning any prohibited act. (1998 Code, sec. 116.03)
Secs. 4.07.004–4.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
Sec. 4.07.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab for hire on any of the streets of the city unless such
person is the legal holder of a certificate of public necessity and convenience issued therefor. (1998 Code, sec.
116.10)
Sec. 4.07.032 Application; issuance or denial
(a) Contents of application. Every person desiring a certificate of public necessity and convenience to operate
an automobile for hire shall file with the city secretary a written application signed by such applicant stating:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/430
(1) His name and place of residence, sex, age, customary occupation; the character and value of his
assets and what portion, if any, of such assets are exempt from forced sale; the liabilities of such
applicant and how, if at all, such liabilities are secured; whether any other person owns any interest in
the business; and what person owns any title or interest in any automobile for which such license is
required;
(2) The name, usual trade description, equipment, rated horsepower and factory number of such
automobile and, as nearly as practicable, the year in which said automobile was manufactured or first
used;
(3) The stands or stand at which automobile will remain while not in actual service;
(4) The kind of written insurance which applicant desires to furnish the city;
(5) The rated seating capacity of such automobile; and
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, the name and place of residence of the officers of such
corporation, the amount of its capital stock and the amounts thereof fully paid-up, the character and
value of its assets, its liability and the security therefor; and such corporation shall file with its
application a duly certified copy of its charter and bylaws, and if it is a foreign corporation, a duly
certified copy of its permit to do business in the state.
(b) Consideration of application by city council. Whenever an application is made to the city secretary under
the provisions of this division, it shall be the duty of the secretary to immediately submit such application to the
city council and such application shall be considered an application for a certificate of public convenience and
necessity. The city council shall make or cause to be made investigations, including any hearings deemed
desirable, as to any applications for such certificates and shall determine whether or not the public convenience
and necessity require the operation of such automobile or automobiles and whether or not the applicant is fit to
conduct such business and may investigate the fitness of the officers and stockholders of any corporation making
such application.
(c) Standards. In determining whether or not a certificate should be issued under the provisions of this
division, the city council shall give weight and due regard to, among other things:
(1) Probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant;
(2) The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant and its organization and personnel;
(3) The character of the automobiles;
(4) The character and location of depots and terminus proposed to be used; and
(5) The experience of the applicant in transportation of passengers.
(d) Denial. If the city council finds that the public convenience and necessity do not require the operation of
such automobile or automobiles or that the applicant is not fit to conduct such business, it shall forthwith refuse
the application and no certificate of public necessity and convenience shall issue to such applicant.
(e) Issuance.
(1) If the city council shall determine that the public convenience and necessity require the
operation of a taxicab or taxicabs, and that the applicant is fit to conduct such business, the applicant
shall within 60 days thereafter furnish the city council, or such person as it may designate, with
information as to the particular automobile or automobiles for which the certificate is to be granted;
such information shall include the make, the state license number, the length of time the vehicle has
been in use, the motor number thereof, the names and addresses of the person or persons from whom
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/430
the automobile or automobiles were purchased and any other information required by the city
council.
(2) If the city council finds that the applicant is the owner of such automobile or automobiles and
the same be fit and safe for the transportation of passengers and conform to the requirements of this
article, applicable city ordinances, and such other requirements that the city council may make under
the authority of this article, it shall issue the certificate or cause it to be issued to the applicant.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.11)
Sec. 4.07.033 Affidavit disclosing owners or parties in interest
Every holder of a certificate issued under the provisions of this division shall file with the city secretary an
affidavit disclosing the names and addresses of all owners or persons interested in the business being operated
by him. Such affidavit shall be filed when the certificate is granted and an affidavit shall be filed immediately
upon any change in the ownership of such business. (1998 Code, sec. 116.12)
Sec. 4.07.034 Transfer
No certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under the provisions of this division shall be
transferable without the consent and approval of the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 116.13)
Sec. 4.07.035 Substitution of vehicles
The person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity may be issued under the provisions of this
division may, by appropriate endorsement made thereon and under the direction of the city council, substitute
another vehicle or vehicles in the place of that for which the certificate was granted. (1998 Code, sec. 116.14)
Sec. 4.07.036 Limitation on number of trade names
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a certificate of public necessity and convenience issued under the
provisions of this division to operate thereunder with more than one trade name, or to have more than one name
listed in any telephone book, public directory, or public place. (1998 Code, sec. 116.15)
Sec. 4.07.037 Suspension; revocation
Any certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under the provisions of this division may be
suspended or revoked by the city council, after hearing, for any of the following: (1998 Code, sec. 116.16)
(1) Violation of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; (1998 Code, sec. 116.16; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(2) Violation of any crime involving moral turpitude;
(3) Violation of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.16)
Secs. 4.07.038–4.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Vehicle License
Sec. 4.07.061 Required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/430
Every automobile operating as a taxicab under a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall have and
operate under a city license. (1998 Code, sec. 116.25)
Sec. 4.07.062 Application
The applicant for a license under the provisions of this division shall give the motor number, make, model, state
license number and mileage, if any, of the automobile desired to be licensed. (1998 Code, sec. 116.26)
Sec. 4.07.063 Required insurance coverage
Upon the approval by the city council of an applicant for the issuance of a license for the operation of a taxicab
over and across the streets of the city, and prior to the issuance of such license, the operator shall cause to be
issued by an insurance company acceptable to the city council a policy of insurance on each and every taxicab
operated or to be operated by the operator under the terms of this division with coverage on each taxicab as
provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 601.072, and such certificate of convenience and necessity
shall not be issued unless and until said insurance policies shall be so secured and deposited with the city. The
policy of insurance shall be filed and maintained in the office of the city secretary. (1998 Code, sec. 116.27;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.064 Fee
(a) The operator of the taxicab business holding a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall, on or
before the May 15th, file a written itemized statement describing the vehicles having a license as required by this
division and such licensee shall pay an annual fee as listed in article 3.000 for each of the vehicles listed.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) The fee for such license may be paid in monthly installments with the first installment being paid on or
before May 15th, which payment and which taxicab license fee shall be effective as of May 1st. In the event
such option is exercised, such monthly payment shall be paid on the first day of each succeeding month
thereafter until the permit fee of each listed vehicle is paid.
(c) In the event a licensee desires to obtain additional taxicab licenses during the year, the fee for such licenses
shall be on a prorated basis based on the number of months during which the cab will be used, with the year's
end being May 1st.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.28)
Sec. 4.07.065 License cards
The city shall furnish a license card which shall be attached to the automobile for which such license is issued
pursuant to the provisions of this division and such card shall be kept in a visible place in the automobile when
in use as a taxicab. (1998 Code, sec. 116.29)
Sec. 4.07.066 Revocation
The vehicle license required by this division shall be revoked upon the failure to have the vehicle inspected as
required by law or for the violation of any other applicable provisions of this code, state law or city ordinance,
rule or regulation. (1998 Code, sec. 116.30)
Secs. 4.07.067–4.07.090 Reserved
Division 4. Driver's Permit
Sec. 4.07.091 Required
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/430
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city unless the person has first obtained a driver's permit
issued by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 116.40)
Sec. 4.07.092 Application; investigation; requirements
(a) Application. It shall be the duty of each person desiring a taxicab driver's permit to apply to the city
secretary for application blanks upon which the applicant shall give his name, age, present address and place of
employment during the past two years with reasons for leaving, whether or not applicant has been convicted of a
felony, or if he has a police record.
(1) Such applicant shall likewise attach to his application for a driver's permit affidavits from two
reputable citizens attesting to the character of the applicant.
(2) Any material omission or false statement on such application shall be considered a violation of
this section.
(b) State commercial driver's license required. No permit shall issue under the provisions of this division to
any person who does not have in his possession, and issued to him, a state commercial driver's license.
(c) Issuance. The chief of police shall make such investigation of the applicant as he deems necessary. If, after
examining such application and obtaining such information as he deems advisable, the chief of police is satisfied
that the applicant is a fit and proper person to drive a taxicab in the city, then the chief of police shall cause to be
issued to the applicant a permit to drive taxicabs in the city until the next ensuing January 1, on which date the
permit shall expire.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.41)
Sec. 4.07.093 Fee
A fee as listed in article 3.000 shall be charged for each permit issued under the provisions of this division.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 4.07.094 Display and contents
The taxicab driver's permit must be prominently displayed at all times in full view of any person in the back seat
of the taxicab being driven by the permittee. Said permit shall have attached to it a picture of the permittee, his
name, age and such other information as may be deemed proper by the chief of police. (1998 Code, sec. 116.43)
Sec. 4.07.095 Transfer
No permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferable without the approval of the city
council. (1998 Code, sec. 116.44)
Sec. 4.07.096 Change of employer
If during the year the holder of such taxicab driver's permit shall desire to change his employment so that he will
be employed by another operator of taxicabs in the city, he must first file a written statement of such intent to
change employment and obtain the written permission of the chief of police. Such permission shall not be
unreasonably or arbitrarily withheld, and unless for good cause the chief of police deems it inadvisable in the
public interest for such a change of employment to be made, he shall grant his permission. Immediately after
such a change has been made, all records in the police department and other departments pertaining to such
driver shall be corrected so as to show the name of his new employer. (1998 Code, sec. 116.45)
Sec. 4.07.097 Suspension or revocation
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/430
Any taxicab driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or city council for the violation
by the permittee of any applicable provisions of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. (1998
Code, sec. 116.46)
Secs. 4.07.098–4.07.130 Reserved
Division 5. Identification and Operation of Vehicles
Sec. 4.07.131 Identification of vehicle
The holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall have plainly printed, on each and every car
operated by him, a sign giving the name, trade name or firm name under which he operates such automobile for
hire and the city license number of such automobile. (1998 Code, sec. 116.55)
Sec. 4.07.132 Daily manifests
(a) Kept by owner, operator. Every person operating one or more taxicabs in the city shall keep a daily
manifest at the dispatching headquarters, on which there shall be recorded in ink or indelible pencil all calls or
assignments of the taxicabs, showing thereon the address to which assigned for service engagement, the exact
time at which assignment was made, the number of miles traveled by each taxicab each day, and the city license
number under which the taxicab is operating. These manifests shall be safely and securely kept by those
operating taxicabs in the city for a period of two years and shall be made available to the chief of police, city
auditor or other representatives of the city as designated by the city council.
(b) Kept by driver. Daily manifests shall be kept by the driver of each taxicab operating upon the public
rights-of-way in the city, and filed with the owner or operator of such taxicab. Such manifest shall record each
trip, showing the date, cab number, origin and destination, number of passengers transported, amount of money
collected on each trip, and the name of driver. The manifest shall be retained by the owner or operator of such
taxicab and shall be made available for examination by the chief of police, the auditor, or other representatives
of the city as shall be designated by the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.56)
Sec. 4.07.133 Maximum seating
It shall be unlawful to carry in a taxicab more than six passengers in any taxicab, and in no event shall more than
two passengers ride in the front seat with the driver. (1998 Code, sec. 116.57)
Sec. 4.07.134 Receipt or discharge of passengers
No vehicle in use as a taxicab shall receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street, but shall be
driven to the right-hand sidewalk or to the extreme right-hand side of the road as nearly as practical for such
purposes. (1998 Code, sec. 116.58)
Sec. 4.07.135 Parking
All taxicabs shall be subject to the sections of this code, ordinances of the city and state laws concerning parking
of motor vehicles. (1998 Code, sec. 116.59)
Sec. 4.07.136 Disposition of property left in vehicles
All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department of the city, or to their employers, all
property left in such vehicles by passengers. If a driver delivers such articles to his employer, the latter shall
deliver them to the police department. When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the office of the chief
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/430
of police, he shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles
until claimed by the owner, or until legally disposed of. (1998 Code, sec. 116.60)
Sec. 4.07.137 Transportation or possession of alcoholic beverages
It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and in the exclusive possession and control of a
fare-paying passenger, in the taxicab, or for any taxicab driver to have on his person any alcoholic beverage
while driving and operating a taxicab in service. (1998 Code, sec. 116.61)
Secs. 4.07.138–4.07.170 Reserved
Division 6. Rates, Fares and Charges
Sec. 4.07.171 Maximum rates and fares
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to charge for transporting any passenger, from any place
within the city, taxi rates or fares in excess of those set forth in this division. (1998 Code, sec. 116.75)
Sec. 4.07.172 Rates
(a) A flat rate pickup fee of $4.50 for the first person within the existing city limits, or a 3-mile radius of the
existing city limits. (Ordinance O-006-10 adopted 10/19/10)
(b) All mileage rounded to the nearest mile.
(c) All miles controlled by vehicle trip meter.
(d) All rates to be posted within sight of passengers.
(1998 Code, sec. 116.76)
Sec. 4.07.173 Additional stop charge
In addition to the rates and fares established by this division, an additional stop charge may be collected by the
operator of a taxicab from passengers for additional stops requested by the passenger from the point of origin to
the point of destination, at the rate of $0.75 per minute after the first five (5) minutes.
Sec. 4.07.174 Additional passenger charge
In addition to the rates and fares established by this division, an additional passenger charge of $0.75 each may
be collected by the operator of a taxicab for each additional passenger for the same destination point.
(Ordinance O-006-10 adopted 10/19/10)
ARTICLE 4.08 TELECOMMUNICATIONS*
Sec. 4.08.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Assist in the management of the rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers;
(3) Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by
telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/430
(1998 Code, sec. 117.01)
Sec. 4.08.002 Definitions
Whenever used in this article, the following terms, as well as their singulars, plurals and possessives, shall have
the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates
otherwise:
Access line.
(1) Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended
to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of
telecommunications service;
(2) Each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a person pursuant to an agreement
under section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996; and
(3) Each termination point of a nonswitched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media
connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of
nonswitched telecommunications service within the city.
Cable service. As defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. section 532
et seq.
Direction of the city. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent
with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
Facilities. Any and all of the duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways,
and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances, and all associated transmission media used for the
provision of telecommunications service.
Line fee. A monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the
city as a rights-of-way fee.
Permit holder. Any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this article.
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability
company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity.
Public utility. A public utility as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Utilities
Code Ann. section 11.004, including municipally owned and/or operated utilities.
Rights-of-way. All present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives,
tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways within the city.
Rights-of-way fee. The total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for the use and occupancy of the rightsof-
way.
Telecommunications service. The transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between
or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the
facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes (inter-
LATA and intra-LATA) or any “wireless service” as defined by law.
Telecommunications service provider. Any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the
corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/430
Telecommunications utility. As used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Utilities Code Ann.
section 51.002(11).
Transmission media. Any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or
placed by a permit holder to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other
characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes.
Use and occupancy. The permit holder's acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance,
repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.02)
Sec. 4.08.003 Permit required; granting of permit
Any person that owns, places, or maintains facilities within the rights-of-way shall first obtain a permit pursuant
to the terms of this article. Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city under this article shall issue
permits to telecommunications service providers for the purpose of regulating the use and occupancy of the
public rights-of-way in the city for the provision of access lines. By acceptance of the permit, the permit holder
agrees to abide by the reasonable terms of this article in all its operations within the city, including all operations
and facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of access lines in any newly
annexed areas as specified in section 4.08.005. (1998 Code, sec. 117.03)
Sec. 4.08.004 Rights granted by permit; term of permit; transfer of permit
(a) No rights agreed to in this article by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant
franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city,
in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest.
(b) A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this article,
but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be
required by law.
(c) The initial term of each permit issued under this article shall be three years from the date of issuance,
unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At the
expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one
year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than 90 days prior to the termination
of the then-current period by the city to the permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit shall terminate
at the expiration of the then-current period.
(d) The rights granted by this article inure to the benefit of the permit holder licensed hereunder. The rights
under this article granted by permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder
without the express written consent of the city. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale
means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to
entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with the permit holder. Any such consent by
the city shall not be withheld unreasonably.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.04)
Sec. 4.08.005 Compensation for use of rights-of-way
(a) Rights-of-way fee. The permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of
month-end by applying the appropriate line fee to each access line owned, placed, or maintained by a permit
holder that is activated for use by an end-user or for another telecommunications service provider that uses the
permit holder's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service within the city. The line fee
to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis shall be:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/430
Access Line Monthly Fee Per Access Line
Residential $
Nonresidential $
(b) Number of access lines. Subject to the city's agreement not to disclose this information, each permit holder
must provide annually, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the
number of each type of access line owned or placed and maintained by the permit holder within the city that are
activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications service providers at month's end for each of the
preceding 12 months. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying the number
of the permit holder's access lines within the city that are activated for end-user customers and
telecommunications service providers. Upon written request, the permit holder shall verify the information in the
report and, upon reasonable advance notice, produce to the city and permit inspection by the city of all
noncustomer specific records and documents reasonably calculated to verify the information. For purposes of
payment of fees for use of the rights-of-way, lines terminating at a customer's premises that are billed as
“lifeline,” “tel-assistance,” or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal
law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be
included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated.
(c) Annexation and disannexation. Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting
the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the
city agrees to furnish the permit holder written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate
boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city
under this article, a permit holder shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the
permit holder's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the state comptroller of public accounts
for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes, but in no case less than 30 days from the date the permit
holder is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation.
(d) Confidential records. If the permit holder notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information,
reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports,
documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the permit
holder's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the permit holder of the
request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before
disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings and will furnish the permit holder with
copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the permit holder's confidential information,
reports, documents or writings.
(e) No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or
other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed
by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the permit
holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of the permit holder's
facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do
not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in
the calculation of the rights-of-way fee.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/430
(f) Timing of payment. A permit holder shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis. The payment shall be due
on the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated.
(g) Uncollectibles. Permit holders have a statutory right to pass through to their customers on a pro rata basis
any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this article
notwithstanding, permit holders shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines for which revenues
remain uncollectible.
(h) Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable
state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or
other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to
persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the
appropriate line fee, as specified in subsection (a) above, to each access line created by rebundling services or
facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the services for
resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rights-of-way fee
imposed herein can be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers that sell
telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, the permit holder
shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other facilities
provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications services, if the
telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement
to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to
those rebundled services directly to the city. If the permit holder provides a copy of the signed statement to the
city, then the permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the telecommunications
service, unbundled network elements, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications
service for sale within the city.
(i) Fee application to leased facilities. Pursuant to Tex. Utilities Code section 54.206, a permit holder may
collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this article through a pro rata charge to the customers in the
boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit
holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or
otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes it does not have sufficient information
to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using
the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. If a
person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, permit holders may bill the
person on the basis of the information provided. Permit holders shall provide to the city any information
regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of
telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as the city first obtains written permission of such
other person for permit holders to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this article
notwithstanding, however, a permit holder shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the
permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses the permit holder's
service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.05)
Sec. 4.08.006 Construction and maintenance of facilities
(a) The location and route of all facilities and transmission media placed and constructed in the rights-of-way
shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city.
(b) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement in
the permit holder's facilities of any electric light or power wires or communications facilities or other systems
not owned by the permit holder. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires,
communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a
further separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this
article shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/430
voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with
any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a telecommunications utility or authorized to offer cable
service within the city.
(c) The surface of the rights-of-way disturbed by the permit holder in the construction or maintenance of its
telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as
good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The permit holder shall endeavor to minimize
disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall
not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance
and/or repair work.
(d) Upon request, the permit holder shall remove, raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to
permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be
paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The permit
holder shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements.
(e) The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and
overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and
transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction
of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.06)
Sec. 4.08.007 Relocation and removal of facilities
(a) In accordance with Tex. Utilities Code Ann. section 54.203(c), upon 30 days' notice by the city, a permit
holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the widening
or straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for the permit
holder's facilities along the rights-of-way.
(b) The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a
public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such
instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such
relocation itself.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.07)
Sec. 4.08.008 Indemnification
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons
or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit
holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit
holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give
the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit holder
shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended to
create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the
benefit of the permit holder and the city. (1998 Code, sec. 117.08)
Sec. 4.08.009 Administration
(a) The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights and
obligations of this article, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis.
(b) Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal
Communications Commission or the state public utility commission shall be provided to the city upon specific
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/430
request.
(c) After reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city may establish, to the extent permitted by law, such
reasonable and nondiscriminatory rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this
article and the construction of the permit holder's facilities in the rights-of-way, so long as those rules and
regulations are competitively neutral.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.09)
Sec. 4.08.010 Future contingency
In the event this article, or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee provided
for in this article, becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative authority
exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the city and all
permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the authority's
decision. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new compensation arrangement shall provide the city with a level of
compensation comparable to that set forth in this article, as long as that compensation is recoverable by permit
holders in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this article. (1998 Code, sec.
117.10)
Sec. 4.08.011 Governing law
This article shall be construed in accordance with the city code in effect on the date of passage of this article to
the extent that such code is not in conflict with or in violation of the constitution and laws of the United States or
the state. (1998 Code, sec. 117.11)
Sec. 4.08.012 Nondiscrimination and competitive neutrality
The city hereby recognizes that it has the legal duty to obligate, on a going-forward basis, all permit holders to
abide by the same terms and conditions imposed by this article, including, but not limited to, the payment of the
line fee, and to apply substantively same requirements governing their use and occupancy of the rights-of-way.
(1998 Code, sec. 117.12)
Sec. 4.08.013 Preexisting facilities; application for permit
Any telecommunications service provider that owns facilities already located within the rights-of-way on the
date this article is enacted (February 2, 1999) is hereby granted a permit hereunder. All prospective permit
holders shall file a permit application form at least 30 days before placing any facilities in the rights-of-way. A
permit application form will not be accepted and a permit will not be granted unless the applicant provides on
that form the name and address of the person to whom notices hereunder are to be sent, the date on which the
applicant expects to begin providing service within the city, a 24-hour-per-day contact number for the applicant,
and the certificate number of the applicant's certificate issued by the state public utility commission, or a
notarized statement from a principal or officer of the applicant that no certification by the public utility
commission is required for the type of service to be offered by applicant. (1998 Code, sec. 117.13; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.08.014 Issuance and effective date of permit
The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of this article to the permit holder, along with a permit hereunder,
within 14 days after receipt of the notice of preexisting facilities or the permit application form. The effective
date for any permit shall be the date of issuance; however, the assessment of the line fee shall not begin until the
first day of the second month after the date of issuance of the permit. Permit holders with preexisting facilities
may continue the preexisting compensation arrangement until the first day of the second month following the
issuance of the permit. (1998 Code, sec. 117.14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/430
ARTICLE 4.09 OPERATION OF COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
Sec. 4.09.001 Purpose
(a) The city council has identified certain negative secondary effects arising out of and related to the operation
of coin-operated gaming machines and gaming establishments;
(b) The city council seeks to adopt regulations to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity, including
operating as a gambling facility; and
(c) The city council has determined that it is in the public's best interest and in support of the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city that the operation of a coin-operated gaming establishment
requires a business license, machine, and occupation tax permits, and in addition, that the location of coinoperated
gaming establishments be regulated through appropriate zoning.
Sec. 4.09.002 Definitions
Whenever used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases as well as their singulars, plurals, and possessives
shall have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates
otherwise.
Business license. The license granted by the city for the operation of coin-operated or slot machines.
Business owner or license holder. A person or sole individual, owning or having the care, control, management, or
possession of any coin-operated or slot machine who exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in his/her
location of business or upon premises under his/her control, any coin-operated or slot machine in this city.
City occupation tax. The imposition of an occupation tax on a coin-operated machine in this city as defined in Texas
Occupations Code, chapter 2153.451.
Coin-operated or slot machine. Includes every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with
coins, metal slugs, tokens, checks, debit, or credit cards.
Excluded machines. As herein defined in section 4.09.003.
Gambling device. Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical device as defined by Texas Penal Code, chapter 47,
gambling, section 47.01(4) as amended and not specifically excluded or exempted under section 4.09.003.
Machine permit. Includes the permit granted by the city to operate a coin-operated or slot machine.
Manager. Includes a person or sole individual having the care, control, or management of any coin-operated or slot
machine in his/her location of business or upon premises under his/her control within this city.
Person. Include an individual, business, firm, company, association, or corporation.
Property owner. Includes a person, individual, firm, company, association, or corporation owning a building, property, or
facility on which a business will operate a coin-operated or slot machine.
Service coin-operated machines. Includes every pay toilet, pay telephone, and all other machines or devices that
dispense services or merchandise.
Skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines. Includes every coin-operated or slot machine of any kind or character
whatsoever, when such machines are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure, or when
such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than
the dispensing or vending of merchandise, music, movies, or service.
Sec. 4.09.003 Excluded and exempt machines
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/430
Machines that are excluded from the provisions of this article are:
(1) Machines that award the user noncash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties solely and directly
from the machine, including claw, crane, children's arcade games, pinball machines, pool tables,
shuffle board or similar machines; and
(2) Machines from which the opportunity to receive noncash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties
or a representation of value redeemable for those items varies depending upon the user's ability,
including, but not limited to: miniature race track machines, miniature football machines, miniature
golf machines, skee-ball machines and miniature bowling machines.
Sec. 4.09.004 Business licenses, machine permits, and city occupation tax
(a) Business licenses.
(1) The following section shall apply to all skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines and
locations that are not specifically excluded in section 4.09.003.
(2) Business license requirements. Every person owning, possessing, maintaining, or operating
skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine(s) for use by the general public or by private clubs,
associations, fraternities, or orders shall obtain and maintain a business license from the city, as
follows:
(A) A business license application must be filled out and must contain a complete statement
about the identity of the owner of the business seeking to install skill or pleasure coin-operated
or slot machine(s): to include name, date of birth, social security number, business name,
D.B.A. information, comptroller tax I.D. number, mailing address of owner, address of
residence; address where the business will operate; the number of machines at the location; a
list of serial numbers (one assigned to each machine); the nature of any current business being
operated at the location; the date when each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine was
placed at the location; the owner of the location where the skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot
machine(s) will operate; and any other pertinent information that may be required by the city in
the licensing and permitting of skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine(s).
(B) If there is a change in any type of information provided to the city or if additional
machines are added to the location, the change must be relayed to the city within seven (7) days
of the change or addition.
(C) Payment of the appropriate business license fees must be paid to the city, in accordance
with this section.
(3) A business license issued for skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine under this article:
(A) May only be issued to a single individual, to be referred to herein as “business owner”;
(B) Is required for each location, is personal to the applicant and may not be sold, bargained,
conveyed, transferred or assigned, save for the exemptions noted in subsection (d)(3) herein;
and
(C) Does not vest any property or rights in the business licensee, except for the right to
conduct the licensed business.
(4) Firms, clubs, corporations, nonprofit or other legal entities including private clubs or
associations may obtain a business license for skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines if an
application is filled out for a single individual or business owner that represents and is the responsible
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/430
party for the firm, club, corporation, nonprofit or other legal entity, and the other provisions of this
section are met.
(5) Business license fees. Business license fees must be paid as follows:
(A) A new license fee as listed in article 5.000 per location for each new business license
issued; and
(B) An annual business license renewal fee as listed in article 5.000 per location.
(b) Machine permits.
(1) Machine permit requirements. Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall be
registered with the city by make, type, and serial number, as follows:
(A) Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall have a serial number, which is
clearly visible on the outside surface of the machine. If a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot
machine is not manufactured with a serial number, the owner shall assign a serial number to the
machine and either stamp or engrave the assigned number permanently on the machine.
(B) Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall have a nontransferable permit
issued by the state and affixed to each machine, before it can be registered by the city.
(C) Upon payment of the machine permit fee as described herein and presentation of the
required serial number and state-issued permit information for each skill or pleasure coinoperated
or slot machine, a machine permit will be issued by the city, which is synonymous
with the city's registration of the state-issued permit for each machine.
(2) Machine permit fees. Machine permit fees must be paid for each skill or pleasure coin-operated
or slot machine, as follows:
(A) A machine permit fee as listed in article 5.000 at the time of application for each
machine; and
(B) Proof of payment of all state regulated tax permit fees; and
(C) Any other fees required by city ordinance, state or federal requirements.
(3) Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine, capable of independent operation with
separate activating coin mechanisms, whether placed separately or in series, and regardless of any
electrical, mechanical or manual component, shall be considered a separate machine in regard to
permitting.
(4) If a license holder, business owner, or manager is found to be operating unregistered machines,
a fee as listed in article 5.000 per unregistered machine will be assessed against the license holder,
business owner or manager, in addition to the five hundred dollar ($500.00) machine permit fee.
(c) City occupation tax requirements. A city occupation tax is hereby imposed on each skill or pleasure coinoperated
or slot machine. An occupation tax permit for each machine will be issued if all of the following
requirements are met:
(1) Applicant holds a valid business license issued by the city;
(2) Proof of a valid machine permit for each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/430
(3) Proof of payment of all state mandated tax permit fees required by Texas Occupation Code sec.
2153.401 (as amended);
(4) Proof of payment of any other fees required by city ordinance, state or federal requirements;
and
(5) Payment of a fee in the current amount set in Texas Occupation Code sec. 2153.451, (as
amended) for each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine for which an occupation tax permit
is sought.
(d) Expirations, renewals, and exemptions.
(1) Expirations. Business licenses, machine, and occupation tax permits issued at any time during a
calendar year shall automatically expire upon the following:
(A) Business license expiration:
(i) On December 31st of each calendar year;
(ii) Upon revocation of the business license by the city or its designees;
(iii) Upon surrender of a business license by a business owner; or
(iv) Upon the death of the business owner or license holder.
(B) Machine permit expiration.
(i) Upon removal of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine from the original
business location;
(ii) Sealing of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine;
(iii) Upon revocation of the business license by the city or its designees;
(iv) Upon surrender of a business license by a business owner; or
(v) Upon the death of the business owner or license holder.
(C) Occupation tax permit. On December 31st of each calendar year.
(2) Renewal. All business licenses and occupation tax permits shall be up for renewal by
December 31st of each calendar year. All businesses in operation in accordance with this article are
required to have the renewal business license fees and annual occupation tax permit fees for each
machine paid in full prior to December 31st of the renewal year. The city shall not refund any portion
of a coin-operated or slot machine business license, machine permit or occupation tax permit fees
after the license or permits have been issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce the amount of any fee due
to the city. If fees are not paid within the time allotted, the business license and all associated
machine permits shall be revoked.
(3) Exemptions.
(A) Exemptions arising under subsection (d)(1)(A)(iv) and (d)(1)(B)(v): Upon the death of
the holder of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business license, the
executor/administrator of the estate, business successor, or immediate next of kin may continue
operations of the skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business and have the business
license, machine, and occupation tax permits transferred over to another license holder that
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/430
meets the requirements of this section. All other requirements still apply, and continued
operation must conform with this and other city ordinances that apply to business operations.
(B) Any person operating a business with a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine(s)
at the time of the passage of this article shall not be required to comply with the requirements of
this article until one of the following events occurs:
(i) Found to be operating a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business in
violation of any local, state, or federal law.
(ii) Addition of any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine after the date of the passage
of this article.
(iii) Found to be operating any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine without required
occupation tax certificates issued by the Texas Comptroller's Office.
(iv) Sealing of any one or more skill or pleasure coin-operated machines by any agency
of competent jurisdiction.
(v) Revocation or suspension of a certificate of occupancy issued by the planning and
development services department.
(vi) Found to be operating without an official certificate of occupancy issued by the
planning and development services department.
(vii) Death of the business owner.
At such time of the occurrence of any of these conditions, the business shall immediately
lose its exempt status and become subject to all requirements of this article.
Sec. 4.09.005 Restrictions and requirements
(a) Age prohibition. The presence of persons under eighteen (18) years of age on premises subject to this
article, is prohibited. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the person under eighteen
(18) years of age was a bona fide employee of the business. Notice in the form of an easily readable sign,
informing the public of said restriction, shall be placed at the entrance of the location.
(b) Alcoholic beverages prohibited. The presence of any alcoholic beverages on the premises of a coinoperated
or slot machine business is prohibited, unless such establishment has a valid license or permit to serve
alcohol by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) and the city. No individual, person, owner, or
manager shall allow, or be allowed, to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of a coin-operated or
slot machine business location without a valid license or permit to serve alcohol by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission (TABC) and the city. No individual, person, owner, or manager shall give, sell, bring to,
or allow the bringing of any alcoholic beverage on said premises of a coin-operated or slot machine business
without a valid license or permit to serve alcohol by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) and
this city.
(c) Posting of business license, machine permits, and establishment address. The business license shall be
posted conspicuously, noticeable to common view at the entrances of the establishment. Machine permits for
each machine shall be affixed to each machine within easy view of the public and inspectors. The establishment
address will be posted conspicuously at or as near as possible to the outside front entrance of the location.
(d) Business license and machine permit limitations. Solely one business license to operate a location with
skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines shall be issued to any one person. A transfer of business license
or machine permits shall not be allowed except as allowed in section 4.09.004(d)(3) and section 4.09.006(e) of
this article. If a business license or a machine permit has been voluntarily relinquished or has been revoked, then
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/430
a new business license or machine permit may be issued to a qualified applicant, in accordance with section
4.09.004.
(e) Window visibility. Windows of the building where skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines are
located shall be unobstructed and/or unpainted, as to allow for visibility. All windows sun screened or tinted
must allow light transmission of twenty (20) percent or more. No luminous reflectance, mirror, or reflective type
material shall be allowed to be placed on same windows.
(f) Sign requirements. The business name is required to be prominently posted and displayed on the outside of
the building; if the business is nameless, the license holder's first and last name shall be posted prominently and
displayed on the outside of the building in place of the business name. All signs for advertisement shall comply
with city zoning ordinances. No unauthorized signs shall be placed or allowed to be placed on the licensed
business property without prior approval from the city. Any signs deemed to be out of compliance with the
zoning ordinance shall be grounds for revocation of skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business
license.
(g) Hours of operation. The business operation hours will be Monday through Sunday, opening no earlier than
8:30 a.m. and closing no later than midnight. Doors must remain unlocked and the business accessible to the
general public during hours of operation.
Sec. 4.09.006 Business location restrictions and relocation requirements
(a) In addition to a business license, every business that owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, or displays any
skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine, shall be required to obtain a specific use permit issued by the city
in accordance with chapter 14, zoning.
(b) In accordance with chapter 14, zoning, the city may issue a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine
specific use permit in any zoned areas, excluding: the central business district, a residential zoned district, or a
neighborhood services district.
(c) The city may not issue a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine specific use permit for use within
300 hundred feet (300') from door entry of the skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business to any
property line of the following:
(1) Any place of education or higher learning to include pre-school facilities, child day-care,
elementary, middle, or intermediate schools, high schools, places of higher learning colleges,
technical schools, or universities.
(2) Any hospital or place where medical attention is received, or pharmaceuticals are dispensed to
include pharmacies, clinics, night clinics, nursing home, adult day-care, veteran hospitals, hospitals,
major trauma units, or where ambulatory services are stationed.
(3) Any place of religious worship to include any established building of gathering for worship
including, but not limited to a building of a denomination or other location where a group of people
(a congregation) comes to perform acts of religious praise, honor, or devotion.
(4) Any school or college district property on which attendance of the student population occurs.
(5) Any location where children congregate to include, but not limited to, playgrounds and/or
parks.
(d) There shall be required to be an amount of parking spaces for each location as calculated under chapter 14,
zoning, section 14.05.003 for nonresidential uses.
(e) Relocation of premises. Active business license holders who wish to relocate the licensed business for
which they have a specific use permit to another location must notify the city's planning and development
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/430
services department immediately, and must obtain a new specific use permit prior to relocating. The city
reserves the right to deny a new specific use permit for the relocation in the event that it finds significant
negative impact for the surrounding properties or the relocation would be in violation of this code.
(f) Exemptions. Locations which, at the time of passage of this article, do not meet the distance requirements
as set forth in subsection (c) shall not be required to comply with the location restrictions set forth in this section
until one of the events as outlined in section 4.09.004(d)(1)(B)(i)–(v) occurs or additional machines are installed
at a subject location. At such time, the subject location shall immediately lose its exempt status and become
subject to all other provisions of this article, as though it were a new application. During the term of this zoning
permit exemption, each of the locations subject to this section must comply with all other terms of this article,
including but not limited to: occupation tax permit fees, sale of alcoholic beverages, age limits, and other
restrictions.
Sec. 4.09.007 Replacement of a valid lost, stolen or destroyed business license or machine permit
The city shall not make a refund of the business license or machine permit fees paid on any skill or pleasure coin-operated
or slot machine business location or machine. The city shall provide a duplicate license or permit if a valid license or
permit has been lost, stolen, or destroyed. The fee for each duplicate license or permit is ten dollars ($10.00). An original
license or permit for which a duplicate license or permit has been issued is void upon issuance of a duplicate.
Sec. 4.09.008 Sealing of machines
(a) The city may seal any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine on which the initial business license
fee or the yearly renewal business license fee has not been paid. The city shall charge an administrative fee of
five dollars ($5.00) for the release of any machine sealed as provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person
to break the seal affixed in the name of the city or to exhibit, display, or remove from the location any machine
on which the seal has been broken.
(b) Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine subject to the payment of the fees levied in this
article, and upon which any fee has not been paid as provided herein, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
and the business displaying said machines may be denied operation by the city, as well as denying the continued
operation of said business. All licenses and permits allowing said business, as referred to in this article, to
operate may be denied, discontinued, and/or revoked.
(c) Upon proof that all fees have been paid in full and an inspection of the location of the business has been
completed verifying that all requirements of this article have been met, any and/or all sealed machines may be
unsealed by the planning and development services department, police department or their authorized designees.
Sec. 4.09.009 Existing laws and inspections
(a) Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine,
device, table, or coin-operated, or slot machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display, or maintenance of
which is now illegal or in violation of any article of the Penal Code or the Constitution of this state and/or any
federal laws of the United States of America.
(b) No business license or machine permit may be issued for any “gambling device” as defined by Texas
Penal Code, chapter 47, gambling, section 47.01(4) and as interpreted by judicial decision (Hardy v. State, 102
S.W.3d 123, Tex. 2003 and State v. One Super Cherry Master Video 8-Liner Machine 102 S.W.3d 132, Tex.
2003), and “gambling devices” are prohibited from use in the city.
(c) In addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by law, violation of any section or provision of
this article shall be cause for revocation of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business license
issued pursuant to this article. The city reserves the right to inspect the premises of any skill or pleasure coinoperated
or slot machine business in order to investigate compliance with this article. The business owner or
manager of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business or their employees shall not prohibit city
inspectors, or police, fire, or fire marshal personnel entry into the premises at any time to ensure there are no
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/430
violations of city, state or federal laws, to include correct and accurate machine count, correct machine permits,
fire, or penal code violations. The building entries and exits shall be maintained so as to allow unobstructed,
unregulated, free entry into said location by inspectors, police, fire, or fire marshal personnel without any delay
of entry. Any violations of this section shall be considered a violation of this article and will be considered
grounds for revocation of business licenses and/or machine permits.
Sec. 4.09.010 Violations
A violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation convicted
hereunder, shall be punished as specified in section 1.01.009, of this code.
(Ordinance O-001-18, sec. 1 adopted 1/16/18)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created
There is hereby created and established within and for the city, the office of fire marshal.
Sec. 5.02.002 Appointment and qualifications
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the city council. The fire
marshal shall hold current valid certifications from the state commission on fire protection as fire and arson
investigator, and as a fire inspector. The fire marshal shall also hold current valid certification from the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education as a peace officer. The fire marshal shall also
hold certification from the department of state health services as an emergency medical technician. The fire
marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of the office, and shall receive such compensation as may be
agreed upon by the city manager.
(Ordinance O-007-15 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 5.02.003 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal or his duly authorized representative shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of
every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make
investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design, and if it appears to the fire marshal
or his duly authorized representative that any such fire is of suspicious origin, the fire marshal or his duly
authorized representative shall then take immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the
fire and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion. Such investigation shall commence within 24 hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. (1998 Code, sec. 32.03)
Sec. 5.02.004 Taking of testimony; authority to summon witnesses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/430
(a) The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing.
(b) The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter
which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production
of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered
to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing before him as witnesses. (1998 Code, sec. 32.04)
Sec. 5.02.005 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separated and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1998 Code, sec. 32.05)
Sec. 5.02.006 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to
cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (1998 Code, sec. 32.06)
Sec. 5.02.007 Right of entry
The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of
the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which
authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1998 Code, sec. 32.07)
Sec. 5.02.008 Inspection of premises
The fire marshal or his duly authorized representative shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, all buildings
and premises, including such hazards or appliances as the fire marshal may designate, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute
to its spread, or any violation of the purpose or provisions of this code and of any other law or standard affecting
fire safety. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever
the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building
or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe, the fire marshal or his duly
authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon the fire marshal by this code; provided that if such building or premises is
occupied he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry, and if such building or premises is
unoccupied he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the fire marshal or his duly authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. For the purpose of this
section duly authorized representative shall include any inspector, fire and arson investigator, or deputy fire
marshal employed or assigned to the fire prevention bureau of the city, or any individual who is certified in the
state as a peace officer, and is employed or assigned to work with the city. If the owner or occupant denies entry,
the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative shall obtain a search warrant or other remedy provided by
law to secure entry. No owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or
premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein
by the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative for the purpose of inspection or examination pursuant to
this code or any other standard affecting fire safety. (1998 Code, sec. 32.08)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/430
Sec. 5.02.009 Record of fires
The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires occurring within the city and all such facts concerning the same,
including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, together with such other
information as may be required by this code. The fire marshal shall retain for not less than five years a record of
each inspection and investigation made showing the cause, the findings and the disposition of each such
inspection or investigation. (1998 Code, sec. 32.09)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE ALARMS*
Sec. 5.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Alarm system. Any device designed and manufactured for the detection of fire or for alerting others of a fire, and
which, when actuated, transmits a signal or message remotely whether directly or indirectly to the 911 dispatch
center.
Alarm user. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity which owns, possesses, or leases or in any manner
uses an alarm system.
Calendar quarter. Either January through March, April through June, July through September, or October
through December of any calendar year.
Excess alarms signaling a fire. Those false alarms in excess of three signaled from the same alarm user's
premises by an alarm system within any calendar quarter, or in excess of five false alarms within any 12-month
period.
False alarm. An alarm signaled from an alarm user's premises in which, upon response and inspection, no fire
can be verified; but the term shall not include those alarms proven by the alarm user to have been caused by an
act of God. Response to the alarm must have occurred within 30 minutes of the initial alarm signal. The decision
of the fire department concerning whether or not a fire or an act of God has occurred will be final.
Person. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity.
Twelve-month period. A period of 12 consecutive months including the month in which the first false alarm
occurs.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.01)
Sec. 5.03.002 Service charges for false alarms
(a) Each alarm user shall pay to the city a service charge for excess alarms from the same user's premises to
which the fire department responds in an amount as listed in article 2.000 for any excess alarm above five in a
12-month period. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) Upon answering any false alarm by the fire department, the answering department shall notify the person
in control of the premises, according to the records of the city, of the false alarm. The answering department
shall submit an invoice for the sixth false alarm and each subsequent alarm.
(c) If any alarm user becomes delinquent more than 60 days in paying a service charge, the answering
department shall notify the person in control of the premises that he is delinquent and that legal action to collect
the charges will be taken with the proper authorities.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/430
(d) After answering any excess alarm, the responding department shall send the alarm user a letter advising
the alarm user of the excess alarm, the duty to repair the alarm system, the liability for excess alarm service
charges and the potential of legal action for noncompliance.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.03)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
(a) Adoption of 2012 International Fire Code. That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office
of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, including
appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, and I, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the fire code of the city regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the city [secretary] are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 5.04.002 of this article.
(b) Adoption of NFPA 704. The 2012 edition of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 704,
including all appendix chapters as copyrighted in 2012 by the NFPA, as hereinafter amended is specifically
adopted as an addition to the fire code of the city.
(c) Open to public inspection. A copy of said fire code, supplemental codes, and any amendments shall be
filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained in the office of the fire prevention bureau of the city, all such
copies to be open to public inspection during business hours of the offices where they are maintained.
(d) Effective date. The International Fire Code, 2012 edition, NFPA 704, and any amendments to such shall
take effect and be in force from and after approval or adoption as required by law.
Sec. 5.04.002 Amendments
The International Fire Code, 2012 edition is hereby amended by adding, deleting, or amending the following
sections:
[A] Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the City of Borger, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
[Al Section 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under the
provisions of this code, shall be cited, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to section
1.01.009 of the City of Borger Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
[A] 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars or more than five hundred $500.00 dollars.
307.1.2 Offensive smoke and odors. Waste matter shall not be burned under permit or otherwise, which shall in
burning, cause or create dense smoke or odors. All waste matter which requires burning shall be burned only in
incinerators meeting the requirements of all codes and ordinances adopted and passed by the City of Borger.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/430
307.1.3 Open Burning prohibited. Outdoor fire shall mean any fire outside a structure and within the corporate
city limits and specifically includes any such fires or ground fires kindled or maintained using grass, weeds, tree
stumps, rubbish, trash, or any other flammable or combustible solid, liquid or gas. Any application of the
penalties stated herein shall not be held to prevent the extinguishment of such outdoor fire.
Exceptions:
(1) Any lawfully kindled or maintained bonfire or recreational fire which meets all
requirements of the currently adopted International Fire Code.
(2) Any outside fires kindled or maintained on one's own property for the use of cooking or
recreational purposes provided that such fires are kindled and maintained in a safe and sane
manner. Such fires must also meet all other requirements of the currently adopted International
Fire Code.
(3) Any fire properly used in connection with industrial or commercial equipment which
must generate heat to operate correctly. Examples of such equipment shall include, but are not
limited to, tar-pots, water heaters, steam generators, and asphalt heating equipment.
(4) Any fire lawfully kindled by the City of Borger for the purposes of hazard mitigation that
meets all of the requirements of article 5.05 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Borger,
Texas.
(5) Training fires conducted in compliance with all state and federal regulations and
specifically authorized by the fire marshal which are kindled and maintained for the instruction
of firefighting personnel.
307.4.1.1 Prohibiting bonfires. The fire chief, fire marshal, or their authorized designee may reduce, restrict,
and/or change types of fuel, or prohibit altogether any permitted bonfire when atmospheric conditions or other
circumstances at the time make any such bonfire hazardous.
307.5.1 Attendance by fire suppression personnel. Bonfires shall be attended by fire suppression personnel as
may be assigned by the fire chief.
311.6 Enforcement. Section 311 may be enforced by the fire department, police department and code
enforcement department of the city.
605.10 Portable electric space heaters. Where not prohibited by other sections of this code, portable, electric
space heaters that are equipped with an automatic shut off that turns unit off when tipped over, shall be permitted
to be used in all occupancies other than group I-2 and in accordance with sections 605.10.1 through 605.10.4.
5601.2.5 Display permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
manufacture, possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, use, or discharge any fireworks within
the corporate city limits. The fire marshal shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
granting of display permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by governmental jurisdictions, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations; or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their
trade. Every such use or display shall be handled by a competent operator who is properly licensed and bonded.
Each such display shall be investigated and approved by the fire marshal and shall be located, discharged, or
fired, so as in the opinion of the fire marshal, is deemed not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
A display permit must be secured for such use or display, with application for the display permit being made at
least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the display. Issuance of such permit will be considered only if all
other provisions of city ordinances, the fire code, and state law are strictly adhered to. Should such display
permit be granted, the possession, use, and/or distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that
purpose only. No display permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/430
5610.1 General remedy. Where the possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are
prohibited, section 5610.1.1 will provide remedy for violation and the destruction of fireworks.
5610.1.1 Remedy for violation. The fire department and police department are each authorized to seize, and
destroy the fireworks seized, inside the city limits in violation of this chapter, in accordance with the following
procedures:
1. At the time of seizing illegal fireworks inside the city limits, the fire marshal or police officer
shall prepare an inventory of such fireworks and photograph same at the scene. All such photographs
shall constitute and be evidence.
2. The fire marshal or police officer shall, by end of the tour of duty during which the fireworks are
seized, deposit same into a receptacle dedicated for the purpose by the fire or police department.
Such container shall be secure from flames, other sources of ignition, pilfering, and theft.
3. As soon as practicable thereafter, and in accordance with internal orders and procedures of the
fire or police chief, all such fireworks shall be destroyed, disabled, or otherwise rendered useless by
any safe method, by personnel trained in the handling of explosives or hazardous materials.
(Ordinance O-012-14 adopted 12/16/14)
Sec. 5.04.003 Enforcement
(a) The fire marshal shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of the fire code within the
corporate city limits. The fire marshal may detail such members of the fire prevention bureau as inspectors as
may from time to time be necessary.
(b) Under the direction of the fire marshal, the members of the fire prevention bureau shall enforce all
ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The suppression or extinguishing of fires.
(3) The storage, use, and handling of explosive, flammable, combustible, toxic, corrosive and other
hazardous gaseous, solid and liquid materials.
(4) The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and
fire-extinguishing equipment.
(5) The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
(6) The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on land and in buildings,
structures and other property, including those under construction.
(7) The means and adequacy of each exit in the event of fire, from factories, schools, motels,
hotels, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other
places in which people work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose.
(8) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.22)
Sec. 5.04.004 Nonliability of city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/430
The fire code shall not be construed to hold the public entity or any officer or employee of the city responsible
for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized in the fire code, or
for any action in connection with the control or extinguishment of any fire or in connection with any other
official duties. (1998 Code, sec. 91.23)
Sec. 5.04.005 Determination of new materials, processes or occupancies which require permits
The city manager, the chief of police and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall
require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1998 Code, sec. 91.24)
Sec. 5.04.006 Appeals
In order to determine the suitability of alternate methods and types of construction and to provide for reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of the fire code, there shall be and is hereby established a board of appeals
consisting of members who are qualified by training and experience to pass upon pertinent matters. The building
standards commission of the city shall serve as the board of appeals. Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an
application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the
fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire
marshal to the building standards commission within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. After
appeal has been heard by the building standards commission, the same may be appealed to the city council. Such
appeal to city council must be made within 30 days of the decision of the building standards commission. (1998
Code, sec. 91.25)
Sec. 5.04.007 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be cited, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to section 1.01.009, general penalty for violations of code; continuing violations. Each and
every day that the provisions of this article are violated shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance O-012-07
adopted 11/20/07)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIRE HAZARD MITIGATION
Sec. 5.05.001 Definitions
Authorized burn. The controlled application of fire to naturally occurring vegetative fuels under specified environmental
conditions and confined to a predetermined area, following appropriate planning and precautionary measures. (Ordinance
O-006-08, sec. 2, adopted 4/7/08)
Burn manager. The city fire chief or his/her authorized designee having reasonable training and experience to conduct the
specific burn operation. (Ordinance O-003-18 adopted 1/16/18)
Extinguished. The absence of any visible flames, glowing coals, or smoke.
Neighborhood. A platted subdivision or property contiguous to and within 300 feet of a platted subdivision.
Practical alternative. An economically, technologically, ecologically, and logistically viable option.
Sec. 5.05.002 Rural/urban interface hazard mitigation program
Hazard mitigation is an important part of any city's plans and procedures for protecting the life and property of
their citizens. The city recognizes that a large hazard exists from wildfires and their interface with the urban
areas of the city. In order to mitigate these hazards, the city has adopted the following rural/urban interface
hazard mitigation program to reduce the hazardous fuel loads in the rural/urban interface through authorized
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/430
burns of land deemed a public hazard based on the height and amount of weeds. The following sections will
regulate the program.
(Ordinance O-006-08, sec. 2, adopted 4/7/08)
Sec. 5.05.003 Authorized burns within the corporate city limits
(a) Preparation.
(1) Targeted areas for authorized burning will be determined by assessing levels of hazards to the
area. An advisory group consisting of the city's emergency management coordinator, the city's fire
marshal's office, and the city's fire department administration will make the determination. Final
approval for any authorized burn rests with the burn manager.
(2) Landowners will be notified by mail or personal contact by fire department personnel when
possible. Landowners must be notified in writing that the property has been deemed a public hazard
and that the city will be abating the hazard. When possible, release of liability and written permission
from the property owner will be obtained.
(3) Specific information regarding authorized burns will be posted on the public information
sources of the city. This includes, but is not limited to, the city's public access cable channel, the
city's website, newspapers serving the city, and any other source deemed necessary or appropriate by
the city.
(4) Prior to burning, sufficient planning shall have been conducted and the area shall have been
prepared. Preparations include the removal of harmful debris and trash, removal of disproportionate
fuel loads, the creation of fire breaks where needed, and any other appropriate action as deemed
necessary by the city or county fire marshal and/or the city fire chief. Electrical insulation, treated
lumber, plastics, nonwood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials,
potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, and items containing natural or synthetic rubber
must not be burned.
(5) Notification will be made to all applicable agencies as required by state law.
(6) Authorization from the TCEQ's executive director shall be required as outlined in section
111.215 of the TCEQ's Texas Administrative Code prior to burning unless state law states otherwise.
(b) Burning.
(1) Any authorized burn will be conducted on a day when the weather is deemed appropriate. The
burn manager will develop a checklist of required signatures to sign off on the burn before the
activities commence. In no instance shall burning start: more than one hour before sunrise, when the
predicted wind speed is less than six miles per hour (mph) (5 knots) or greater than 23 mph (20
knots) during the burn period and during periods of actual or predicted persistent low level
atmospheric temperature inversions. In all cases, any authorized burn must be completed no later
than one hour before sunset.
(2) The National Incident Management System (NIMS) shall be utilized throughout any and all
authorized burns. Appropriate individuals from all participating agencies shall be directly involved in
all stages of the operations and management of the authorized burn.
(3) The burn manager shall insure that sufficient personnel and equipment will be available at the
scene and/or at the fire station to ensure the proper containment of the authorized burn during the
burn period.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/430
(4) The burn manager shall develop a checklist outlining the steps to be completed for the
conducting of a safe authorized burn and the completed checklist shall be maintained as
documentation of the authorized burn.
(5) All outdoor burning conducted under this section shall be consistent with the Texas Clean Air
Act and the TCEQ's Texas Administrative Code.
(c) Documentation.
(1) All steps of the authorized burn shall be documented and each burn shall have a file maintained
at the city central fire station.
(2) Pictures shall be taken to document the before and after state of the burn area.
Sec. 5.05.004 Authorized burns within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
(a) Preparation.
(1) Targeted areas for authorized burning will be determined by assessing levels of hazards to the
area. An advisory group consisting of the city's emergency management coordinator, the county's fire
marshal office, and the city's fire department administration will make the determination. Final
approval for any authorized burn rests with the burn manager.
(2) Landowners must be notified and provide a release of liability and written permission for the
burn.
(3) Specific information regarding authorized burns will be posted on the public information
sources of the city. This includes, but is not limited to, the city's public access cable channel, the
city's website, newspapers serving the city, and any other source deemed necessary or appropriate by
the city.
(4) Prior to burning, sufficient planning shall have been conducted and the area shall have been
prepared. Preparations include the removal of harmful debris and trash, removal of disproportionate
fuel loads, the creation of fire breaks where needed, and any other appropriate action as deemed
necessary by the county fire marshal and/or the city fire chief. Electrical insulation, treated lumber,
plastics, non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially
explosive materials, chemical wastes, and items containing natural or synthetic rubber must not be
burned.
(5) Notification will be made to all applicable agencies as required by state law.
(6) Burns in the extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to county burn bans. Expressed permission
to conduct the burn must be obtained from the county judge or other duly authorized county designee
during the time a county burn ban is in effect.
(b) Burning.
(1) Any authorized burn will be conducted on a day when the weather is deemed appropriate. The
burn manager will develop a checklist of required signatures to sign off on the burn before the
activities commence. In no instance shall burning start: more than one hour before sunrise, when the
predicted wind speed is less than six miles per hour (mph) (5 knots) or greater than 23 mph (20
knots) during the burn period and during periods of actual or predicted persistent low level
atmospheric temperature inversions. In all cases, any authorized burn must be completed no later
than one hour before sunset.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/430
(2) The National Incident Management System (NIMS) shall be utilized throughout any and all
controlled burns. Appropriate individuals from all participating agencies shall be directly involved in
all stages of the operations and management of the authorized burn.
(3) The burn manager shall insure that sufficient personnel and equipment will be available at the
scene and/or at the fire station to ensure the proper containment of the authorized burn during the
burn period.
(4) The burn manager shall develop a checklist outlining the steps to be completed for the
conducting of a safe authorized burn and the completed checklist shall be maintained as
documentation of the authorized burn.
(5) All outdoor burning conducted under this section shall be consistent with the Texas Clean Air
Act and the TCEQ's Texas Administrative Code.
(c) Documentation.
(1) All steps of the authorized burn shall be documented and each burn shall have a file maintained
at the city central fire station.
(2) Pictures shall be taken to document the before and after state of the burn area.
(Ordinance O-006-08, sec. 2, adopted 4/7/08; Ordinance O-003-18 adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 5.05.005 Exclusions
Burning at a city-owned or officially designated limb pile falls under a separate standard, whereas the burn is not
dependent on the wind requirements as listed in section 5.05.003(b)(1) and section 5.05.004(b)(1). Therefore, no minimum
wind speed is required. Maximum wind speed would still apply unless heavy precipitation of snow is present. (Ordinance
O-003-18 adopted 1/16/18)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 UNSANITARY AND UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.02.001 Stagnant water
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or other premises in the city to allow or permit holes or places where
water may accumulate and become stagnant to be or remain on such lot or premises or to allow or permit the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain thereon. (1998 Code, sec. 92.01)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/430
State law reference–Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
secs. 342.001, 342.005 et seq.
Sec. 6.02.002 Carrion, filth or other unwholesome matter
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, building, house, establishment or premises in the city to allow or
permit any carrion, filth or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain
thereon. (1998 Code, sec. 92.02)
Sec. 6.02.003 Accumulations of waste or unsanitary matter; outdoor storage
(a) Prohibited conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any lot, tract or
parcel of land, whether occupied or unoccupied, within the city limits, to:
(1) Permit the accumulation of rubbish, trash, solid waste, garbage or debris on such premises;
(2) Permit the accumulation of unsanitary matter upon such premises;
(3) Permit or allow the accumulation, in view from public property or from adjacent private
property, of materials, equipment, merchandise or personal property of any kind;
(4) Permit or allow the outdoor storage of materials, equipment, or merchandise of any type,
unscreened, that is required to be screened by other sections of this code.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Debris. Generally encompasses the entire gamut of unused material substances which may be from a natural or
manmade cause, but whose attributes constitute at least the common elements of rubbish, trash, and garbage.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the storage, handling, preparation,
cooking or consumption of food.
Rubbish. Nondecayable wastes, except ashes, from a public or private establishment or residence.
Solid waste. Any organic or nonorganic material created as a result of human or animal physical accretions,
secretions, or discharge; residual results, products, discharges, or any creation of byproducts or products from
manufacturing, research, or testing activities.
Trash. Nonputrescible waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including, but
not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, wood, rubber, plastics, yard or lawn trimmings, tree or shrub trimmings,
leaves, glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, scrap metal, scrap lumber, discarded appliances, furniture,
vehicle parts, construction waste, ashes and similar material.
(c) Removal required. It shall be the duty of any person having supervision or control of any premises as
described in subsection (a) of this section to remove or cause to be removed all such grass, weeds, rubbish, trash,
debris, brush, rubber or any other objectionable unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature as often as
may be necessary to comply with this section.
(1998 Code, secs. 92.03, 92.03.1, 92.03.2)
Sec. 6.02.004 Vegetation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any lot, tract or parcel of land occupied
or unoccupied within the city limits to allow grass, weeds or any uncultivated plantings to grow in rank
profusion:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/430
(1) When weed and uncultivated growth is 12 inches or more in height and 20% or more of the
subject property is covered by said vegetation growth.
(2) Along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the premises, between the property line and the curb, or
if there is no curb, then within ten feet outside that property line.
(3) In any alley or easement adjacent to the premises measured to the centerline of such alley or
easement.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.04)
(b) The city may abate, without notice, the nuisance of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height
which are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.004 et seq.;
additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Secs. 6.02.005–6.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abatement
Sec. 6.02.031 Notice of violation; hearing; failure to abate
(a) The director of planning and zoning shall cause to be examined any lot, tract or parcel of land suspected of
being in violation of the provisions of this article, and where a violation exists, the director of planning and
zoning shall give the owner or the person in control of the property, or both, written notice which must be given
personally to the owner in writing; by letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the
appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or if personal service cannot be
obtained: (1) by publication at least once; (2) by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on
the property to which the violation relates; or (3) by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. The notice is still effective if the notice is returned
by the United States Postal Service. The notice of violation may inform the owner that, if the owner commits
another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the
first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's
expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection
occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership
change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by this section and assess its expenses as
provided by section 6.02.032(b). (1998 Code, sec. 92.05; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Should the person notified fail to remedy such violations, the director of planning and zoning may file
charges in municipal court and may report such violations to the building standards commission.
(c) Upon report of violations of this section, the building standards commission may schedule a public hearing
to determine whether or not such violations constitute a nuisance and should be ordered to be abated.
(d) Should the building standards commission schedule a public hearing, the owner or person in charge of
such property shall be given a notice by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at his last
known address and by publication at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, of the time,
place and subject matter of such public hearing.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.05)
(e) Should the building standards commission upon such public hearing determine that violations of this
section exist and that such violations constitute a nuisance, then the building standards commission may enter an
order commanding the owner or person in control, or both, of the property on which such violations exist to
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/430
abate such nuisance within seven days. Such order shall also state that, should the nuisance continue after the
expiration of seven days from the date of the order, the director of planning and zoning may cause the nuisance
to be abated at the expense of the property owner.
(f) Should the owner or person in charge of such property, or both, fail to abate the nuisance found to exist by
the building standards commission within seven days following the order of the building standards commission,
then the director of planning and zoning may cause the nuisance to be abated. The director of planning and
zoning, upon completion of such work, shall submit an invoice of the charges for such work to the owner or
person in control of such property, or both, which invoice shall request payment within 30 days. If the person to
whom the invoice is submitted shall fail to pay the same as requested, then the director of planning and zoning
may file a lien, which shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum, against the property on which the work
was done in the appropriate county deed records.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.05; Ordinance adopting Code)
(g) Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decision of the commission shall have a
right of appeal to the city council within ten days from the rendition of such decision, order or requirement by
the commission. Said appeals shall be submitted by written notice of appeal to the city council requesting a
hearing before the city council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. Due process shall not be
denied and further appeal may be made to the court of proper jurisdiction. (1998 Code, sec. 92.05)
State law reference–Notice of work or improvements by city, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.006.
Sec. 6.02.032 Abatement by city; recovery of costs incurred by city
(a) Correction or removal of conditions by city. At the expiration of seven days after notification as provided
in section 6.02.031, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary or cause the
same to be done in order that the premises comply with the requirements set forth in division 1 of this article.
(b) Collection of costs; filing of statement of expenses.
(1) Mailing of bill; due date; administrative charge. The bill for the cost incurred by the city
resulting from the abatement of the condition existing by reason of the owner's failure to comply with
division 1 of this article shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and must be satisfied within 30
days of the mailing of the bill. In addition to all other costs an administrative charge of $50 shall be
added to cover the city's cost of inspection, reinspection, mailing, publication, bookkeeping and other
related administrative expenses.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.06; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Filing of statement of expenses. If the bill has not been satisfied within the period specified in
subsection (b)(1) of this section, the director of the planning and zoning department may file a
statement signed by the mayor with the office of the county clerk for the expenses incurred in the
abatement of the above-described condition on the premises, including the administrative costs set
out in subsection (b)(1).
(3) Privileged lien; interest. The city shall have a privileged lien on any lot upon which such
expense is incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, for the cost as
specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section plus interest of 10% per annum from the date payment is
due.
(4) Suit for recovery and foreclosure. For any such expenditure and interest as aforesaid, suit may
be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/430
(5) Proof of amount. The statement made by the director of the planning and zoning department as
provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, or a copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the
amount expended in any such work performed by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.06)
State law reference–Assessment of expenses, lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.007.
ARTICLE 6.03 MOSQUITO CONTROL*
Sec. 6.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning:
Collections of water. Those collections of water contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes,
depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse
troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks or flush
closets or other similar water containers.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.15)
Sec. 6.03.002 Treatment of standing and flowing water required
(a) Treatment required. It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any
collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection
of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding.
(b) Presence of larvae. The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence
that mosquitoes are breeding therein, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the
health officer shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(c) Methods of treatment. The method of treatment of any collections of water directed toward the prevention
of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the accredited health officer, and may be any one or more of the
following:
(1) Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way or with any other
material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
(2) Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough
drying or cleaning.
(3) Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer.
(4) Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once
every seven days.
(5) Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking
with mosquito-destroying fish.
(6) Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer.
(7) Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and
similar articles likely to hold water.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/430
Sec. 6.03.003 Abatement by city
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take
necessary measures to prevent the same within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health
officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge
against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. (1998 Code, sec. 92.17)
Sec. 6.03.004 Right of entry; noncompliance
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent, acting
under his authority, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction; and any
person or persons charged with any of the duties imposed by this article failing, within the time designated by
this article, or within the time stated in the notice of the health officer, as the case may be, to perform such
duties, or to carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the health officer, shall be deemed guilty of a
separate violation of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 92.18)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 BUILDING SECURITY FUND†
Sec. 7.02.001 Assessment of fee
(a) All defendants convicted in trial of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be assessed a $3
security fee as cost of court.
(b) A person shall be considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.01(A), (B))
Sec. 7.02.002 Use of fund; administration
The costs collected shall be paid to the finance director and deposited in a fund to be known as the municipal
court building security fund. This fund shall be administered under the direction of the city council and may be
used only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the
municipal court building:
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/430
(2) Handheld metal detectors;
(3) Walk-through metal systems;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when
they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, or other security hardware;
(1998 Code, sec. 36.01(C))
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 7.03 TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 7.03.001 Fund established
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the fund,
pursuant to Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.15)
Sec. 7.03.002 Assessment of fee
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in
the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after October 1, 2001.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the city finance director, who shall deposit the
fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.16)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/430
Sec. 7.03.003 Use of fund; administration
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements of the city municipal
court, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.17)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Adoption of state law
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the
city, and if committed within the city, is hereby declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty
therefor shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1.01.009 or the penalty prescribed by state law,
whichever is less. (1998 Code, sec. 130.01)
Sec. 8.01.002 Obstructing public ways
(a) General prohibition; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to erect, construct, or
permit the erection or construction of any character of obstruction over, on, or across any public way, street,
sidewalk, alley, or public property, or between the property line of any lot and a public street or alley line, with
the following exceptions:
(1) Fences or canopies temporarily erected for the protection of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic
as required by the building code during the construction or demolition of a building.
(2) Barricades or warning signs required to be placed in the street or right-of-way in connection
with utility repairs, street repairs or excavations and other work activities as may be authorized by a
permit issued by the building inspector.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/430
(3) Commercial signs or canopies installed in compliance with applicable city codes or ordinances
that extend over the street right-of-way and are a minimum height of eight feet above the sidewalk or
grade and which do not project closer than two feet horizontally to the curbline. In the absence of a
curb, the curbline shall be established by the city.
(4) The reerection, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any fence, wall or structure authorized by
a permit issued by the building inspector. (No permit shall be issued for the repair of any structure of
whatever nature if said structure constitutes a sight obstruction or a hazard to the safety of persons or
property.)
(5) Hedges or plantings may be placed in the area between the property line and the edge of the
street provided their height does not exceed three feet above the gutter flow line, pavement edge or
ditch line, and provided the outer limits of such hedge or plantings extend no closer to the curb,
pavement edge or ditch than two feet on the property side.
(6) Tree limbs may extend into the area between the property line and the curb, pavement edge, or
ditch line and over the street; provided that over the street and for a distance of two feet behind the
curb, pavement edge or ditch line the limbs are a minimum height of 15 feet, and from two feet
behind the curb, pavement edge or ditch line the limbs are a minimum height of eight feet. Tree limbs
extending into the alley shall be a minimum height of 15 feet above the alleyway.
(b) Removal of obstruction. An obstruction of whatever character which is found to be located over, on, or
across any public way, street, sidewalk, alley, or public property, or between the property line of any lot and a
public street or alley line, that impedes the safe movement of vehicular traffic or pedestrians, or which is a
hindrance to or prevents the maintenance of said public ways or utilities placed therein, shall be deemed in
violation of this section and shall be removed by the owner or person responsible therefor upon notice from the
designated authority of the city. The notice shall contain a reasonable time for removal of the obstruction
depending upon the severity of the situation, but in no case shall the time allowed to remove the obstruction
exceed ten days. Failure of the owner or person responsible to remove the obstruction in the required time can
result in the removal of same by city personnel and the cost of removal being assessed against the owner or
person responsible.
(c) Obstruction by individuals. A person shall not stop or stand in the way so as to in any manner obstruct the
use of the sidewalks, streets, or any other public place in the city by loafing, lounging or standing in or upon the
same.
(d) Placing objects in streets, alleys, or sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any materials,
boxes, or other objects whatever in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city without first obtaining the
written permission of the building inspector. If written permission is obtained, then it shall be unlawful to
remove the material so placed without first obtaining the written permission of the city engineer to remove the
same.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.01)
Charter reference–Altering streets, obstructions, encroachments, etc., sec. 100.
State law reference–Obstruction of highway or other passageway, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.03.
Sec. 8.01.003 Riding or using bicycles, roller skates, etc., on sidewalks in central business district
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate or move a bicycle, wagon, go-cart or other
toy vehicle or to use roller skates as a means of movement on sidewalks within the central business district as
that area is designated by the zoning ordinance.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/430
(b) Procedure when violator is minor. In the event the person violating the provisions of this section is a minor
as that term is defined under the penal laws of the state, any peace officer of the city shall take possession of the
means of movement and take the same to the police station and duly notify the parents of such minor of the
violation and surrender possession of such article upon call of one or more parents at the police station.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.02)
ARTICLE 8.02 PROPERTY OFFENSES
Sec. 8.02.001 Climbing water towers, poles and similar structures
It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or ascend any water tower, windmill tower,
telephone, telegraph, electric light or any other publicly or privately owned pole in the city. (1998 Code, sec.
130.15)
ARTICLE 8.03 PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Sec. 8.03.001 Abandoning refrigerators or similar containers
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other
structure, or within any warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building, or other
structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or
semi-airtight container which has a capacity of 1-1/2 cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or
more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door
or lid shut. (1998 Code, sec. 130.25)
State law reference–Regulation of abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
756.011 et seq.
Sec. 8.03.002 Discharging weapons
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or to discharge an air rifle
or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas,
springs, or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object at a velocity in excess of
300 feet per second, or to discharge any cannon cracker or torpedo on or across any public square, street, alley,
or other public or private property within the city; provided, however, this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers in the discharge of their duty or training. A “cannon cracker” is any combustible package
more than two inches long and more than one inch through. (1998 Code, sec. 130.26)
State law references–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001;
disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01.
Sec. 8.03.003 Refusing to aid peace officer
It shall be unlawful for any person being called on by the chief of police or any other peace officer to refuse or
fail to aid such officer in any manner in which, by law, he may be rightfully called on to aid or assist in the
execution of a duty incumbent upon such officer. (1998 Code, sec. 130.27)
Sec. 8.03.004 Loitering
(a) A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual
for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the
fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/430
afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the
person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct. Before this explanation is
requested by the police officer, the person must be given his or her Miranda warning. No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding two sentences,
or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the police
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being
a loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the suspect caused by
obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police officer, or where a “no loitering”
sign or signs have been posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street,
curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or
obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to
block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any building open to the public.
(c) For the purpose of this section, “public place” has the following definition unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets, sidewalks,
bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open
to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(1998 Code, sec. 130.28)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Unreasonable noises prohibited
The creation of any unreasonable loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is hereby prohibited. Noises
of such character, intensity and duration as are reasonably calculated to be detrimental to the life or health of any
ordinary reasonable person, or disturb the comfort and repose of any reasonable person of normal sensibilities in
the vicinity, are hereby prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 93.01)
Sec. 8.04.002 Examples of unreasonable noises
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
article; provided, however, that such enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive of other noises:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph, amplifier, loudspeaker or any musical instrument in
such manner, or with such volume, as to create a noise such as is reasonably calculated to disturb a
person of ordinary disposition under the same or similar circumstances residing in a dwelling or other
type of residence in the vicinity.
(2) The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create
loud or unnecessary noises such as spinning or squealing tires, grating, grinding, rattling or other
noise.
(3) The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger.
(4) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(5) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air or otherwise, except pneumatic
drills, unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled and reduced.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/430
(6) The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a
residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit from the
chief of police, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency
continues.
(7) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
(8) The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(9) The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace
of the neighborhood.
(10) The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention, by creation of noise, to any performance, show or sale of merchandise.
(11) The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on any vehicle.
(12) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets at any time or place so as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(13) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
(1998 Code, sec. 93.02)
ARTICLE 8.05 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 8.05.001 Prohibition
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages (as
defined in Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code section 1.04(1)) while in any of the public parks, streets, alleys and
parking lots as described in section 8.05.003. (1998 Code, sec. 94.50)
Sec. 8.05.002 Prima facie evidence of consumption
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Open container. Bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages which have had the seal broken, but have the
cap or lid on the container, and shall also include containers such as cups, mugs, glasses, thermos bottles, and
flasks.
Possession. Being in close proximity to an open container of alcoholic beverage and not just the physical
possession of said container.
(b) The possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.51)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/430
Sec. 8.05.003 Prohibited locations
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic
beverage (as defined in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, section 1.04(1)) while in any public park, public-owned
parking lot, municipal facility, municipal building, Marcy Trail and Gregg Drive (located on the campus of
Frank Phillips College), or on any street or alley within the central business district as outlined on the official
zoning map of the city.
(b) Exceptions:
(1) The Municipal Golf Course property.
(2) Johnson Park softball field area.
(3) Johnson Park horseshoe pitching and picnic area.
(4) Johnson Park soccer/football field area.
(5) Huber Park with special permit and security deposit.
(6) Huber Park recreational vehicle parking area.
(Ordinance O-007-03, sec. 94.52, adopted 7/1/03)
ARTICLE 8.06 CURFEW FOR MINORS*
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
Curfew hours.
(1) From 11:01 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of
the following day;
(2) From 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency. Any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/430
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person, but does not include a parent
whose parental rights have been terminated; or
(2) A person who is at least 18 years of age and has supervision of the minor may qualify for care
and custody for any signal event, if such authorization is in writing and can be presented and
established.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay;
(2) Walk, run, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public place; or
(3) Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 8.06.002 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable
by as provided in section 1.01.009.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.06.003 and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
Sec. 8.06.003 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of an establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.06.004 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.06.003 above that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/430
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, charitable, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, Borger Independent School District, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that has undertaken responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from
such activity, without any detour or stop;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, and exercising rights protected by
the Texas Constitution;
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code (as amended); or
(10) Acting at the direction of a peace officer.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.06.003 that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 8.06.005 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defenses are available in section 8.06.004.
(Ordinance O-002-10 adopted 7/6/10)
ARTICLE 8.07 ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle:
(1) Is inoperable, is more than five (5) years old, and has been left unattended on public property
for more than 48 hours;
(2) Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours;
(3) Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the
property for more than 48 hours;
(4) Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway
for more than 48 hours; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/430
(5) Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project
constructed and maintained by the state turnpike authority or a controlled-access highway. For the
purpose of this subsection (5), “controlled-access highway” has the meaning assigned by Tex.
Transp. Code section 541.302.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.01, adopted 5/6/03)
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.01, adopted
5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
Department. The state department of transportation.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a storage facility.
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and inoperable and:
(1) Does not lawfully have affixed to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate;
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.01, adopted 5/6/03)
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.01,
adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(3) Has remained inoperable for more than 30 consecutive days if on private property, or
(4) Has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours, if on public property.
Law enforcement agency.
(1) Department of public safety;
(2) Police department of the city;
(3) Police department of an institution of higher education; or
(4) Sheriff's department or constable of the county.
Motor vehicle. A vehicle that is subject to registration under Texas Transportation Code chapter 501, except that
for purposes of section 8.07.031 through section 8.07.033 “motor vehicle” includes a motorboat, outboard
motor, personal watercraft or vessel subject to registration under Texas Parks and Wildlife Code chapter 31.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or
special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle
for historic interest.
Motor vehicle demolisher. A person in the business of:
(1) Converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/430
(2) Wrecking or dismantling motor vehicles.
Police department. The police department of the city.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Storage facility. Includes a garage, parking lot, or establishment for the servicing, repairing, or parking of motor
vehicles.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.01, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.002 Right of entry; enforcement
Any person duly authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this article may enter private
property for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as
to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a
nuisance. The municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec.
95.02, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.003 Effect of article on other laws authorizing removal of vehicles
This article relating to junked and abandoned motor vehicles does not affect any law or ordinance authorizing
the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property. (Ordinance O-005-03,
sec. 95-03, adopted 5/6/03)
Secs. 8.07.004–8.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Motor Vehicles
Sec. 8.07.031 Authority to move and remove vehicles
(a) Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon a street or highway in violation of any
provisions of a statute or ordinance, such police officer is authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of
such highway or street.
(b) Any police officer is authorized to remove a vehicle from any public or private property to the nearest
garage, or other place of safety, or to a storage place designated by the city, under the following circumstances:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or causeway where such vehicle is an
obstruction to traffic;
(2) When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it
is impractical to move such vehicle from in front of the driveway to another point along the highway;
(3) When any vehicle is found upon a highway and report has previously been made that such
vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and warrant thereon issued charging that such
vehicle has been embezzled;
(4) When any such police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been
abandoned;
(5) After a vehicle that does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a
valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, or is so disabled that its normal operation is
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/430
impossible or impractical, has been parked on any public highway, and after the owner has been
given at least 48 hours' notice either in person or in writing attached to the windshield at the
beginning of the 48-hour period that the vehicle will be removed after the expiration of such period;
and
(6) When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and
such officer is authorized by this code or other law to take the person arrested into custody or to take
the person immediately before a magistrate.
(c) Any vehicle standing unattended may be moved by any member of the police or fire department, and any
police officer or firefighter may require the moving of any such vehicle if it obstructs the free movements of
such persons in the actual discharge of their duties.
(d) Any member of the police department is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked or standing in or
on any portion of a highway when, in the opinion of the member of the police department, the vehicle is a
hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or because of any catastrophe, emergency
or unusual circumstance the safety of the vehicle is imperiled.
(e) The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve and
store such vehicles it takes into custody.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.10, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.032 Notice of removal; storage fees
(a) The police department that takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle shall notify, no later than the
tenth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the
motor vehicle and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, or Texas Parks and Wildlife
Code chapter 31, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model
and vehicle identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the
motor vehicle is being held, and inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle
not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation, and storage
charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, or garagekeeper's charges if notice is given under section
8.07.034. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim
the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title, and
interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction.
(b) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for
the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
abandoned is sufficient notice under this section. The notice by publication may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles, shall be published with the same requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail, and
shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail.
(c) The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are as set forth in a valid
notice given under this section.
(d) The police department or agent of the police department that takes custody of an abandoned motor vehicle
is entitled to reasonable storage fees for:
(1) A period of not more than ten days beginning on the day the department takes custody and
continuing through the day the department mails notice as provided by this section; and
(2) A period beginning on the day after the day the department mails notice and continuing through
the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle is removed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/430
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.11, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.033 Auction of unclaimed vehicles; transfer of title; disposition of proceeds
If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by section 8.07.032, the police department
shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given, and
in the case of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. The
purchaser of the motor vehicle takes title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership,
shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and
receive a certificate of title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the police department
shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle that
resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred
under section 8.07.032. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or
entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the
payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing
another abandoned vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned vehicle are insufficient
to meet these expenses and costs. The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the
general revenue account to be used by the police department. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.12, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.034 Disposition of vehicles abandoned at garagekeeper's establishment
(a) A motor vehicle left for more than ten (10) days in a storage facility operated for commercial purposes
after notice is given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to any lienholder
of record under the Certificate of Title Act to pick up the vehicle, or for more than ten (10) days after a period
when under a contract the vehicle was to remain on the premises of the storage facility, or a motor vehicle left
for more than ten (10) days in a storage facility by someone other than the registered owner or by a person
authorized to have possession of the motor vehicle under contract of use, service, storage or repair is considered
an abandoned vehicle, and shall be reported by the garagekeeper to the police department. If the notice to the
owner or a lienholder is returned by the post office unclaimed, notice by one publication in one newspaper of
general circulation in the area in which the vehicle was left in storage is sufficient notice. (Ordinance O-005-03,
sec. 95.13, adopted 5/6/03)
(b) If a garagekeeper or storage facility acquires possession of a motor vehicle for a purpose other than repair,
the garagekeeper or storage facility is entitled to towing, preservation, and notification charges and to reasonable
storage fees, in addition to storage fees earned pursuant to contract for each day, up to a maximum of five days
only until notification is mailed to the last known registered owner and all lienholders of record as provided by
this section. After such notice is mailed, storage fees may continue until the vehicle is removed and all accrued
charges are paid. A garagekeeper who fails to report the possession of an abandoned vehicle to the police
department within seven days after it becomes abandoned may no longer claim reimbursement for storage of the
vehicle. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.13, adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle
considered abandoned under the provisions of this section, shall follow the notification procedures provided by
section 8.07.032, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garagekeeper until after compliance
with the notification requirements. A fee of $5 shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper to the police
department. The $5 fee shall be retained by the police department receiving the report and used to defray the
cost of notification or other costs incurred in the disposition of an abandoned motor vehicle. (Ordinance O-005-
03, sec. 95.13, adopted 5/6/03)
(d) An abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility and not reclaimed after notice is sent in the manner
provided by section 8.07.032 shall be taken into custody by the police department and sold in the manner
provided by section 8.07.033. The proceeds of sale under this section shall first be applied to the garagekeeper's
charges for servicing, storage and repair, but as compensation for the expense incurred by the police department
in placing the vehicle in custody and the expense of auction, the police department shall retain 2% of the gross
proceeds of the sale of each vehicle auctioned, unless the gross proceeds are less than $10.00. If the gross
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/430
proceeds are less than $10.00, the department shall retain the $10.00 to defray expenses of custody and auction.
Surplus proceeds remaining from an auction shall be distributed in accordance with section 8.07.033. An
abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility and not reclaimed after notice is sent in the manner provided by this
article may be taken into custody by the police department and used for police department purposes. (Ordinance
O-005-03, sec. 95.13, adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(e) Except for the termination or limitation of a claim [for] storage for failure to report an abandoned motor
vehicle, nothing in this section may be construed to impair a lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state.
(f) A person charging fees under this section commits an offense if the person charges a storage fee for a
period of time not authorized under this section. Such offense is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided
in section 1.01.009.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.13, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.035 Disposal of vehicles to demolishers
(a) A person, firm, corporation or unit of government on whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle or a person who is the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or
destroyed may apply to the state department of transportation for authority to sell, give away, or dispose of the
vehicle to a demolisher. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.14, adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) A person, firm, corporation or unit of government may dispose of a motor vehicle to a demolisher if:
(1) The abandoned motor vehicle is eight (8) years of age or older;
(2) The abandoned motor vehicle either has no motor or is otherwise totally inoperable; or
(3) The abandoned motor vehicle does not comply with applicable air pollution emissions control
related requirements required by state law;
(4) The abandoned motor vehicle was authorized to be towed by a law enforcement agency; and
(5) The law enforcement agency approves the application; and
(6) The person submits a $2 fee, unless the application is submitted by a unit of government.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.14, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.036 Duties of demolishers
(a) A demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires a motor vehicle to wreck, dismantle or demolish shall
obtain a valid certificate of title, sales receipt or transfer document under section 8.07.033 and section 8.07.064,
respectively, or certificate of authority from the person delivering the vehicle for demolition, but the demolisher
is not required to obtain a certificate of title for the motor vehicle in the demolisher's name. On demand of the
department of transportation, the demolisher shall surrender for cancellation the certificate of title or authority.
The department of transportation shall issue such forms and rules governing the surrender of auction sales
receipts and certificates of title as are appropriate. The Certificate of Title Act governs the cancellation of title of
the motor vehicle. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.15, adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) A demolisher commits an offense if the demolisher fails to keep an accurate and complete record of a
motor vehicle purchased or received in the course of business in the manner provided by this subsection. These
records must contain the name and address of the person from whom each motor vehicle was purchased or
received and the date of the purchase or receipt. The records shall be open for inspection by the department of
transportation or any police department at any time during normal business hours. A record required by this
subsection must be kept by the demolisher for at least one year after the transaction to which it applies. A
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/430
demolisher who commits an offense under this section is on conviction subject to a fine of not less than $100 or
more than $1,000, or a term of no less than ten (10) days or more than six (6) months in county jail, or both fine
and confinement. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.15, adopted 5/6/03)
Secs. 8.07.037–8.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 8.07.061 Public nuisance
A junk vehicle, including a part of a junk vehicle, that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place
or right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of others;
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.25.1, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.062 Offenses; penalty
A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 8.07.061 and upon
conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009, and
each and every day such offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. The court, upon conviction
of the person maintaining a public nuisance, will order abatement and removal of the public nuisance.
(Ordinance O-002-07 adopted 2/6/07)
Sec. 8.07.063 Procedure for abatement and removal by city
(a) The city hereby adopts procedures for the abatement and removal of a junk vehicle, or a part of a junk
vehicle, as a public nuisance, from public or private property or public rights-of-way. Such vehicle or part of a
junk vehicle will not be reconstructed or made operable after removal of the public nuisance.
(b) For a nuisance on private property the city shall give not less than ten (10) days' notice stating the nature
of the public nuisance on private property, that the nuisance must be abated or removed not later than the tenth
day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed, and if a hearing is desired a written
request for hearing must be made before the ten-day period expires. The notice must be personally delivered or
sent by certified mail, five-day return receipt requested, to:
(1) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(2) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(3) The owner or occupant of:
(A) The property on which the nuisance is located; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/430
(B) If the nuisance is located on public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-ofway.
(c) If the notice is returned undelivered, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to not earlier
than the eleventh day after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of
the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.
(d) For a nuisance on public property, the city shall give not less than ten days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated
within ten (10) days, and if a hearing is desired, a written request for hearing must be made before expiration of
the ten-day period. The notice must be personally delivered or mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return
receipt requested, to the last known registered owner of the public nuisance, each lienholder of record of the
nuisance, and the owner or occupant of the private property, or if the nuisance is located on public right-of-way
the property adjacent to the right-of-way. If the notice is returned undelivered, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of return.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.26, adopted 5/6/03)
(e) Upon request for a hearing as provided herein, a public hearing shall be held before the municipal court of
the city for determination of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance, and for the purpose of
entering an order requiring removal of the junk vehicle or junk vehicle part as a public nuisance. Where a
request for a hearing has not been received, the judge of municipal court, if shown a public nuisance exists, may
conduct a public hearing and enter an order requiring the removal of the junk vehicle or vehicle part as a public
nuisance. (Reference Texas Transportation Code as it now exists or may be amended in the future.) The order
requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the vehicle
identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. A fifty dollar
($50) administrative fee shall be assessed against the owner or lienholder of the vehicle or vehicle part.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.26, adopted 5/6/03; Ordinance O-009-05 adopted 9/6/05)
(f) Notice shall also be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after
removal. The notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part. The department shall immediately cancel the
certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act.
(g) Where the vehicle is declared a public nuisance by the municipal court judge and is ordered to be
removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(h) This section does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a
lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; a vehicle or vehicle part
that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
vehicle dealer or junkyard; or an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by
a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so
that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence,
rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other approved means.
(i) This section shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that
removal of a vehicle or parts thereof from public or private property or public rights-of-way may be by any other
duly authorized person under the direction of the city.
(j) The person designated by the city authorized by this section to administer the procedures of this article may
enter upon private property for the purposes specified in these procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part,
obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part
that constitutes a public nuisance. The judge of municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce these
procedures.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/430
(k) The relocation of a junk vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the corporate limits of
the city after a proceeding for the abatement or removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on
the proceedings if the junk vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.26, adopted 5/6/03)
Sec. 8.07.064 Disposal
A junk vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher or any suitable site
operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the provisions
of section 8.07.063. Upon proper authorization by the city council, the city may operate a disposal site if the city
council determines that commercial channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate, and it may make
final disposition of the vehicles or vehicle parts, or the city may transfer the vehicle or vehicle parts to another
disposal site if the disposal is only as scrap or salvage. (Ordinance O-005-03, sec. 95.27, adopted 5/6/03)
ARTICLE 8.08 IMPOUNDMENT AND SALE OF NUISANCE PROPERTY
Sec. 8.08.001 Effect of article on other laws
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall apply to, alter or affect the provisions of this code regulating the
impounding and sale of livestock, fowl and dogs.
(b) Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to abrogate or supersede the abandoned motor vehicle
and junked motor vehicle procedures established in article 8.07. The provisions of article 8.07 shall govern the
disposition of abandoned motor vehicles and junked motor vehicles, as those terms are defined in article 8.07.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.01)
Sec. 8.08.002 Nuisance property defined
Any property or obstruction placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any provision of this
code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on
any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place within the city is declared to be a nuisance. (1998
Code, sec. 97.02)
Sec. 8.08.003 Removal authorized
Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove property of any description from a street or
highway to a place designated or maintained by the police department when:
(1) Such property is left unattended upon any public right-of-way and constitutes an obstruction to
traffic;
(2) Such property upon a street or highway is disabled so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic,
and the person in charge of it because of physical injury or illness is incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
(3) Such property is left unattended on a street either in a place at which parking is prohibited, or
beyond the legal limit of parking time;
(4) Such property is declared a nuisance according to section 8.08.002;
(5) Such property is left unattended in a clearly marked fire lane.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.03)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/430
Sec. 8.08.004 Notice of impoundment
(a) If the property removed from the street, as authorized in sections 8.07.031 and 8.08.003, is a motor vehicle
and the officer knows or can decide from motor vehicle registration records the name and address of the owner
thereof, such officer shall, when practicable, give or cause to be given notice in writing to said owner of the fact
of such removal, the reasons therefor, and of the place to which said vehicle has been removed.
(b) If the property removed from the street, as authorized by sections 8.07.031 and 8.08.003, is a motor
vehicle and the officer does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason
is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and if the vehicle is not
returned to the owner as provided in section 8.08.005, notice shall be given as provided in article 8.07 of this
code and Tex. Transp. Code section 683.001 et seq.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.04)
Sec. 8.08.005 Redemption of impounded property before sale
(a) Property removed under the provisions of this article shall be kept at such place as designated by the chief
of police and kept there until application for its redemption shall be made by the owner or his authorized agent,
who shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment of fines and costs of removal and storage that may
have accrued thereon.
(b) A reasonable fee for removing the vehicle or other property and for storage shall be charged against the
vehicle or other property.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.05)
Sec. 8.08.006 Sale of unredeemed property; bill of sale; redemption after sale
(a) When the property impounded pursuant to this article is not redeemed by the owner or his authorized agent
within the time provided by law, it shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by law.
(b) When an impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the
chief of police shall sell such property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall execute a bill of sale of the
property to the purchaser thereof; provided, he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale
unless and until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the
day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.06)
Sec. 8.08.007 Lien for costs incurred by city; disposition of proceeds of sale
(a) Lien on impounded property. The city shall have a lien on all impounded personal property declared to be
a nuisance for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, and advertising such property. Such lien shall be prior
and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes; and the city may retain
possession thereof until all costs are paid or may sell the same.
(b) Disposition of proceeds of sale. After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses incurred
by the city in impounding, storing and selling of property declared to be a nuisance, as determined by the chief
of police, not to exceed a reasonable amount for each impounded article, he shall pay the balance of the proceeds
of such sale, if any, to the owner of the property. Within six months after such auction sale, the owner may apply
in writing to the chief of police, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount
of the proceeds delivered to the city treasury.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.07)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/430
Sec. 8.08.008 Disposal of property not sold at auction
Property declared to be a nuisance which is offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the procedure
herein prescribed, and upon which no person bids, shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk.
Money received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale
under this article. (1998 Code, sec. 97.08)
Sec. 8.08.009 Records
The chief of police shall keep a record book which shall contain: a description of all property impounded; the
date and time of such impounding; the date notices of sale were posted, advertised and mailed to owners and
lienholders; the return receipts of registered notices; the date of the sale at auction; the amount realized for each
article at such sale; the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known; the name and address of the
auction buyer; and any such other information as he may deem necessary. (1998 Code, sec. 97.09)
ARTICLE 8.09 SEXUAL OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.09.001 Findings and intent
(a) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on
children present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are likely to use physical violence and to
repeat their offenses and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever
reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
(b) It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens, particularly children, by prohibiting certain sexual offenders from
establishing temporary or permanent residence in certain areas where children are known to regularly congregate
and to restrict certain sexual offenders access to parks, public swimming pools, child-care facilities, public or
private youth centers, and video arcade facilities.
Sec. 8.09.002 Definitions
The following terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Child or children. Any person(s) less than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child-care facility. Day nurseries and family day-care homes, as defined in article 42.002, Human Resources
Code of the state.
Convicted or conviction. A determination of guilt which is the result of a trial or the entry of a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. A conviction of a similar offense includes, but
is not limited to, a conviction by a federal or military tribunal, including a court-marshal conducted by the
Armed Forces of the United States, and includes a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
resulting in any sanction in any state of the United States or other jurisdiction. A sanction includes, but is not
limited to, a fine, probation, community control, parole, conditional release, control release, or incarceration in a
state prison, federal prison, private correctional facility, or local detention facility.
Legal guardian or guardian. Biological or adoptive parent of a child, or a person who is responsible for the care
and maintenance of said child pursuant to Texas Statutes or similar laws of another jurisdiction.
Minor. A minor is a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/430
Park. Public parks and ball fields, school athletic facilities and playgrounds, and youth centers whether public or
private where children under the age of seventeen (17) are known to regularly congregate.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
Reside or residence. To have a place of permanent or temporary residence.
School. A public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle or secondary (high) school.
Sexual offender. Any person required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database
because of a violation involving a victim who was less than seventeen (17) years of age as required by chapter
62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
Sexual offense. A conviction under article 21.08, article 21.11, article 22.011, article 22.021, article 25.02, article
43.05, article 43.25 or article 43.26, Penal Code, Texas Statutes, or similar law of another jurisdiction in which
the victim of the sexual offense was less than seventeen (17) years of age.
Temporary residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more
days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or place where
the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive
days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
Sec. 8.09.003 Residence prohibition; exceptions
(a) It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of article 21.08, article 21.11, article
22.011, article 22.021, article 25.02, article 43.05, article 43.25 or article 43.26, Penal Code, Texas Statutes,
regardless of whether the adjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offense was less than seventeen
(17) years of age, to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 500 feet of any premises where
children are known to regularly congregate, including but not limited to, a school or school athletic facility, daycare
facility, park, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms
are defined in article 481.134, Health and Safety Code, Texas Statutes.
(b) The 500-foot distance shall be measured in a straight line from the outer boundary of the real property that
comprises a sexual offender's residence to the nearest boundary line of any premises where children are known
to regularly congregate, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or private
youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. The distance may not be measured by a pedestrian
route or automobile route, but instead by the shortest distance between the two points.
(c) The planning and zoning department shall develop and update as needed a map of known locations where
children regularly congregate, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or
private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. This map shall be used by the police
department and made available to sexual offenders during the registration process. The revision date of the map
used during the registration process of each sexual offender shall be maintained by the police department,
ensuring the exception in subsection (d)(4) below, as locations are updated on the map.
(d) Exceptions. A person residing within 500 feet of those places where children are known to regularly
congregate, as specified herein does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the dated adoption of this
article and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state.
(2) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person is a minor.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/430
(4) The premises where children are known to regularly congregate, as specified herein, within 500
feet of the person's residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary
residence, and the person has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state.
(e) Subsections (d)(1) and (d)(4) above shall not apply to a sexual offender who is convicted of a subsequent
offense as an adult after residing at an established permanent or temporary residence within 500 feet of where
children are known to regularly congregate, as specified herein.
Sec. 8.09.004 Access to parks, public swimming pools, child-care facilities, public or private youth
centers and video arcade facilities
(a) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in section 8.09.003, to
knowingly be present in a public park or swimming pool, when a child under the age of seventeen (17) years is
present, unless the sexual offender is the parent or legal guardian of a child present in the park or swimming
pool.
(b) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in section 8.09.003, to
knowingly enter or remain at a child-care facility or on its premises unless the sexual offender:
(1) Is dropping off or picking up a child registered at the facility and is the parent or legal guardian
of said child.
(2) Remains under the supervision of a facility supervisor or his/her designee while on the facility
premises.
(c) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in section 8.09.003, to
knowingly be present in a public or private youth center or video arcade facility when a child under the age of
seventeen (17) years is present, unless the sexual offender is the parent or legal guardian of a child present in the
center or facility.
Sec. 8.09.005 Penalties
A violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation
convicted hereunder, shall be punished as specified in section 1.01.009, general penalty for violation of code.
(Ordinance O-003-07 adopted 4/3/07)
ARTICLE 8.10 ILLICIT SYNTHETIC AND MISBRANDED SUBSTANCES
Sec. 8.10.001 Covered substances
Under this article, covered substances includes any substance listed as a controlled substance as defined in
chapter 481 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (Texas Controlled Substances Act), a controlled substance
analogue, or any other compound, mixture or product including but not limited to the following:
(1) [(1R, 2R, 5R)-2-[2, 6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenyl]-7, 7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo
[3.1.1] hept-3-enyl] methanol, commonly known as HU-308;
(2) (6aR, 10aR)-3-(1, 1-Dimethylbutyl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydro-6, 6, 9-trimethyl-6H-dibenzo [b,
d] pyran, commonly known as JWH-133;
(3) (-)-2ß-Carbomethoxy-3ß-(4-fluorophenyl) tropane, commonly known as ß-CFT, WIN-35, 428;
(4) (6aR, 10aR)-1-methoxy-6, 6, 9-trimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen, commonly known as L-759, 633;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/430
(5) Any aromatic plant material in granular, loose leaf or powder form, or in liquid form or as a
food additive, and any herbal incense type stimulant commonly characterized or represented to be
legal spice/synthetic cannabinoids/synthetic “legal” marijuana, sold under numerous brand names
such as “K-2,” and “Spice.” Other common brand names may include, but are not limited to: Blaze,
Blueberry Haze, Dank, Demon Passion Smoke, Genie, Hawaiian Hybrid, Magma, Mr. Nice Guy,
Ninja, Nitro, Ono Budz, Panama Red Ball, Puff, Red X Dawn, Sativah Herble Smoke, Sence, Skunk,
Smoke, Ultra Chronic, Voodoo Spice, Yucatan Fire, Zohai, etc.
(6) Any crystalline or powder product in crystalline, loose-powder, block tablet, or capsule form,
or any stimulant-type product commonly characterized or represented to be bath salts/synthetic
cathinones/synthetic stimulants, sold under numerous brand names such as “Bliss,” “Euphoria,”
“Kratom,” and “Super Coke.” Other common brand names may include, but are not limited to: Ivory
Wave, Purple Wave, Red Dove, White Dove, Blue Silk, Zoom, Bloom, Cloud Nine, Charge +, Ocean
Snow, Lunar Wave, Vanilla Sky, White Lightening, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Tranquility, Eight Ballz,
Hurricane Charlie, White Rush, Pure Ivory, etc.
(7) Any other substance or substances similar to the above described substances which when
inhaled or otherwise ingested, may produce intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or which, in any manner, changes, distorts, or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental
process of the user, when the substance has no other legitimate, nonnarcotic purpose.
(Ordinance O-012-13 adopted 12/3/13)
Sec. 8.10.002 Prohibition on the sale, possession or use
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to market, publicly display for sale, package or repackage for sale any
substance listed or described in section 8.10.001(1) through (7) in such a manner, as to imply or create the
impression, under the “totality of the circumstances,” that the ingestion or use of the substance will result in any
form of euphoria, or will mimic the effect on the human body typically associated with naturally occurring
cannabinoids or any other substance listed or described in any penalty group contained in the Texas Controlled
Substances Act as it now exists or may be amended. A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be
proved, for an offense under this subsection.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, purchase, barter, give, display, breath, inhale,
drink, or otherwise ingest, any compound, liquid, or chemical listed or described in section 8.10.001(1) through
(7), for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior,
or which, in any manner, changes, distorts, or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental process of the user.
(c) The fact that a product's labeling is inconsistent with the regulations of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration or other federal or state law may be considered as an element of the “totality of the
circumstances.”
Sec. 8.10.003 Prohibition on use or possession of ingestion device paraphernalia
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use, an ingestion device to inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illicit synthetic or misbranded drug [substance] (as
described in this article).
(b) For the purposes of this section an “ingestion device” shall mean any type of equipment or any type of
product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illicit
synthetic or misbranded drug [substance] into the human body, including but not limited to:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/430
(2) Water pipe;
(3) Carburetion tube or device;
(4) Smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) Chamber pipe;
(6) Carburetor pipe;
(7) Electric pipe;
(8) Air-driven pipe;
(9) Chillum;
(10) Bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
(Ordinance O-004-13 adopted 3/19/13)
Sec. 8.10.004 Prohibition on use or possession of other paraphernalia or other substances
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally use or possess any item with the intent to sell or
use such item as illicit synthetic or misbranded substance, or paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
or conceal an illicit synthetic or misbranded substance in violation of this article. (Ordinance O-012-13 adopted
12/3/13)
Sec. 8.10.005 Exceptions
(a) The prohibitions set forth in section 8.10.002(a) shall not apply to any person or facility regulated under
the Texas Pharmacy Act.
(b) The prohibitions set forth in section 8.10.002 shall not apply to any substance if the substance's packaging
includes:
(1) The name and physical address of the manufacturer of the product and each ingredient or
component thereof;
(2) The name and physical address of each distributor; and
(3) A complete list of all ingredients and components of the product, including their chemical
composition, sufficient to provide full disclosure.
(c) The prohibitions set forth in section 8.10.002 shall not apply to any substance labeled in accordance with
the regulations of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or other federal or state law.
(d) It is not a violation of this article if a person purchased, sold, breathed, inhaled, drank, or otherwise
ingested the substance under the lawful supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or
ensure compliance with this article.
(e) It is not a violation of this article if a person breathed, inhaled, drank, or otherwise ingested a substance
described in this article pursuant to the lawful direction or prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, etc.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/430
(f) This article does not apply to the inhalation of a lawfully prescribed anesthesia for medical or dental
purposes.
Sec. 8.10.006 Penalties
Any person, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity found to have violated any provision of this
article or to have failed to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in
accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. The imposition of a fine shall be in addition to all other remedies
provided in this article. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 8.10.007 Alternative enforcement
(a) The city council having determined and found that this article is intended for the preservation of public
health and safety, the city attorney or his/her designee is expressly authorized to institute civil proceedings to
obtain temporary and permanent injunctive relief against any violation hereof, to recover any civil penalties
permitted by law, and to recover the city's costs.
(b) In any proceeding hereunder, the city shall also request entry of an order for the seizure of any substances
or products that violate the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance O-004-13 adopted 3/19/13)
ARTICLE 8.11 ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
Sec. 8.11.001 Purpose
This article is adopted so that the city council may promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city under the age of 18 from the hazards of nicotine addiction and the dangers of
ingesting products with no clear regulatory oversight as to their purity, contents, and potential negative health
impacts, through the regulation of the sale and merchandising of electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine products,
and other flavored liquid products designed to be used in conjunction with electronic cigarettes, the regulation of
which is not preempted by federal or state law.
Sec. 8.11.002 Definitions
Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette. An electronic device usually composed of a mouthpiece, a heating element or
atomizer, a battery, and electronic circuits that all work together to provide a gas derived from liquid nicotine,
and/or other substances, which is inhaled by a user simulating smoking. The term includes such devices,
regardless of the details of the product appearance or marketed name, generally manufactured to resemble
cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other smoking devices.
Liquid nicotine. Any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of nicotine, propylene glycol and/or
other similar substances, and manufactured for use with an e-cigarette to be converted into a gas for inhaling.
Minor. A person less than 18 years of age.
Person. Any natural person, individual, corporation, limited liability company, unincorporated association,
proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association, or other entity or business of any kind.
Photographic identification. A state-issued, district, national or other equivalent government driver's license,
identification card or military card, in all cases bearing a photograph and a date of birth; or a valid passport.
Sec. 8.11.003 Prohibited acts and exceptions
(a) A person who is a minor commits an offense if the person:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/430
(1) Possesses, purchases, consumes, or accepts an electronic cigarette, liquid nicotine, or any
flavored liquid product designed to be used in conjunction with an electronic cigarette; or
(2) Falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older by displaying proof of age
that is false, fraudulent, or not actually proof of the individual's own age in order to purchase, receive
or obtain possession of an electronic cigarette, liquid nicotine, or any flavored liquid product
designed to be used in conjunction with an electronic cigarette.
(b) No person may give, distribute, transfer, sell, market, or offer electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or any
flavored liquid product designed to be used in conjunction with an electronic cigarette, to a minor.
(c) No person shall sell, or permit to be sold, through a mechanical dispensing device or vending machine,
electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or any flavored liquid product designed to be used in conjunction with an
electronic cigarette, unless the dispensing device or vending machine is located fully within premises from
which minors are prohibited.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the minor possessed the electronic
cigarette, liquid nicotine, or any flavored liquid product designed to be used in conjunction with an electronic
cigarette, in the presence of his or her own adult parent, guardian, or a spouse who is at least 18 years of age.
(e) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if possession or receipt of the electronic
cigarette, liquid nicotine, or any flavored liquid product designed to be used in conjunction with an electronic
cigarette is required in the performance of the minor's duties as an employee. This defense to prosecution only
extends to the possession or receipt of a prohibited item, as described in subsection (a)(1) above, and is not a
defense to prosecution for purchase or consumption of a prohibited item.
(f) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if a minor is participating in an inspection
or test of compliance, acting under the supervision and instruction of a law enforcement agency performing
compliance operations.
Sec. 8.11.004 Enforcement
This article shall be enforced by the city's police department.
Sec. 8.11.005 Penalty
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable
by fine as provided in section 1.01.009.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.11.003 and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(Ordinance O-004-14 adopted 5/20/14)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/430
Sec. 9.01.001 Response time for employees required to respond to fire calls
(a) A reasonable response time is hereby established by the city for employees who are required to respond to
fire calls. Such individuals are hereby required to establish residence within a 60-minute response time from the
city's central fire station.
(b) (1) Individuals who are hired as new employees by the city, and are required to respond to
fire calls, shall establish a residence within the 60-minute response area no later than 60 days
subsequent to actual employment.
(2) Acquisition of a mailing address inside the 60-minute response area shall not be considered
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. The individual to which this section applies must
establish, maintain, and actually reside within the 60-minute response area.
(c) Individuals living inside the 60-minute response area at the time of the adoption of this section (September
4, 2012) will be subject to the same requirements as new employees.
(d) This section shall not be applied retroactively. Individuals residing outside the 60-minute response area at
the time of the adoption of this section (September 4, 2012) shall not be required to move inside the 60-minute
response area. Nothing in this section shall be intended to conflict with other state statutory enactments, such as
the Health and Safety Code.
(e) Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be determined by the fire chief on an individual basis.
State law reference–Residency requirements for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 150.021.
Cross reference–Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5.
Sec. 9.01.002 Response time for employees required to respond to police calls
(a) A reasonable response time is hereby established by the city for employees who are required to respond to
police calls. Such individuals are hereby required to establish residence within a 60-minute response time from
the city's police station.
(b) (1) Individuals who are hired as new employees by the city, and are required to respond to
police calls, shall establish a residence within the 60-minute response area no later than 60 days
subsequent to actual employment.
(2) Acquisition of a mailing address inside the 60-minute response area shall not be considered
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. The individual to which this section applies must
establish, maintain, and actually reside within the 60-minute response area.
(c) Individuals living inside the 60-minute response area at the time of the adoption of this section (September
4, 2012) will be subject to the same requirements as new employees.
(d) This section shall not be applied retroactively. Individuals residing outside the 60-minute response area at
the time of the adoption of this section (September 4, 2012) shall not be required to move inside the 60-minute
response area. Nothing in this section shall be intended to conflict with other state statutory enactments, such as
the Health and Safety Code.
(e) Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be determined by the police chief on an individual
basis.
(Ordinance O-008-12 adopted 9/4/12)
State law reference–Residency requirements for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 150.021.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/430
Sec. 9.01.003 Health benefits coverage for city retirees
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through TML Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition of “retiree” for purposes of this section:
(1) Twenty (20) years of service at any age.
(2) Ten (10) years of service at sixty (60) years of age.
(c) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool provides that the board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the TML
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool allow the participating member entity to provide retiree medical
coverage at the same contribution as charged to active employees, to select a contribution level which is an
elevated percentage (which may change from time to time) of the active employee contribution, or to offer over
age 65 retirees a Medicare supplement.
(d) The city elects to offer to retirees and their dependents that are under the age of sixty-five (65):
(1) The same medical plan(s) offered to active employees at the same rate as the active employees
for as long as the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool offers this rate structure for
retiree medical coverage.
(2) Retiree continuum of care plan for those retirees and their dependents not entitled to Medicare
and/or Medicare supplement or advantage plans.
(e) The city elects to offer Medicare supplement or Medicare advantage plans with/without prescription drug
coverage as established annually by the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool board of trustees for
retirees and their dependents who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older at the Medicare supplement or
Medicare advantage rate.
(f) The city elects to offer the following optional life insurance coverages:
(1) Retiree basic life.
(2) Retiree optional life.
(3) Retiree dependent life.
(g) The city may adopt on an annual basis, any additional or alternative retiree benefit plans to be provided
through TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool.
(h) The entire cost of these plans shall be paid for entirely by the retiree.
(i) This section will apply to individuals retiring after the effective date of this section, and to employees who
retired under a previous ordinance that elected to continue their healthcare coverage through TML-IEBP. For
individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify, they must enroll for this coverage within
thirty (30) days of their retirement.
(j) This section may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring
while it is in effect.
(Ordinance O-005-09, secs. 2, 4 and 5, adopted 9/1/09)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/430
Editor's note–Former sections 9.01.004 and 9.01.005 pertaining to health benefits coverage for city retirees (2005) and (2007)
deriving from sections 2–7 of Ordinance O-015-05 adopted by the city on September 13, 2005 and Ordinance O-007-07 adopted by the
city on September 11, 2007 have been repealed by section 3 of Ordinance O-005-09 adopted by the city on September 1, 2009.
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.02.001 Election to participate; applicable regulations adopted by reference
(a) Election to participate in TMRS. On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and
elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter “TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov't. Code section 851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of
the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted.
(b) Election to participate in TMRS supplemental benefits fund. The city council elects to have the employees
of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't. Code section 851.001 et seq.; and all the
benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(c) Adoption of regulations by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation in the TMRS,
employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other
applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this code as if fully set forth herein and
shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 33.01)
Sec. 9.02.002 Vesting not provided
The city council elects not to provide five-year vesting under the Texas Municipal Retirement System (“TMRS”)
as provided in Tex. Gov't. Code section 854.205, and the city is hereby authorized and directed to file notice of
this election with the board of trustees of TMRS before December 31, 2001. (1998 Code, sec. 33.02)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 10.01.001 Authority
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the constitution and laws of the state, including particularly
chapter 212, compiled as Tex. Local Gov't Code, and the provisions of Local Gov't Code section 43.021 as
heretofore or hereafter amended.
Sec. 10.01.002 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the
city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community.
Sec. 10.01.003 Jurisdiction
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/430
(a) From and after the passage of this chapter, all plats and subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of
the city and all plats and subdivisions of land outside the corporate limits of the city and within one mile thereof,
and all land outside the corporate limits of the city that the council may be petitioned to include within the
corporate limits of the city by an extension of said corporate limits, shall conform to the following rules and
regulations.
(b) It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or in any way impair or interfere with the existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those provisions which are in conflict with this chapter, or with
private restrictions placed upon property, by deed, covenant or other private agreement. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or
ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
Sec. 10.01.004 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with
the customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Alley. A minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which
is used primarily for installation of public utilities, solid waste collection, and for vehicular access to the back or
sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Block. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings. As a term of measurement, block
shall mean the distance along a side of a street lying between and adjoining two (2) intersecting streets.
Building setback line. The line parallel to the street right-of-way line designating the minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line that a structure may be erected.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Comprehensive plan. A periodically updated series of documents that unifies all elements and aspects of city
planning. This plan reflects the best judgment of the staff, planning and zoning commission and city council and
sets a policy for zoning and subdivision decisions. This plan indicates the general locations recommended for
various land uses, transportation routes, public buildings, streets, parks and other public and private
developments and improvements.
Conceptual development plan. An overall conceptual plan showing the intentions of the developer to improve or
subdivide land in accordance with this chapter.
Council. Members of the city council.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Developer. Any person, entity or corporation who improves land, to effect a subdivision of land, or submits a
conceptual plan for city consideration.
Easement. A right held by the city or its franchised utility companies to be used for access, drainage or the
placement of utilities such as water, gas, sewer, telephone, cable television and electrical lines or other facilities.
Engineer. A person duly authorized under the provisions of The Texas Engineering Practice Act, [V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 1001], as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction. The contiguous unincorporated area not incorporated in any other city, within one
(1) mile of the corporate limits of the City of Borger.
Front/frontage lot. The length of a lot adjacent to a street between two (2) adjacent property lines of lots.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/430
Front/frontage, street. The length of all property on one (1) side of a street lying between two (2) intersecting
streets measured along the right-of-way line, or if the street is a dead-end or cul-de-sac, the length of all property
abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the end of the dead-end street or cul-de-sac street.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building.
Main. A water or wastewater (sewer) line designed and installed to collect sewage from or distribute water to
lateral or service lines.
Plat. The map (conceptual plan) which a developer's plan is presented for approval and intends to record in final
form.
Plat, final. A plat which complies with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 212 (sec.
212.001 et seq.) and this chapter.
Replattinq (resubdivision). The rearranging of any part of a block, street, or alley of a previously platted
subdivision.
Riqht-of-wav, public. Any strip of land including surface, overhead or underground space which is used or
intended to be used wholly or in part as a public street, or alley, or as the location of public walkways and utility
or drainage facilities or installations.
Service tap. A water or wastewater pipe of a design capacity to service a single lot extended from the main to the
property line of the lot served by the service tap.
Shall, should, may. The word “shall” is mandatory. The word “should” is considered to be advisable usage,
recommended but not mandatory. The word “may” is merely permissive.
Sidewalk. The cement concrete, asphaltic concrete or other permanent hard-surfaced material approved by the
director of public works that is located in the street right-of-way, intended for pedestrian use.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way, other than an alley, publicly maintained when
any part of it is opened to the use of the public for vehicular traffic.
Street, arterial. A principal traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city, which connects remote parts of
the city or areas adjacent thereto and acts as a principal connecting street with state and federal highway, and
includes each street designated as a primary or secondary arterial street.
Street, collector. A street which carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets or highway, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation in such a development.
Street, cul-de-sac or court. A dead-end street providing a turnaround for vehicles.
Street, dead-end. A street other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet.
Street, local. A street which is primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood and which is not necessarily
through several residential districts.
Street, marginal access. A local street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which
provides access to abutting property and protection from through traffic.
Street, width. The shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street.
Subdivider. Any person or agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as
that term is defined herein, in any event, the term “subdivider” shall be restricted to include only the owner,
equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/430
Subdivision. A division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within one (1) mile of such
limits, in two (2) or more parts.
Surveyor. A licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional land surveyor as authorized by state statutes
to practice the profession of surveying in Texas.
Thoroughfare. Same as street.
Tract. Same as lot.
Transportation plan. The master street development and thoroughfare plan for the city.
Utility. City and/or franchised utility company, above or below ground equipment and lines including, but not
limited to, water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and cable television.
Zoning. Regulations governing the use of land and buildings and development standards as set forth in chapter
14, Zoning, Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 10.01.005 Policy
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner of land to lay out, subdivide, plat or replat any
land or tract in two or more parts, lots, blocks and streets within the city, or within a maximum distance of one
mile of the corporate limits of the city, without the approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city
council. It shall be unlawful for any such owner or agent to offer for sale or sell property therein or thereby,
which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted or replatted with the approval of the planning and zoning
commission and the city council.
(1) No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the county clerk's office or have
any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner prescribed herein. In the event any such
unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the city shall institute proceedings to
have the plat stricken from the records.
(2) No owner or agent of any owner of any land located within a subdivision shall transfer, sell,
agree to sell or negotiate to sell any land by reference to, by exhibition of or by the use of a plan or
plat of a subdivision before such plan or plat has been approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed herein.
(3) At the request of the city council, the city attorney or any other attorney representing the city
may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation or threatened violation
of this chapter by the owner of a tract of land, or recover damages from the owner of a tract of land in
an amount adequate for the city to undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring
about compliance with the requirements of this chapter regarding the tract. “Owner of a tract of land”
as used in this subsection does not include the owner of an individual lot in a subdivided tract of land.
(b) In order to promote the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city, and the safe, orderly and
healthful development of the city, the city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all public
improvements of whatsoever nature, including water service, sewage facilities and maintenance of streets, from
all additions, subdivisions, or parts thereof and from all areas dedicated to the public, the platting of which has
not been approved by the planning and zoning commission and the city council.
(c) No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the city on any
piece of property other than the original or resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without
the written approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council.
(d) (1) The attention of each subdivider is directed to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 242.001(b),
which states in part: “For an area in a municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as defined by Tex.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/430
Local Gov't Code section 212.001, a plat may not be filed with the county clerk without the approval
of both the municipality and the county.”
(2) In the event any provision of this chapter is violated within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city, and outside the city's corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of this chapter.
(e) In lieu of the requirements set forth in (a), (b), (c) and (d) above, the director of planning and zoning,
without consideration by the planning and zoning commission or city council, may approve minor final plats
involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street(s)
or alley(s), or the extension of municipal facilities, or for amending a final plat which may be recorded and is
controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is solely for one or more of
the following purposes:
(1) To correct an error in a course or distance that was shown on or add a course or distance that
was omitted from the preceding plat, or to correct an error in property description shown on the
preceding plat, or to correct an error in property description shown on the preceding plat.
(2) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the
engineer or surveyor responsible for setting the monuments.
(3) To show the location or character monument that has been changed in location or character or
that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat.
(4) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission in a plat previously
approved by the planning and zoning commission or city council, including lot numbers, acreage,
street names and identification of adjacent recorded plats.
(5) To correct errors in the courses or distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if both lot
owners join in the application for amending the plat, if neither lot is abolished, and if the amendment
does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions.
(6) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement; or to relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or
more adjacent lots if the owners of all those lots join in the application amending the plat, if the
amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restriction, and if the amendment does
not increase the number of lots.
(7) To make necessary changes to a preceding plat to create four (4) or fewer lots in the
subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if the changes do not affect the
applicable zoning and other regulation of the City of Borger, if the changes are located in an area that
the city council has approved as a residential area.
(8) To replat one (1) or more lots fronting on an existing street if the owners of all those lots join in
the application for amending the plat, if the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restriction or if the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or
make necessary the extension municipal facilities.
(A) The director of planning and zoning shall not approve a variance to these regulations.
(B) Submittal requirements and approval standards shall be the same as for other final plats.
The director of planning and zoning shall submit any minor plat or amending plat which he
disapproves to the planning and zoning commission for consideration within sufficient time to
enable action to be taken within thirty (30) days after the application is filed.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/430
(C) The director of planning and zoning may, for any reason, elect to present a minor plat or
amending plat to the planning and zoning commission for consideration.
ARTICLE 10.02 PLAT APPROVALS
Sec. 10.02.001 Preapplication conference
Prior to the filing of a plat, the subdivider shall meet with the city secretary and/or director of planning to
acquaint himself with the requirements of the city and the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing
subdivisions in the general area. At such meeting, the street requirements, utilities and general character of the
development may be discussed.
Sec. 10.02.002 Application required for preliminary and final plat
(a) Any owner or agent of any owner of land desiring to subdivide or plat such land shall submit an
application in writing for approval of a “preliminary and final plat” and proposed street and utility designs to the
city secretary or director of planning. Such application, accompanied by five prints of the proposed plat and the
street and utility designs, shall be filed at least ten days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning
commission at which approval is asked. The “preliminary and final plat” shall be submitted by the owner,
subdivider or his agent prior to the sale or offering for sale of any lot, tract, or building site.
(b) When it is desired to develop a subdivision in sections or parcels, a preliminary plat of the entire area shall
be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for approval following the same
procedure as a “preliminary and final plat.” Such plat shall be titled “preliminary plat.” The approval of the
“preliminary plat” by the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall not constitute acceptance or
approval of the subdivision, but is an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat of the
subdivision or portions thereof with the conditions of such approval. The “preliminary plat” shall be filed with
the city secretary after approval, to serve as a guide for the future development of the remaining sections or
parcels.
(c) The planning and zoning commission shall not receive or consider a plat and street and utility designs
unless submitted in accordance with or are accompanied by the following: (see sections 10.02.003 through
10.02.006).
Sec. 10.02.003 Application requirements
(a) For all subdivisions exceeding ten acres in size, a vicinity sketch or key map at a practical scale (400 feet
to the inch preferred) shall be supplied. Such sketch or key map shall show existing subdivisions, streets,
property lines and the recorded names of the owners of the adjoining parcels. It shall also show how the streets
and alleys connect or relate to streets and alleys in neighboring subdivisions and the relationship of the
development to existing or proposed major and secondary thoroughfares.
(b) The “preliminary and final plat” shall be so titled and shall show the names of the subdivider and the name
of the owner if different from the subdivider.
(c) The proposed name of the subdivision (which must not be as similar to that of an existing subdivision as to
cause confusion) and adjacent subdivisions, the names of streets (to conform whenever possible to existing street
names) and numbers of lots and blocks, in accordance with a systematic arrangement.
(d) An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances referenced to section lines and
established subdivisions, and showing the lines of adjacent lands and the lines of adjacent streets and alleys, with
their width and names. Streets, alleys and lot lines in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown in dashed lines.
(1) Location of permanent monuments which shall be placed at all corners of boundary lines of a
subdivision and the location of other points which may be necessary for the layout of the subdivision.
Permanent monuments shall be six-inch-diameter concrete 18 inches long with the intersection point
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/430
marked with a copper pin 1/4 inch in diameter or a brass cap 1-1/2 inches in diameter. Intermediate
property corners, curve points and angle points shall be marked by iron stakes not less than 12 inches
in length. All monuments and iron stakes shall be set flush with the ground or countersunk, if
necessary, to avoid being disturbed.
(2) Physical features of the property shall be shown including location of watercourses, ravines,
bridges, culverts, present structures, location and size of any existing utilities, and other features
pertinent to subdivision. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the line for such watercourse and of such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose.
(3) Any existing flood zones, as shown on the “flood hazard boundary maps” as published by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development [Federal Emergency Management Agency],
shall be clearly outlined on the plat with the base flood elevations shown.
(4) The planning and zoning commission may require additional easements across other parts of
lots if necessary for the installation of utilities or enclosed or open drainage ways. When easements in
areas adjoining the proposed subdivision are necessary to provide adequate drainage thereof or to
serve the subdivision with utilities, the subdivider shall obtain such easements.
(e) The location and width of proposed streets, lots, alleys, building lines, utility easements, widening of
existing thoroughfares, and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimal fractions of feet, with
the length of radii and arcs of all curves, all angles, and with all other engineering information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points.
(1) Contours with a minimum interval of five feet shall be shown as light, dashed lines. A closer
contour interval may be required by the director of planning or city secretary when it is deemed
necessary to indicate topography or drainage. All elevations shown shall be based on USGS datum,
which shall be specified on the plat. A permanent boundary monument shall be used as a benchmark
and the elevation and location of the monument shall be shown on the plat.
(2) The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of
the entire neighborhood area and shall conform to any preliminary plat which may have been
approved by the planning and zoning commission or city council. Proposed streets shall be adjusted
to the contour of the land so as to provide usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
(3) Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent or parallel to a railroad right-of-way
or a major thoroughfare or freeway of expressway standards, provisions shall be made for a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a suitable distance to provide
reasonable use of the intervening land.
(4) All lots or building sites shall conform to the minimum standards for area, width and depth
prescribed by the zoning ordinance for the district or districts in which the subdivision is located.
(5) All lots of subdivisions to be located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and
which are to be served by a public water supply, but utilizing individual subsurface absorptive
methods for sewage disposal, shall provide for individual lots having surface areas of at least onehalf
acre, or large enough to have a duplicate system, whichever is greater. Smaller lot sizes shall
only be permitted upon submission of written approval for such from the department of state health
services.
(f) The “preliminary and final plat” shall be clearly and legibly drawn in India ink upon permanent tracing
material to a scale of 100 feet to the inch unless approved otherwise and the plat shall also show:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/430
(1) North point, scale, and date of preparation.
(2) Location of subdivision by section, block, survey, county and state.
(3) Metes and bounds description of plat boundaries.
(4) Location of all permanent monuments and control points to which all dimensions, bearings and
similar data shall be referred.
(5) Signature and seal of a registered public surveyor or licensed state land surveyor in responsible
charge of surveying the platted area.
(6) An acknowledgement by the owner of his adoption of the plat and of the dedication of streets,
alleys, easements and other public areas to public use.
(7) Restrictive covenants imposed on the land. (These may be submitted in a separate instrument
but must be filed with the city.)
Sec. 10.02.004 Certificates to be placed on plat
(a) The following certificates shall be placed on the plat in a manner that will allow the filling in of the
certificates by the proper party.
Recommended for approval:
__________________________________________ _____________
Chairman Planning and Zoning Commission Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Planning and Zoning Director Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Director of Utilities Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Southwestern Public Service Company Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Texas Gas Service Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Southwestern Bell Telephone Company Date
__________________________________________ _____________
Cable One Date Approved:
__________________________________________
Mayor, City of Borger, Texas
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/430
Attest:
I hereby certify that this plat was approved by the City Council of the City of Borger, Hutchinson
County, Texas, on the ______ day of ____________, ________.
__________________________________________
City Secretary, Borger, Texas
(b) The following certificates shall be required to be placed on the plat when the proposed subdivision is
located outside the corporate limits of the city, but located within one mile thereof, being located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and requiring the approval of the city and county.
Approved by County Commissioners Court:
___________________________________________ Date_______________
Judge, Hutchinson County
Attest:
I hereby certify that this plat was approved by the Hutchinson County Commissioners Court on the
______ day of ____________, ________.
___________________________________________
County Clerk
Sec. 10.02.005 Accompanying documents
(a) The “preliminary and final plat” or “final plat,” as the case may be, shall be accompanied by the following
and each shall bear the signature and seal of a registered professional engineer:
(1) Street design. Plan and profile for each street proposed in the subdivision showing the right-ofway,
paving width, curb and gutter, drainage structures and any utilities which may be located in such
right-of-way. Profile shall show the elevation of the existing ground and the proposed grade elevation
at the centerline of the street and top of the curb elevation if different from the centerline. Plan and
profile of drainage structures and channels may be shown on the same drawings as the street plans
and profiles. Maximum station interval shall be 50 feet.
(2) Utility design. Plan and profile of sewer line may be shown on the street plan and profile when
located in the street right-of-way. The profile shall show the elevation of existing and proposed street
or ground elevation and the top and flow line elevation of each manhole and the sewer line at a
maximum station interval of 50 feet.
(3) Cross sections. Cross sections showing details of street design, manholes and drainage
structures.
(4) Sewage lift station. Complete plans and specifications shall be submitted for approval to the
director of utilities prior to the meeting of the city council at which the plat will be considered.
(5) Estimate. A detailed estimate indicating the cost of materials and their installation for the
streets, utilities, drainage structures and lift stations shall be submitted ten days prior to the meeting
of the city council at which the plat will be considered.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/430
(b) Easement documents, right-of-way deeds or property deeds properly executed for any streets, utilities,
drainage structures, lift stations or others which may be located outside the subdivision shall be presented prior
to the meeting of the city council at which the plat will be considered.
Sec. 10.02.006 Surety bond, certificate of deposit or cashier's check required
Prior to submission of the “preliminary and final plat” or “final plat” to the city council for consideration of
approval, the subdivider or owner shall deliver to the city secretary a surety bond, certificate of deposit or
cashier's check payable to the city. The amount of the surety bond, certificate of deposit or cashier's check shall
be determined by the estimate as required in section 10.02.005(a)(5). The amount of the surety bond, certificate
of deposit or cashier's check may be reduced as the work on the development progresses; for example, when the
street work is complete and accepted by the city in writing, the amount on deposit with the city may be reduced
by the amount in the estimate allowed for the cost of the street work.
Sec. 10.02.007 Presentation of plat to director of planning or city manager
After the subdivider or owner has acquainted himself with the requirements of this chapter, the plat, along with
the street and utility designs, shall be presented to the director of planning or city secretary ten days prior to the
meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which approval is requested.
Sec. 10.02.008 Public hearing by planning and zoning commission
(a) The planning and zoning commission at its regular meeting shall hold a public hearing to consider the plat.
After such hearing the commission may recommend to the city council that the plat be considered for approval
and may in such recommendation set forth any conditions or requirements that the developer or owner must
comply with. If such conditions or requirements exist to such an extent that in the opinion of the planning and
zoning commission an additional hearing is required, the plat shall be returned to the commission at the next
regular meeting or a future meeting. The planning and zoning commission shall approve a plat if it conforms to
the general plan of the city and its current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds and public utility
facilities; the general plan for the extension of the city and its roads, streets and public highways within the city
and in its extraterritorial jurisdiction, taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and
the instrumentalities of public utilities; and all requirements of this subdivision chapter.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall act on a plat within 30 days after the date the plat is filed. A
plat is considered approved by the planning and zoning commission unless it is disapproved within such 30-day
period.
Sec. 10.02.009 Action by city council
(a) The city council, upon receiving the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission in a regular
meeting, shall set a date to hold a public hearing thereon at which the plat will be considered for approval. In
considering such plat the city council may impose conditions or requirements which are deemed necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter, other city ordinances and/or for the protection of property owners in
adjacent subdivisions. Such conditions or requirements may be in addition to any which may have been imposed
by the planning and zoning commission.
(b) The city council shall act on the plat within 30 days after the date the plat is approved by the planning and
zoning commission or is considered approved by the inaction of the planning and zoning commission. A plat is
considered approved by the city council unless it is disapproved within such 30-day period.
Sec. 10.02.010 Signature of mayor; filing of copy of plat
Upon approval of the plat by the city council and after the proper escrow deposit or bond has been filed with the
city secretary, the plat shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city secretary after which a reproducible
copy of the plat shall be filed with the county clerk's office by the city secretary. A reproducible copy with the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/430
filing information shall be retained in the city archives and the original plat shall be returned to the subdivider.
The plat shall be an official plat of record after it has been filed with the city secretary and the county clerk.
Sec. 10.02.011 Subdivider, owner or agent to be present at public hearings
The subdivider, owner, or his agent shall be present at all public hearings at which the plat is to be considered.
Failure to appear may result in such hearing being postponed or the plat being tabled until such time as the
subdivider, owner, or his agent requests a hearing.
Sec. 10.02.012 Variances
(a) The planning and zoning commission may recommend that the city council authorize a variance of these
regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In recommending any
variance, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or
desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the planning and zoning
commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of the land in the
vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be recommended unless the
planning and zoning commission finds:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his
land.
(2) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right
of the petitioner.
(3) That the granting of a variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property in the area where the property is located.
(b) Application for any general variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the plat is
filed for the consideration of the planning and zoning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for
the application and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The application shall be supplemented with maps,
plans or other additional data which may aid the planning and zoning commission in the analysis of the proposed
project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions
necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
(c) Any subdivider aggrieved by any finding or action of the planning and zoning commission which is
lawfully subject to review by the city council shall make appeal to the city council within 30 days from the date
of such finding or action, and no appeal shall be permitted after such 30 days.
Sec. 10.02.013 Effect of approval or disapproval of plat
The approval of a plat is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication and does not impose on the
city any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement of any dedicated parts until the appropriate municipal
authorities make an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by entry, use or improvement. The disapproval of
a plat is considered a refusal by the city of the offered dedication indicated on the plat.
Sec. 10.02.014 Vacation of plat
The proprietors of the tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold.
The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded
in the manner prescribed for the original plat. If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat,
may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/430
prescribed for the original plat. On the proper execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated
plat has no effect.
ARTICLE 10.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 10.03.001 Street arrangement generally
Unless otherwise approved by the city council, provision must be made for the extension of major streets;
secondary streets shall be provided for circulation of traffic through the subdivision, and adequate minor or local
residential streets provided to accommodate the subdivision.
Sec. 10.03.002 Alignment of streets with existing streets
All major and secondary streets shall be continuous or in alignment with existing streets, unless variations are
deemed advisable by the city council after consideration of recommendations made by the planning and zoning
commission. Curvilinear streets shall be allowed.
Sec. 10.03.003 Street curve requirements
Major streets may have a minimum radius at the centerline of 800 feet; secondary streets may have a minimum
radius at the centerline of 300 feet; minor or local residential streets may have a minimum radius at the
centerline of 150 feet except in special circumstances the planning and zoning commission may approve a minor
or local residential street with a smaller radius.
Sec. 10.03.004 Street intersections
More than two streets intersecting at one point shall be avoided except where it is impractical to secure a proper
street system otherwise. Where several streets converge at one point, setback lines, special rounding or cut-off of
corners and/or a traffic circle may be required to insure safety and facility of traffic movement. No street shall
intersect any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Major street intersections shall have curb radii with
a minimum of 30 feet. Minor or local residential streets shall have a minimum curb radii of 12 feet measured
from the back of the curb.
Sec. 10.03.005 Dead-end streets, cul-de-sacs and courts
Courts or places may be permitted where the form or contour of the land or the shape of the property makes such
street design appropriate. Such cul-de-sacs, courts or places shall provide proper access to all lots and shall
generally not exceed 400 feet in length and a turnaround shall be provided at the closed end which has a
minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet except that, if an equally safe and convenient form of paved space is
approved by the planning and zoning commission in place of a turning circle, such approved space may be
improved as agreed upon.
Sec. 10.03.006 Relation of streets to adjoining streets and land
The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in unusual cases, must connect with streets already
dedicated in adjacent subdivisions; and where no adjacent connections are platted, must in general be the
reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts and must be continued to the boundaries of the
tract subdivided, so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or
egress from other property or to or from any street or alley or having the effect of restricting or damaging the
adjoining property for subdivision purposes or which will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements
shall not be permitted in any subdivision unless such reserve strips are conveyed to the city on fee simple.
Sec. 10.03.007 Street grades
Major streets may have a maximum grade of 5%, unless the natural topography is such as to require steeper
grades, in which case a 7-1/2% grade may be used for a maximum continuous distance of 200 feet. Secondary
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/430
streets may have a maximum grade of 7-1/2%. Minor or local residential streets may have a maximum grade of
10%. All streets must have a minimum grade of at least 0.5%. Centerline grade changes with an algebraic
difference of more than 2% shall be connected with vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a minimum of
600 feet sight distance on major streets; 400 feet sight distance on secondary streets and minor or local
residential streets. No vertical curve shall be less than 200 feet in length. Whenever a cross slope is necessary or
desirable from one curb to the opposite curb, such cross slopes shall not be less than three inches in 30 feet nor
more than 12 inches in 30 feet.
Sec. 10.03.008 Block lengths and widths
In general, intersecting streets determining block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross
traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks shall not be more than
1,600 feet in length nor less than 300 feet in width except in unusual cases.
Sec. 10.03.009 Street widths
(a) Major streets shall have a minimum dedicated width of 100 feet with a minimum pavement width of 66
feet or as prescribed by the planning and zoning commission.
(b) Secondary streets shall have a minimum dedicated width of 65 to 80 feet, with a minimum paving width of
36 to 48 feet.
(c) Minor or local residential streets shall have a minimum dedicated width of 60 feet and all minor or local
residential streets shall have a minimum pavement width of 36 feet measured from back of curb, except in the
case of curvilinear streets, which such width shall be increased to 40 feet measured from back of curb.
Sec. 10.03.010 Sidewalks
In residential subdivisions, sidewalks when provided are to be not less than four feet in width parallel to the curb
and located within the designated street right-of-way. Location of sidewalks shall be uniform throughout the
subdivision and if an extension of an existing subdivision, the sidewalks shall be located the same as in the
existing subdivision. Sidewalks shall be made to slope toward the curb, a minimum slope being 1-1/2 inches.
Maximum slope shall not exceed four inches. Handicapped access ramps shall be provided in the sidewalks at
each block corner. Sidewalks shall be ramped where driveways extend across the sidewalk, if necessary.
Sidewalks are to be constructed of 2500 psi concrete, minimum four inches thick with trowel joints four feet on
center and 1/2-inch expansion joints at all drive edges and intermediate locations not exceeding 40 feet, and
shall have a light sweep finish. Sidewalks abutting business property when provided shall have a minimum
width of six feet.
Sec. 10.03.011 Alleys and alley widths
(a) Alleys shall be provided adjacent to all lots in all districts. Alleys shall be provided 20 feet in width, unless
due to the nature of the development the planning and zoning commission may require additional alley width.
Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted except where they are unavoidable and adequate turnaround facilities
have been provided.
(b) The commission may waive the alley requirement in commercial subdivisions where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with
and adequate for the uses proposed.
(c) Alleys shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be designed to carry surface waters to the nearest
practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved as a safe place to deposit such waters. Storm
drainage ways or easements that cross alleys shall be concreted the full width of the alley. Compacted base
material four inches thick shall be provided in all alleys. The material shall be of the same type and placement as
that required for streets.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/430
Sec. 10.03.012 Inspections and approval of construction work; compliance with standard specifications
(a) All subdivision construction work located within the corporate limits or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city, such as street grading, drainage structures, curb and gutter, and installation of sanitary
sewer and water systems, performed by the subdivider or his contractor shall be inspected during construction by
the proper authority of the city and all such work shall be in compliance with standard specifications approved
by the city council.
(b) The proper authority of the city shall submit written approval to the city secretary of the construction of
streets, curbs and gutters, alleys, drainage structures, sanitary sewers, water system and any other item which
may be required prior to release or refunding of any bonds or deposits held by the city and prior to their
acceptance for maintenance by the city.
Sec. 10.03.013 Curb and gutter
Stand-up type concrete curb and gutter, two feet wide and six inches thick, shall be required to be constructed on
all streets and avenues and shall be continuous from block corner to block corner. Radial curb and gutter shall be
constructed at each corner upon each block. Lay-down curbs shall be constructed across all alley intersections
with streets and concrete drainage ways.
Sec. 10.03.014 Street construction standards
(a) All street construction shall be in compliance with the 1982 Standard Specifications for Construction of
Highways, Streets and Bridges as adopted by the state department of transportation.
(b) Street designs shall be approved prior to construction with the minimum being a six-inch-thick sand and
gravel or crushed rock flexible material base compacted to 98% density using the “density control” method with
an overlay of 1-1/2 inch hot mix or an overlay of triple course penetration-type asphalt paving.
(c) Inspection of the installation of the base material and written approval by the proper authority of the city
shall be required prior to overlay.
Sec. 10.03.015 Street posts and markers
All street posts and markers shall be furnished and installed by the city.
Sec. 10.03.016 Excavation and grading
All excavation and grading shall be so designed and performed to carry surface waters to the nearest practical
street, storm drain or natural watercourse and shall be done according to the current standards on file with the
city secretary. All persons performing any excavation or grading operations shall put into effect all safety
precautions which are necessary and shall provide adequate anti-erosion and/or drainage devices, debris basins,
or other safety devices to protect life, limb, health, and welfare of private and public property of others from
damage of any kind.
Sec. 10.03.017 Storm drainage requirements
The size of all drainage structures shall be designed using the “rational method.” Drainage structures shall be
constructed in such locations and of such size to adequately serve the subdivision and the contributing drainage
area. The subdivider shall provide all the necessary easements and rights-of-way inside the subdivision or
outside the subdivision for drainage structures, including storm sewers and open or lined channels. Easements
for drainage structures shall be at least ten feet wider than the structure.
Sec. 10.03.018 Open or lined drainage channels
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/430
Drainage channels, when required, shall conform substantially to the line of the existing watercourse and shall
be constructed to extend through the subdivision. All open or lined drainage channels shall have a minimum
bottom width of two feet and a depth based on maximum design flow. Side slopes of channels shall not be
steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal distance. Concrete channels may have vertical sides if
approved by the director of planning or city secretary.
Sec. 10.03.019 Storm sewers
Water in excess of what gutters will carry at maximum design flow shall be diverted into storm sewers or
channels.
Sec. 10.03.020 Water, sewer and other utilities
(a) Generally.
(1) Within the tract covered by a plat, the city shall not serve or connect any public utilities,
including water, sewer, electricity, and gas, that are owned, distributed or controlled by the city, for
the use of the owners or purchasers of any part of the tract unless the plat is approved as provided in
this chapter.
(2) No water connections shall be made and no permits shall be issued for sewer and other utility
connections until the installation of the water and sewer mains with laterals has been completed and
accepted for maintenance by the city on the entire block facing the street on which the property is
located.
(b) Water distribution system.
(1) The water distribution system shall be designed, installed and constructed in accordance with
current AWWA Standards as approved and published by the American Water Works Association and
in compliance with the current rules and regulations for public water systems adopted by the
department of state health services, with reference to materials to be used and construction
procedures to be followed.
(2) As-built drawings shall be provided to the city prior to refunding any deposits and prior to the
acceptance of the system by the city for maintenance.
(3) The water distribution system shall be a closed loop for all subdivisions; dead-end lines shall be
avoided unless installed to serve an area which may be developed in the future. Dead-end lines shall
be provided with a two-inch blowoff valve. Valves shall be so located such that the water line in each
block can be shut off for leak repair or maintenance purposes.
(4) The minimum size water line permitted shall be four inches; the maximum length of four-inch
line shall be 1,000 feet or 30 lot connections, whichever controls.
(5) Water mains serving fire hydrants shall be six inches with a six-inch valve located between the
fire hydrant and the water main.
(6) Water mains and valves shall be of materials as approved by the director of utilities.
(7) Laterals across streets shall be two inches and shall extend from the main to a minimum of two
feet into the area between the curb and the property line and shall be located as close to the center of
the lot it serves as possible. Water laterals shall not be located closer than five feet to a sewer lateral.
The location of all laterals, dimensioned to the nearest lot corner, shall be provided for future location
by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/430
(8) Inspection of the water distribution system shall be made by the proper authority of the city and
shall be requested by the subdivider or his contractor prior to the backfilling of ditches.
(c) Water extension service. In the event water main sizes need to be increased to provide service for the
future development of land, the city will pay the difference in the cost of material of the size line required for
such extension service over the cost of material of the size line which would normally be required to serve the
proposed subdivision. The size of the line needed and the amount to be paid by the city shall be agreed upon
prior to the subdivider purchasing materials. The city will not pay the difference in material cost if the area being
subdivided is part of an area for which a preliminary plat has been filed.
(d) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required to be installed in all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall
conform to the minimum requirements of the state insurance commission and are subject to the approval of the
director of planning and/or city secretary. Fire hydrants in residential areas shall be placed a minimum of 750
feet from any lot in the subdivision as measured along any public right-of-way or easement, which is open and
unobstructed; or located such that a circle with a radius of 500 feet will intersect the circle with radius of 500
feet of the next nearest fire hydrant.
(e) Sewage collection system.
(1) The sewage collection system shall be designed in accordance with the current edition of
Design Criteria for Sewage Systems as adopted by the department of state health services and the
state commission on environmental quality.
(2) As-built drawings shall be provided to the city prior to refunding any deposits and prior to the
acceptance of the system by the city for maintenance.
(3) The materials used in the system shall be as approved by the director of utilities and shall be
identified in the project specifications with appropriate ASTM, ANSI, or AWWA specification
numbers for both quality control and installation. In no case shall bituminous fiberboard or paper
pipe be acceptable for use anywhere in a sewage system.
(4) Manholes shall be located a maximum distance of 400 feet apart with a cleanout provided at
the end of each sewer main. Manholes proposed to be located in the street right-of-way shall be
located on the street centerline or in the area between the curb and the property line.
(5) The minimum size sewer main line shall be six inches and the minimum size lateral shall be
four inches.
(6) All sewers shall be designed and constructed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give a velocity
when flowing full of not less than two feet per second. The slope of the line or grade shall be as
provided in Design Criteria for Sewer Systems as adopted by the department of state health services
and the state commission on environmental quality. The following slopes are from that publication:
Size of Pipe in Inches LD Fall in Feet per 100 Feet of Sewer
6 .50
8 .33
10 .25
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/430
12 .20
18 .11
(7) Laterals shall be extended from the main to the property line and shall be located as close to the
center of the lot it serves as possible. Sewer laterals shall not be located closer than five feet to a
water lateral. The location of the lateral shall be furnished to the city with dimensions to the nearest
lot corner.
(8) Sewage lift station plans and specifications shall be approved by the proper authority of the city
prior to the purchase of any materials therefor.
(9) Inspection of the sewage collection system shall be made by the proper authority of the city and
shall be requested by the subdivider or his contractor prior to the backfilling of ditches.
(f) Sewer extension service. In the event sewer main sizes need to be increased to provide service for the
future development of land, the city will pay the difference in the cost of material of the size line required for
such extension service over the cost of material of the size line which would normally be required to serve the
proposed subdivision. The size of the line needed and the amount to be paid by the city shall be agreed upon
prior to the subdivider purchasing materials. The city will not pay the difference in material cost if the area being
subdivided is part of an area for which a preliminary plat has been filed.
Sec. 10.03.021 Proposed subdivision where city water or sewer not available
(a) Requirements where city water not available. In a subdivision proposed to be located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction (within one mile of the corporate limits) of the city where city water is not available,
a public water supply shall be accessible, providing an adequate supply of potable water to every lot in the
subdivision. The water distribution system shall comply with this chapter, the same standards, and be subject to
the same inspections as if the subdivision were located within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Requirements where city sewer not available. In a proposed subdivision to be located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city where city sewer may not be available, the subdivider shall install
individual sewage disposal systems or a single system for the subdivision. Such sewage systems shall be
designed and installed in compliance with the current edition of Construction Standards for On-Site Sewage
Facilities adopted by the department of state health services. Letters of approval or other acceptable evidence
that the systems have been accepted by the state shall be submitted to the city prior to the release or refund of
any bonds or deposits held by the city.
Sec. 10.03.022 Extraterritorial jurisdiction
(a) Any subdivision proposed to be located within one mile of the corporate limits of the city, within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, shall comply with this chapter, the standards referred to herein, bonds
required and applicable state laws.
(b) This chapter shall have the same force and effect within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within
the corporate limits of the city, except that no violation of any provision of this chapter outside the corporate
limits of the city but within the city's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction shall constitute a misdemeanor under
this chapter.
(c) The city is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief in district court to enjoin a violation of this chapter
which occurs within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/430
Sec. 10.03.023 Replatting
Any replatting of any existing subdivision or any part thereof shall comply with the provisions of Tex. Local
Gov't Code sections 212.014, 212.015 and 212.016. In no case shall lot sizes smaller than the minimum set forth
in the zoning ordinance for the zoning district of the area proposed to be replatted be permitted.
Sec. 10.03.024 Advice and cooperation; access to public ways; boundary streets in plats adjoining
unplatted property
(a) Advice and cooperation. Advice and cooperation in the preparation of plats will be freely given by the
planning and zoning commission and the director of planning and/or city secretary.
(b) Land controlling access to public ways. No subdivision or addition showing reserve strips of land
controlling the access to public ways or adjoining properties will be approved.
(c) Boundary streets in plats adjoining unplatted property. Where plats are presented for approval which
adjoins unplatted property, the owner and/or developer of the proposed subdivision shall provide his pro rata part
of the boundary streets.
Sec. 10.03.025 Requirements for final approval and issuance of building permits
(a) The final approval of a final plat of a subdivision shall be invalid unless such approved plat of such
subdivision is recorded in the office of the county clerk within 30 days after the date of its final approval by the
city council.
(b) No building permit shall be issued nor shall any utility connections be permitted by the city to the
subdivider or owner of any lot or any other persons with respect to any property in any subdivision covered by
this chapter until:
(1) The subdivider has complied with all the requirements of this chapter and the final plat
regarding improvements (utilities, street paving, or other items which may have been required); or
(2) An escrow deposit is filed with the city secretary, in the form of a surety bond, certificate of
deposit, cashier's check or other acceptable means, to assure that all the improvements that are
required for the subdivision will be installed and completed. The amount of such deposit shall be
based on the engineer's estimate as required in section 10.02.005(a)(5). Should the subdivider or
owner fail or refuse to install the required improvements within one year of the date of approval of
the subdivision by the city council, the city may make the improvements or have them made by a
contractor using the deposit held by the city to pay for such improvements. An extension of time up
to six months may be permitted upon written application to the city secretary or director of planning.
It shall be necessary for the subdivider to make application to the city council for any additional
extension of time.
ARTICLE 10.04 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 10.04.001 City council may grant variances
Generally, the city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardships
may result from strict compliance. In granting variances, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the city
council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity,
the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds that
there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land; that the variance is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; that the granting of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/430
the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which
said property is situated.
Sec. 10.04.002 Planned unit development
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be varied or modified by the city council after study
and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission in order to encourage a complete or unique
residential, industrial or commercial development. Full consideration shall be given to adequate public spaces,
traffic circulation, recreation, light, air and other service needs of the development when fully developed. Deed
restrictions, covenants or other legal provisions may be imposed by the developer to assure the general character
proposed.
Sec. 10.04.003 Industrial or commercial subdivisions
An industrial or commercial subdivision shall be processed for approval in the same manner as provided for a
residential subdivision except that no individual lots need be shown on such plat and only streets, blocks,
easements and minimum building lines need be indicated. The minimum right-of-way width of a minor street in
an industrial or commercial subdivision shall be 60 feet and all other streets shall conform to the standards for
major and secondary streets prescribed by the major thoroughfare plan.
Sec. 10.04.004 Authority of city manager or director of planning to establish standards for installation
of public improvements
The city secretary and/or director of planning are hereby authorized to promulgate standards and specifications
as deemed necessary for the regulation of the installation of public improvements in a subdivision. The standards
and specifications shall be submitted to the city council for approval and shall be filed with the city secretary at
least 30 days before they become effective.
(Ordinance O-001-10 adopted 4/20/10)
Sec. 10.04.005 Fees and charges
Fees and charges as listed in article 5.000 shall be paid into the general fund of the city when any map or plat is tendered to
the planning and zoning commission and shall be paid in advance, and no action of the planning and zoning commission
shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Adoption of state law relative to payment of taxes and penalties
The provisions of state law applicable to municipalities shall apply to and govern the payment of taxes due and
owing to the city and penalties in connection therewith, to the same extent as if such provisions had been, by the
terms thereof, made applicable to city taxes by ordinances of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 35.01)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.01.002 Licenses and permits not to be issued to persons in debt to city
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/430
No license or permit required by the provisions of this code shall issue to any person who is in debt to the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 35.04)
Charter reference–Issuance of licenses, sec. 104.
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAXES†
Sec. 11.02.001 Property subject to tax; assessment
All property, real, personal and mixed, shall be subject to taxation, and assessed by the city as provided and in
accordance with the charter and state law. (1998 Code, sec. 35.02)
Sec. 11.02.002 Residence homestead exemption for elderly or disabled
That, beginning January 1, 2009, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city on the residence
homestead of a person who is disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older may not be increased while that
homestead remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's qualified spouse, as provided by
section 1-b(h), article VIII, Texas Constitution, and in accordance with provisions of the Texas Tax Code,
section 11.261 as it exists now and as may be amended, except that any statutory amendment allowing an option
for local government must be expressly adopted by separate ordinance in order to become effective in this
municipality. (Ordinance O-003-08 adopted 3/4/08)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.003 Penalty to defray costs of collection of delinquent property taxes
The city council hereby adopts a 15% penalty to defray the costs of collection of delinquent taxes as authorized
by Tex. Tax Code, sections 33.07 and 33.08, for the current year and each succeeding year thereafter. (1998
Code, sec. 35.07)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.004 Leased vehicles not exempt
The city chooses not to exempt leased vehicles and will assess and levy ad valorem taxes on the vehicles as
authorized by Tex. Tax Code, section 11.252. (1998 Code, sec. 35.08)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on leased vehicles otherwise exempted, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.252.
Sec. 11.02.005 Goods in transit
Goods in transit, as defined in Texas Tax Code, section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by
the 80th Texas Legislature in Regular Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city. (Ordinance O-010-07
adopted 11/6/07)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Sales and use tax on gas and electricity for residential use
The city, by majority vote of the membership of its governing body, votes to continue the taxes authorized by the
Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act (Tex. Tax Code section 321.105) on the receipts from the sale, production,
distribution, lease or rental of, and use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use,
effective October 1, 1979, as authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1 Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second
Called Session. (1998 Code, sec. 35.06)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/430
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX†
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly
indicates another meaning, are respectively defined as follows:
City manager. The city manager or his or her designee.
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facility in such hotel and
shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning
and readying such room for occupancy and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy therefor by any
other governmental agency.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses,
trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space (regardless of whether the bed space is rented to individuals or
groups), apartments, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a
consideration. The term “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Monthly period. One (1) calendar month.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, space or sleeping facility
in a hotel for any purpose.
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/03)
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms,
or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or
agreement. (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
Occupant. Anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, anyone, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms of
sleeping space or facility in hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or
agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or
sleeping space or facility in a hotel contracted for in advance of occupancy for at least thirty (30) consecutive
days during the current calendar year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel or motel
where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven
percent (7%) of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space, or facility of such hotel, exclusive
of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 1, adopted
6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/430
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section
11.04.002 for the city. (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 3, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.004 Reports
On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, every person required in section
11.04.003 to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the city manager showing the consideration
paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such
occupancies, and any other information as the city manager may reasonably require. Such person shall also
submit a copy of the Texas Hotel Occupancy Tax Report No. 12-100, which is submitted to the state comptroller
for occupancy tax, to the city manager. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of
filing such report. (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 4, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.005 Adoption of procedures; rules and regulations; access to books and records
The city manager shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively
collect the tax levied herein, and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or controlling
any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person and facilitate
the collection of such tax as such collection is required herein. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall be in
writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city secretary. The city manager shall be permitted to
have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall be necessary to enable the city
manager to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions of this article, or to determine
whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due. (Ordinance O-012-03,
sec. 5, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.006 Violations; penalties; additional enforcement actions
(a) If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as
required herein, and pay to the city manager the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such
reports, or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, or any such person shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished
by fine as provided in section 1.01.009; and each day after the due date of reports and/or payment of such fine
shall be deemed to be a separate offense and subject to a separate fine. In addition to such fine, such person, firm
or corporation shall pay to the city manager the tax due, together with a penalty of five percent (5%) per month
or any part of a month on any delinquent tax; plus any attorney fees and court courts associated with the
collection of delinquent or fraudulent taxes.
(b) In addition to those penalties and provisions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the city may also
take the following actions:
(1) Bring a civil suit against the hotel/motel operator for noncompliance;
(2) Request any district court with proper jurisdiction to enjoin the hotel/motel operation for
noncompliance until the report is filed and/or the tax is paid;
(3) Assess a fifteen percent (15%) penalty of the current arrearage of taxes due;
(4) Request that any appropriate district court close down the hotel/motel if the occupancy taxes
are not remitted. Such request shall require only a ten-day nonjudicial notice to the hotel/motel
operator or that notice date decreed by the district court.
(c) Hotel/motel operators shall provide the city with the proper name, address and telephone number of the
real owners of interest in the facility or complex, including all operations in the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/430
(1) If the owners do not physically reside in city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or are
corporations, limited liability corporations, or partnerships, an agent must be designated for process
of service, either by virtue of an assumed name certificate filed with the county clerk or by written
designation.
(2) Should this information not be provided, any summons issued by the municipal court of the
city may be served upon the local manager of the facility compelling appearance to answer citations
and/or complaints as if the entity or owners had designated the individual as the local agent.
(3) Failure to appear for any such summons and/or subpoena may then be considered by the
municipal court as a further violation of this article, and additional fines and penalties assessed, as
well as arrest warrants issued as appropriate.
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 6, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.007 Sale of properties
Should there be a sale of properties by current operators and/or owners, then in that event the following
requirements and actions shall be in force and enforceable:
(1) Retention by buyer of delinquent taxes, plus penalties and interest.
(A) The purchaser shall retain out of the purchase price an amount sufficient to recover any
delinquent hotel/motel occupancy taxes due the city, including any penalties, interest, attorney's
fees, or other costs included in any judicial judgment awarding same to the city;
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 7, adopted 6/17/03)
(B) If the purchaser does not remit such amounts or show proof that the hotel/motel is current
in remitting such occupancy taxes, the purchaser becomes liable for any delinquent hotel/motel
occupancy taxes due, including all penalties, interest and assessments, either judicial or
nonjudicial. (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 7, adopted 6/17/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Rights of purchaser. In addition to the above enumerated terms, the following shall also apply:
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 7, adopted 6/17/03)
(A) The purchaser of a hotel/motel may request that the city provide a receipt showing that
no hotel/motel occupancy taxes or assessments are due; (Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 7, adopted
6/17/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
(B) The city shall be required to file this statement not later than the 60th day after is
received by the city, and upon proof of said pending sale proposed transfer of title;
(C) If the city fails to issue such statement within this time frame, without justification of
delay, the purchaser is relieved of the obligation to withhold the amount due from the purchase
price, but is not relieved of the liability of the debt due.
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 7, adopted 6/17/03)
Sec. 11.04.008 Exemptions
(a) State statute exempts the following individuals from the payment of the local hotel/motel occupancy tax if
they are traveling on official business:
(1) Federal employees;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/430
(2) Foreign diplomats with a tax exempt card issued by the U.S. Department of State;
(3) State employees with a hotel tax exemption card (heads of state agencies, state legislators and
legislative staff, members of state boards and commissions, and state judges);
(4) Individuals who have contracted to use a hotel room for more than thirty (30) days.
(b) Additionally, other state employees, such as employees of a state agency, institution, board or commission,
who are traveling on official business, are also exempt from the local hotel/motel occupancy tax. However, such
state employees shall pay the hotel/motel occupancy tax when paying their bill. The state agency is then
responsible for requesting a refund from the appropriate county or municipal government. See exhibit A to
Ordinance O-012-03 for further illustration of the exemptions.
(Ordinance O-012-03, sec. 8, adopted 6/17/03)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 12.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Alley. A street that:
(1) Is not used primarily for through traffic; and
(2) Provides access to rear entrances of buildings or lots along a street.
Authorized emergency vehicle.
(1) A fire department or police vehicle;
(2) A public or private ambulance operated by a person who has been issued a license by the
department of state health services;
(3) A municipal department or public service corporation emergency vehicle that has been
designated or authorized by the governing body of a municipality;
(4) A private vehicle of a volunteer firefighter or a certified emergency medical services employee
or volunteer when responding to a fire alarm or medical emergency;
(5) An industrial emergency response vehicle, including an industrial ambulance, when responding
to an emergency, but only if the vehicle is operated in compliance with criteria in effect September 1,
1989, and established by the Texas Industrial Fire Training Board of the State Firemen's and Fire
Marshals' Association of Texas; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/430
(6) A vehicle of a blood bank or tissue bank, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or
the United States, when making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs, medicines or organs.
Business district. The territory adjacent to and including a highway if buildings used for business or industrial
purposes, including a building used as a hotel, bank, office building, public building, or railroad station:
(1) Are located within a 600-foot segment along the highway; and
(2) Within that segment the buildings occupy at least 300 feet of frontage:
(A) On one side of the highway; or
(B) Collectively on both sides of the highway.
Crosswalk.
(1) The portion of a roadway, including an intersection, designated as a pedestrian crossing by
surface markings, including lines; or
(2) The portion of a roadway at an intersection that is within the connections of the lateral lines of
the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway.
Digging out. The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of
power, recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.
Highway or street. The width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way, any part of which is
open to the public for vehicular travel.
Intersection.
(1) The common area at the junction of two highways, other than the junction of an alley and a
highway.
(2) The dimensions of an intersection include only the common area:
(A) Within the connection of the lateral curblines or, in the absence of curblines, the lateral
boundary lines of the roadways of intersecting highways that join at approximate right angles;
or
(B) At the place where vehicles could collide if traveling on roadways of intersecting
highways that join at any angle other than an approximate right angle.
(3) Each junction of each roadway of a highway that includes two roadways at least 30 feet apart
with the roadway of an intersecting highway, including each roadway of an intersecting highway that
includes two roadways at least 30 feet apart, is a separate intersection.
Laned roadway. A roadway that is divided into at least two clearly marked lanes for vehicular travel.
Loading zone. That portion of any roadway set apart, marked and numbered for the sole use of the public as a
place for loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo.
Motor vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from overhead trolley
wires.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/430
No-parking zone. A space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official signs or not, in which
no vehicle may be parked.
Official traffic-control device. A sign, signal, marking, or device that is:
(1) Consistent with this chapter;
(2) Placed or erected by a public body or officer having jurisdiction; and
(3) Used to regulate, warn or guide traffic.
Operator. As used in reference to a vehicle, a person who drives or has physical control of a vehicle.
Park or parking. To stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
Parking stall or parking space. That portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart,
marked and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the
roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space
to be a parking zone.
Pedestrian. Any person on foot.
Police officer. An officer authorized to direct traffic or arrest persons who violate traffic regulations.
Right-of-way. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another
vehicle or pedestrian that is approaching from a direction, at a speed, and within a proximity that could cause a
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
Roadway. The portion of a highway, other than the berm or shoulder, that is improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes at least two separate roadways, the term “roadway” applies to
each roadway separately.
Safety zone. The area in a roadway officially designated for exclusive pedestrian use and that is protected or so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so designated.
Sidewalk. The portion of a street that is:
(1) Between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line; and
(2) Intended for pedestrian use.
Stand or standing. To halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while receiving or
discharging passengers.
Stop or stopping.
(1) When required, means to completely cease movement; and
(2) When prohibited, means to halt, including momentarily halting, an occupied or unoccupied
vehicle, unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and conveyances, including vehicles and streetcars, singly or
together, while using a highway for purposes of travel.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/430
Traffic-control signal. A manual, electric or mechanical device that alternately directs traffic to stop and to
proceed.
Truck. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily to transport property.
Vehicle. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The term does not
include:
(1) A device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; or
(2) Manufactured housing as that term is defined by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards
Act (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1201).
(1998 Code, sec. 70.01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.002 Penalty
Whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or
wherever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this code, the violation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding the amount as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code; provided, however, that no penalty shall be
greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of the state. Each day a
violation of this chapter or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1998 Code, sec.
70.99)
Sec. 12.01.003 Purpose
The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this chapter is to insure to the people the maximum use and benefit
of the public streets of the city and yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to person and
property. (1998 Code, sec. 70.02)
Sec. 12.01.004 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1998 Code, sec. 70.08)
Sec. 12.01.005 Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1998 Code, sec. 70.10)
Sec. 12.01.006 Use of toy vehicles on roadway
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device,
shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1998 Code,
sec. 70.12)
Sec. 12.01.007 Depositing injurious substances on streets
No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any
other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or alley. (1998 Code, sec.
70.13(a); Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/430
Sec. 12.02.001 Authority of police officers and fire officials to direct traffic
(a) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In
the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police
department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other
traffic laws.
(b) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing
traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.65)
Sec. 12.02.002 Traffic engineer
(a) Office created. There is hereby created in and for the city the office of city traffic engineer. The authority,
powers and duties of the traffic engineer are hereby equally vested in the chief of police.
(b) Duties relative to traffic. It shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and
proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents
and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the
operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city for the purpose of making recommendations to the
city council in regard thereto, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.67)
Sec. 12.02.003 Temporary and experimental regulations
(a) The chief of police, or the city traffic engineer, by and with the approval of the city manager, is hereby
empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter or other traffic
ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or
special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(b) The chief of police or the city traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of
traffic.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.68)
ARTICLE 12.03 ACCIDENTS*
Sec. 12.03.001 Accident reports required
When the driver or operator of a vehicle is unable physically to make the required accident report, if there were
other occupants of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such occupant or
occupants shall make or cause to be made such report. (1998 Code, sec. 70.29(c); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Written accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 550.061 et seq.
Sec. 12.03.002 Record of accident reports
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or
cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the city traffic engineer. (1998 Code, sec. 70.30)
Sec. 12.03.003 Moving or removal of vehicles by wrecker trucks
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/430
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device who
has answered a call to, or is attending the scene of, any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on any
highway or street in the city to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident,
or in any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and
in the presence of a police officer of the city, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of
releasing a person imprisoned within or under such vehicle; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device to remove a vehicle from the scene
of accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle, unless directed by a police officer to
remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property. (1998 Code, sec. 70.31)
ARTICLE 12.04 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Sec. 12.04.001 Adoption of official map
There is hereby adopted by reference a map or plat of all official traffic-control devices authorized by and
erected or installed pursuant to the provisions of this article and the other provisions of this chapter relative to
speed limits and parking restrictions. Such map shall indicate by appropriate symbols the location and type of
each such traffic-control device. Such map shall be on file in the office of the city secretary. (1998 Code, sec.
70.45)
Sec. 12.04.002 Conformity with specifications of state
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the
state transportation commission. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall,
so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected
and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. (1998
Code, sec. 70.46)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.04.003 Authority of traffic engineer
(a) General powers and duties.
(1) The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices
when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may
place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the city
traffic engineer to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control
devices.
(2) The city traffic engineer shall make a written memorandum in duplicate reflecting the need as
found in investigations for all traffic-control devices, and the location and date of erecting the same.
The original shall be filed with the city secretary and a duplicate retained by the city traffic engineer.
(b) Installation of traffic lights. The city traffic engineer, as authorized by the city council from time to time,
shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and
shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections.
(c) Designation of crosswalks and safety zones and marking of traffic lanes. The city traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to:
(1) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/430
(2) Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary
for the protection of pedestrians.
(3) Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent
with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city.
(4) Designate and maintain school zones and crosswalks with appropriate pavement markings,
signs and/or signals in such locations necessary for the safety of children going to and from school.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.47)
Sec. 12.04.004 Ratification of existing devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this code and
in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be
official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter or state law. (1998 Code, sec. 70.49)
ARTICLE 12.05 TRAFFIC RULES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.05.001 Limitations on turning around
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in
a business district; and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic; and at no intersection controlled by a traffic-control sign or
signal. (1998 Code, sec. 71.08)
State law reference–Safely turning, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.103.
Sec. 12.05.002 Obstructing traffic
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1998 Code, sec.
71.12(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.05.003 Funerals, parades, and other processions
(a) Funeral processions. Every funeral procession shall be marked with appropriate pennants or other devices
or methods, such as burning headlights in daytime, sufficient to show the nature of such procession. Police
officers leading funeral processions or assisting in the movement of funeral processions, together with
automobiles in such funeral processions, shall, and the same are hereby authorized, to proceed through red lights
and stop signs, and all persons approaching such traffic-control devices at intersections shall, notwithstanding
any traffic-control device, yield the right-of-way to such police officers and funeral processions.
(b) Driving through processions. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(c) Driving in procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(d) Permit for parades and processions. No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States
army, navy, air force or marines, the military forces of the state, and the forces of the police and fire
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/430
departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, sidewalk or any other public place or way in the
city, except in accordance with a permit therefor issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are
set forth herein which may apply.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.15)
Sec. 12.05.004 One-way streets and alleys
(a) Whenever any ordinance of the city council designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer
shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where
movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(b) Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or
alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.16)
Sec. 12.05.005 Driving on fresh pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been
freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street
is ready for travel. (1998 Code, sec. 71.18)
Sec. 12.05.006 Operating vehicle off of designated roadways or parking lots
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle whatsoever through or upon, or to park such
vehicle upon, any park, hospital grounds or other public property within the city except upon official, designated
roadways or parking lots. (1998 Code, sec. 71.19)
Sec. 12.05.007 Digging out prohibited
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall cause such vehicle to “dig out” or shall cause any such vehicle to
make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such a manner as to cause the wheels thereof to
spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning movement
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 71.20)
Sec. 12.05.008 Control of vehicle; duty to avoid collision
It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle within the city to keep the same under control
at all times and to avoid whenever possible colliding with any other vehicle or person. (1998 Code, sec. 71.21)
Sec. 12.05.009 Truck routes
(a) The city traffic engineer, as authorized from time to time by the city council, may designate such truck
routes within the city as may be necessary for the proper flow of traffic through the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of over 18,000 pounds (or 18,000
pounds gross cargo weight rating in the case of a truck-trailer or tractor-trailer unit) to use, travel upon or be
driven over any street, avenue or highway within the city not designated as a truck route in subsection (a);
provided, however, that if the point of origin or destination, for commercial purposes only, for any such truck
shall be off such truck route, then such truck may proceed by the shortest possible route to the nearest truck
route.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.27)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/430
Secs. 12.05.010–12.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Intersections
Sec. 12.05.051 Stop intersections
The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized to determine and designate
any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before
entering such intersection. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the city traffic engineer shall
cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the
intersection shall stop. (1998 Code, sec. 71.40(a); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to designate stop intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs. 542.202, 544.003.
Sec. 12.05.052 Yield intersections
The city traffic engineer, as authorized from time to time by the city council, may install and maintain yieldright-
of-way signs at intersections where a special hazard may exist anywhere vehicles shall be required to yield
the right-of-way. (1998 Code, sec. 71.41; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to designate yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs. 542.202, 544.003.
Secs. 12.05.053–12.05.080 Reserved
Division 3. Speed
Sec. 12.05.081 Speed limits on specific streets
The city council may alter the maximum speed limit of 30 miles per hour on any street or portion thereof within
the city in accord with the provisions of Tex. Transp. Code section 545.356. Whenever signs are posted giving
notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. (1998 Code,
sec. 71.57; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Authority to establish or alter prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.202(12);
authority of municipality to alter speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.356.
Sec. 12.05.082 Speed limit in school zones
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour
through any school zone as may be marked or designated by signs within the city from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
days when school is in session or during the period that yellow signal lights are flashing in conjunction with a
sign indicating a speed limit of 20 miles per hour or whenever children are present in such zones. (1998 Code,
sec. 71.58)
Sec. 12.05.083 Maximum speed in alleys
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 20 miles per hour upon any
alley within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec. 71.61)
ARTICLE 12.06 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Sec. 12.06.001 Designation of areas where parking prohibited or limited; overtime parking
(a) The city traffic engineer shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets
and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time, and he shall cause spaces in which
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/430
parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be
designated by the city council from time to time. The traffic engineer shall also cause time limit parking areas to
be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city council
from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the
pavement or curb.
(1) In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed
by the city council, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both
ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time
limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area.
(2) Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such
days and between such hours as prescribed by the city council.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or
owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which
parking is prohibited as provided in subsection (a) above, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of
time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.02)
Sec. 12.06.002 Parking or standing in alleys
(a) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the
free passage of other vehicles in such alleys.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley within blocks 28, 29, 36, 37, 44 and 45,
original townsite, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the purpose of loading or unloading of
merchandise.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.03)
Sec. 12.06.003 Parking near hazardous or congested places
(a) The city traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized by this section, no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.04)
Sec. 12.06.004 Parking for certain purposes
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(3) Sale or disposal of goods, wares or merchandise from such vehicle.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.05)
Sec. 12.06.005 All-night parking
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/430
No person shall park a vehicle on any business street or through street for a period of time longer than 30
minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls, where
signs prohibit such parking. (1998 Code, sec. 72.06)
Sec. 12.06.006 Ten feet of roadway to be available for traffic
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet of width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic,
except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. (1998 Code, sec. 72.09)
Sec. 12.06.007 Vehicles in excess of certain length prohibited from parking in central business district
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or combination thereof on the streets, alleys or
other public ways of the city in the central business district, as defined in the zoning ordinance, which shall
exceed 25 feet in length. (1998 Code, sec. 72.10)
Sec. 12.06.008 Unauthorized designation of parking restriction
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or cause to be painted upon any sidewalk, curb, alley, street or
commons within the city limits, or place or cause to be placed upon any sidewalk, curb, alley, street or commons
within the city, a sign or marker of any kind or character designating a reserve zone, no-parking zone, loading
zone or restricted parking zone of any kind or character unless such person has been authorized to do so by the
city council. (1998 Code, sec. 72.12)
ARTICLE 12.07 PEDESTRIANS*
Sec. 12.07.001 Applicability of traffic regulations
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to those restrictions stated in this article. (1998 Code,
sec. 73.01)
Sec. 12.07.002 Crossing roadway at right angles
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the
shortest route to the opposite curb, except in crosswalks. (1998 Code, sec. 73.06)
ARTICLE 12.08 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Sec. 12.08.001 Schedule I: One-way streets and alleys
The following named streets and alleys are hereby designated as one-way streets or alleys, pursuant to the
provisions of section 12.05.004, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a vehicle
in any direction other than that indicated:
Street Location Direction
The first alley east of Main Street From 10th Street to 3rd Street Southerly
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/430
The first alley west of Main Street From 3rd Street to 10th Street Northerly
The first alley west of Main Street From Adams Street to 1st Street Northerly
The first alley west of Deahl Street From 5th Street to 6th Street Northerly
(Ordinance O-003-12 adopted 4/3/12)
Sec. 12.08.002 Schedule II: Speed limits
Pursuant to the provisions of section 12.05.081, the following speed limits are hereby established for the streets and
portions of streets enumerated below:
Street From To Speed
Limit
F.M. 1551 (Fairlanes Boulevard) State Highway 136 (Wilson
Street)
330 feet east of centerline Fairview
Street 45
F.M. 1551 (Fairlanes Boulevard) 330 feet east of centerline
Fairview Street
410 feet west of centerline Huber
Avenue 55
F.M. 1551 (Fairlanes Boulevard) 410 feet west of centerline
Huber Avenue State Highway 207 (Cedar Street) 40
Spur 119 (Tenth Street) Intersection of State Highway
207 (Cedar Street)
60 feet east of centerline Weatherly
Street 30
Spur 119 (Tenth Street) 60 feet east of centerline
Weatherly Street North city limits 40
Spur 140 (North Main) 150 feet north of Coble Street 700 feet north of Spur 119 (Tenth
Street) 40
Spur 140 (South Main) State Highway 152 (Third
Street) South side of McGee Street 35
Spur 140 (South Main) South side of McGee Street State Highway 207 (Cedar Street) 40
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/430
Spur 245 (Carolina Street) 700 feet west of centerline
Bunton Street
1,160 feet west of east city limits 40
Spur 245 (Carolina Street) 1,160 feet west of east city
limits
East city limits (345 feet east of
centerline Mary Street) 50
Spur 246 (Florida Street) Intersection of Spur 119 (Tenth
Street)
650 feet south of State Highway
152 (Third Street) 40
Spur 246 (Florida Street) 650 feet south of State
Highway 152 (Third Street) 150 feet south of Galahad Street 45
Spur 246 (Florida Street) 150 feet south of Galahad
Street State Highway 207 (Cedar Street) 50
East Wilson Street 300 feet east of Spur 246
(Florida Street) 400 feet north of Gardner Street 45
State Highway 136 (Wilson
Street) Cedar Street 505 feet east of centerline College
Avenue 30
State Highway 136 (Wilson
Street)
505 feet east of centerline
College Avenue
600 feet west of centerline
Roosevelt Street 40
State Highway 136 (Wilson
Street)
600 feet west of centerline
Roosevelt Street
West city limits (0.5 mile east of
F.M. 1319) 55
State Highway 152 (Third Street) State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
135 feet west of centerline
Whittenburg Street 30
State Highway 152 (Third Street) 135 feet west of centerline
Whittenburg Street 1,055 feet west of east city limits 40
State Highway 152 (Third Street) 1,055 feet west of east city
limits
East city limits (0.2 mile east of
Spur 246) 55
State Highway 152 135 feet east of centerline of
Whittenburg Street East city limits 40
State Highway 152 255 feet west of east city limits East city limits (0.2 mile east of
Spur 246)
55
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/430
State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
North city limits (0.3 mile north
of Circle)
60 feet south of centerline Home
Road 45
State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
60 feet south of centerline
Home Road
65 feet north of centerline Cooley
Drive 30
State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
65 feet north of centerline
Cooley Drive
95 feet south of centerline Monroe
Street 40
State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
95 feet south of centerline
Monroe Street
875 feet south of centerline Huber
Avenue 40
State Highway 207 (Cedar
Street)
875 feet south of centerline
Huber Avenue
1,906 feet south of centerline F.M.
1551 (Fairlanes Boulevard) 50
State Highway 207
1,906 feet south of centerline
F.M. 1551 (Fairlanes
Boulevard)
South city limits (0.565 mile south
of F.M. 1551 (Fairlanes Boulevard) 55
Cloverleaf Traffic Interchange On the inside ramps within the interchange 20
(Ordinance O-005-18 adopted 4/3/18)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Provisions of chapter incorporated in service contracts
All applicable provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the city
and its consumers and customers using any utility service furnished by the city, and they are hereby specifically
charged with the duty and responsibility of knowing the provisions of this chapter and, by applying for or
accepting any such utility service from the city, are deemed to have assented to the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.001)
Sec. 13.01.002 Nonliability of city
The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any consumer of any utility service furnished by
the city due to backflow of the sewer system or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. (1998
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/430
Code, sec. 51.002)
Sec. 13.01.003 Rights and duties of city council
The city council shall at all times have the right and it shall be its duty to:
(1) Prescribe rules and regulations pertaining to and providing for the manner and method of
operating the city's utility systems;
(2) Provide for their extension and improvement;
(3) Provide for such deposits as in its opinion are reasonable and required;
(4) Enter into valid contracts with property owners within and without the corporate limits of the
city for the extension of water and sewer services, not in conflict with applicable provisions of this
code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations; and
(5) Prescribe charges for such services.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.003)
Sec. 13.01.004 Creation of water and sewer utility department
There is hereby created in and for the city the water and sewer utility department of the city, which shall be
known as the water and sewer utility department for the purposes of this chapter, which department shall
embrace the entire waterworks system and the sewer system of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 51.004)
Sec. 13.01.005 Disposal of trash, dirt or other material in drainage ditch
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or dump any trash, dirt or any other material, other than natural
stormwaters, in natural drainage ditches within the city. (1998 Code, sec. 51.005)
Sec. 13.01.006 Impeding watercourse or drainage ditch
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, divert, change, dam, impound or impede the flow of any watershed
course, drainageway, ditch or other passageway, either natural or created by the city, which serves the purpose of
draining surface water from public rights-of-way in the city; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be
construed as restricting the authority of the city, in the exercise of its legal right, to direct, order or authorize
such changes or disposition of the watercourses as the city council shall deem advisable and to the best interest
of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 51.006)
Sec. 13.01.007 Water or sewer service outside city limits
The city shall be authorized to furnish water or sewer service to consumers outside the city limits at a rate of one
and one-half times (150%) the current rate charged to consumers inside the city limits as set forth in section
13.04.010, water rates, and section 13.05.002, Charges for the use of Municipal Wastewater Facilities and
Monthly Water Consumption. The City Council may also, by resolution or contract, upon such terms, conditions
and rates, provide service for industrial consumers outside the city limits. However, nothing in this section shall
be construed to compel the city to furnish such consumers beyond the corporate limits or to continue such
supply once begun; and the city reserves the right to furnish such consumers it deems advisable and to, at any
time, wholly or partially discontinue the supply upon violation of any of the terms of this Chapter as if the
consumer resided within the city. (Ordinance O-021-05, sec. 51.007, adopted 12/20/05)
ARTICLE 13.02 WATER SERVICE*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/430
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire department or other authorized employee of the
city, to open or use water from a fire hydrant, or to take off the cap of a fire hydrant, or to commit or assist in
committing any of the following acts:
(1) Placing any telegraph, telephone, or electric light pole, or any other obstruction whatsoever,
within three feet of any fire hydrant;
(2) Resorting to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for
himself or others from private connections or premises contrary to the provisions of this code or city
regulation or ordinance;
(3) Turning on or off without authority from the city the water in any street hydrant or other water
fixture, or hitching or tying any animal thereto;
(4) Making or assisting in making or permitting to be made any connections with the mains or
service pipes of the waterworks system of the city or turning on or using the water of the system
without first obtaining a permit;
(5) Covering or concealing from view any water valve box, service or meter box;
(6) Removing any water meter that has been placed by the city, or in any manner changing,
interfering with or tampering with any water meter; provided the provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity;
(7) Turning on the water supply to any building or supply pipe where the supply has been turned
off for the nonpayment of the water charge or for the violation of any provision of this code or city
rule or ordinance governing the water system;
(8) Doing or causing to be done any act that shall hinder or delay the city in its operation of its
water system, or with the intent to defraud the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.056)
Sec. 13.02.002 Use of water from fire hydrants
Under no conditions shall fire hydrants be used for furnishing water except for fire department or sewer and
street service; provided, however, that the utilities customer service manager, by and with the consent and
approval of the city manager, may grant a special permit in writing to contractors or others engaged in street
improvement or other construction work, under such regulations as may be prescribed by the city manager, to
use water from not more than one opening on a fire hydrant, the water to be measured and paid for as provided
in this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 51.056)
Sec. 13.02.003 Repair of service pipes
The city reserves the right to make all repairs and renewals of service pipes from main to meter, but may
authorize licensed plumbers to make such repairs and renewals. (1998 Code, sec. 51.057)
Sec. 13.02.004 Temporary interruption of service
The right is reserved by the city to temporarily discontinue and to reconnect without notice water supply to all
consumers for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions and cleaning of mains, machinery,
reservoirs or any part of the city's waterworks system. (1998 Code, sec. 51.058)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/430
Secs. 13.02.005–13.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Drought Contingency Plan*
Sec. 13.02.031 Declaration of policy, purpose and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection and to protect and preserve public health,
safety, and welfare and to minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the municipal water system hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on
the delivery and consumption of water through an ordinance.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be
nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply
conditions are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in
section 13.02.041, enforcement, of this plan.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(A), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.032 Public involvement
Opportunity for the public and wholesale water customers to provide input into the preparation of the plan was
provided by the municipal water system by means of a public meeting to accept input into the plan. (Ordinance
O-07-05, sec. 51.059(B), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.033 Wholesale and retail water customer education
The municipal water system will periodically provide wholesale water customers and the public with
information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to
be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information
will be provided by means of the public access channel of the local cable television company for the city. Also,
wholesale customers or the general public may request a copy of the plan at any time during normal business
hours at the office of the utility director at City Hall, 600 N. Main, Borger, Texas 79007. (Ordinance O-07-05,
sec. 51.059(C), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.034 Coordination with regional planning groups
The water service area of the municipal water system is located within the Panhandle Water Planning Area,
Region (A), and the municipal water system has provided a copy of the plan to the Panhandle Water Planning
Area, Region (A), located in the Panhandle Groundwater Conservation District, P.O. Box 637, White Deer,
Texas 79097. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(D), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.035 Authorization
The mayor, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this
plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The
mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply
emergency response measures as described in this plan. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(E), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.036 Application
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the
municipal water system. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals,
corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(F), adopted
9/6/05)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/430
Sec. 13.02.037 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit
establishments and government entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office
buildings.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the municipal water system.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even-number address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and
locations without addresses.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way
and medians.
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety,
or welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise
provided under this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas.
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic purposes except where necessary to support
aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/430
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting.
Odd-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(G), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.038 Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages
(a) The mayor or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a regular basis and
shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan; that is, when the
specified “triggers” are reached. Retail and wholesale customer notification of the initiation or termination of
drought response stages will be made by mail, telephone, local media, and/or local public access television.
(b) The triggering criteria below are based on statistical water use patterns, current and expected weather
conditions, known system capacity limits, and/or current and expected allocation levels from the Canadian River
Municipal Water Authority, our primary supplier of raw water.
(1) Stage 1 triggers–Mild water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water
and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, as defined in section 13.02.037,
definitions, when the municipal water system recognizes that a mild water shortage condition
exists. The following are examples of the types of triggering criteria that may be used in one or
more successive stages of this drought contingency plan:
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(i) When water supply allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority
to the municipal water system are equal to or less than 3600 acre-feet per year, and the
projected use from the municipal water system's owned water wells exceeds 6240 acrefeet
per year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted 4/1/14)
(ii) When, pursuant to the requirements specified in the municipal water system's
wholesale water purchase contract with the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority,
notification is received from the authority requesting initiation of stage 1 of the drought
contingency plan. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(iii) When, due to declining water levels, mechanical failure, or any other unforeseen
event in the municipal water system's owned wells, an amount of water less than or equal
to 6380 acre-feet of water cannot reasonably be expected to be produced, and there are not
adequate allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority to bring the
total available water to 9840 acre-feet per calendar year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted
4/1/14)
(iv) Any mechanical, accidental, regulatory, or unforeseen event that might negatively
affect the daily safe operating capacity of the municipal water system to continually
provide a safe and reliable supply of drinking water that meets all state and federal
standards. This condition or triggering event must also be expected to persist for several
days or weeks.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 30 consecutive days.
The municipal water system will notify its retail and wholesale customers and the media of the
termination of stage 1 in the same manner as the notification of initiation of stage 1 of the plan.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/430
(2) Stage 2 triggers–Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Wholesale and retail customers shall be required to comply
with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section
13.02.039, drought response stages, of this plan when the municipal water system recognizes
that a moderate water shortage condition exists. The following are examples of the types of
triggering criteria that may be used in one or more successive stages of this drought
contingency plan:
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(i) When water supply allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority
to the municipal water system are equal to or less than 3080 acre-feet per year, and the
projected use from the municipal water system's owned water wells exceeds 6240 acrefeet
per year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted 4/1/14)
(ii) When, pursuant to the requirements specified in the municipal water system's
wholesale water purchase contract with the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority,
notification is received from the authority requesting initiation of stage 2 of the drought
contingency plan. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(iii) When, due to declining water levels, mechanical failure, or any other unforeseen
event in the municipal water system's owned wells, an amount of water less than or equal
to 5315 acre-feet of water cannot reasonably be expected to be produced, and there are not
adequate allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority to bring the
total available water to 9060 acre-feet per calendar year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted
4/1/14)
(iv) Any mechanical, accidental, regulatory, or unforeseen event that might negatively
affect the daily safe operating capacity of the municipal water system to continually
provide a safe and reliable supply of drinking water that meets all state and federal
standards. This condition or triggering event must also be expected to persist for several
days or weeks.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 15 consecutive days.
Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(3) Stage 3 triggers–Severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Wholesale and retail customers shall be required to comply
with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section
13.02.039, drought response stages, of this plan when the municipal water system recognizes
that a severe water shortage condition exists. The following are examples of the types of
triggering criteria that may be used in one or more successive stages of this drought
contingency plan:
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(i) When water supply allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority
to the municipal water system are equal to or less than 2524 acre-feet per year, and the
projected use from the municipal water system's owned water wells exceeds 6356 acrefeet
per year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted 4/1/14)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/430
(ii) When, pursuant to the requirements specified in the municipal water system's
wholesale water purchase contract with the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority,
notification is received from the authority requesting initiation of stage 3 of the drought
contingency plan. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(iii) When, due to declining water levels, mechanical failure, or any other unforeseen
event in the municipal water system's owned wells, an amount of water less than or equal
to 4970 acre-feet of water cannot reasonably be expected to be produced, and there are not
adequate allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority to bring the
total available water to 8305 acre-feet per calendar year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted
4/1/14)
(iv) Any mechanical, accidental, regulatory, or unforeseen event that might negatively
affect the daily safe operating capacity of the municipal water system to continually
provide a safe and reliable supply of drinking water that meets all state and federal
standards. This condition or triggering event must also be expected to persist for several
days or weeks.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 15 consecutive days.
Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative.
(4) Stage 4 triggers–Critical water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Wholesale and retail customers shall be required to comply
with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section
13.02.039, drought response stages, of this plan when the municipal water system recognizes
that a critical water shortage condition exists. The following are examples of the types of
triggering criteria that may be used in one or more successive stages of this drought
contingency plan:
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(i) When water supply allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority
to the municipal water system are equal to or less than 1967 acre-feet per year, and the
projected use from the municipal water system's owned water wells exceeds 6471 acrefeet
per year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted 4/1/14)
(ii) When, pursuant to the requirements specified in the municipal water system's
wholesale water purchase contract with the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority,
notification is received from the authority requesting initiation of stage 4 of the drought
contingency plan. (Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
(iii) When, due to declining water levels, mechanical failure, or any other unforeseen
event in the municipal water system's owned wells, an amount of water equal to or greater
than 4623 acre-feet of water cannot reasonably be expected to be produced, and there are
not adequate allocations from the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority to bring the
total available water to 7549 acre-feet per calendar year. (Ordinance O-002-14 adopted
4/1/14)
(iv) Any mechanical, accidental, regulatory, or unforeseen event that might negatively
affect the daily safe operating capacity of the municipal water system to continually
provide a safe and reliable supply of drinking water that meets all state and federal
standards. This condition or triggering event must also be expected to persist for several
days or weeks.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/430
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 5 consecutive days.
Upon termination of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative.
(5) Stage 5 triggers–Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Wholesale and retail customers shall be required to comply
with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section
13.02.039, drought response stages, of this plan when the municipal water system recognizes
that an emergency water shortage condition exists. The following are examples of the types of
triggering criteria that may be used in one or more successive stages of this drought
contingency plan:
(i) Major water line breaks, pump, or other system failures that occur, which cause
unprecedented loss of capacity to provide a safe and adequate supply of water to all or
portions of the system.
(ii) Extended electrical power failures, natural or manmade contamination of the water
supply source(s) that might cause unprecedented outages.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 4 consecutive hours or
immediately when the municipal water system is able to resume normal operations and deliver
adequate quantities of safe and reliable water to its wholesale and retail customers.
(6) Stage 6 triggers–Water allocation.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Residential, nonresidential commercial, wholesale, and
industrial customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions of
section 13.02.040, pro rata water allocation, of this plan when the municipal water system
recognizes that water shortage conditions exist and are expected to persist for several weeks or
months that threaten public health, safety, and welfare. Any one or combination thereof of the
example triggering criteria listed in stages 1 thru 5 may be used to initiate this stage.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 6 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 30 consecutive days
and there is no longer a threat to public health, safety, or welfare of either wholesale or retail
customers.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(H), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.039 Drought response stages
(a) Monitoring and notification. The mayor, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand
conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 13.02.038, criteria
for initiation and termination of drought response stages, of this plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate,
severe, critical, or emergency condition exists and shall implement the following notification procedures:
(1) Notification of the public. The mayor or his/her designee shall notify the public by publication
of notice in a newspaper of general circulation and/or public service announcements on local access
channel.
(2) Additional notification. The mayor or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be
notified directly, the following individuals and entities as appropriate to respective drought stages:
(A) Mayor and members of the city council.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/430
(B) City manager and staff.
(C) Fire chief and or his/her designee.
(D) City/county emergency management coordinator.
(E) State commission on environmental quality.
(F) Wholesale water customers.
(G) Industrial water customers.
(H) Critical water users.
(b) Stage 1 response–Mild water shortage conditions.
Target: Achieve a voluntary 10-percent reduction in total water use.
(1) Best management practices for supply management.
(A) All operations (e.g., municipal buildings, facilities, and parks) of the municipal water
system shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for stage 2 of the plan.
(2) Voluntary water use restrictions for retail customers.
(A) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to
Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in and even number (0, 2, 4,
6, 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd
number (1, 3, 5, 7, 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of midnight and 10:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days.
(B) All water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or
discontinue water use for nonessential purposes.
(3) Voluntary water use restrictions for wholesale and industrial customers.
(A) The mayor, or his/her designee, shall contact wholesale and industrial water customers to
discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will request that wholesale water customers
initiate voluntary measures to reduce water use (e.g., implement stage 1 of the wholesale water
customers' drought contingency plan).
The mayor, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to the news media with information regarding
current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought
conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices.
(c) Stage 2 response–Moderate water shortage conditions.
Target: Achieve a 20% reduction in total water use.
(1) Best management practices for supply management.
(A) Designate hours for hose-end watering and noncommercial vehicle washing.
(B) Prohibit flushing of fire hydrants.
(C) Designate hours for watering golf courses.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/430
(D) Request wholesale water customers to reduce nonessential water use.
(2) Water use restrictions for retail customers.
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems
shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even
number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address
ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of
midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days. However,
irrigation of landscaped area is permitted at any time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a
faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or by means of drip irrigation
systems.
(B) Use of water to wash any vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is
prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00
a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done
with hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick
rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial
carwash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these
regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle
cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables.
(C) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading
pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours
of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are
equipped with a recirculation system.
(E) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or other
activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. Exceptions on the use of
water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special
permit from the municipal water system.
(F) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited
except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and
between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes a water source other
than that provided by the municipal water system, the facility shall not be subject to these
regulations.
(G) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the
patron.
(H) The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited:
(i) Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(ii) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
(iii) Use of water for any kind of dust control;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/430
(iv) Flushing of gutters or storm drains, permitting water to run or accumulate in any
gutter or street; and
(v) Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been
given notice directing the repair of such leak.
(3) Water use restrictions for wholesale and industrial customers.
(A) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate weekly contact with wholesale and industrial
water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of a pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries.
(B) The mayor, or his/her designee, will request wholesale water customers to initiate
mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g., implement stage 2 of the customer's
drought contingency plan).
(C) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries by preparing a monthly water usage
allocation baseline for each wholesale and industrial customer according to the procedures
specified in 13.02.036, application, of this plan.
The mayor, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to the news media with information regarding
current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought
conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices.
(d) Stage 3 response–Severe water shortage conditions.
Target: Achieve a 30% reduction in total water use.
All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except:
(1) Best management practices for supply management.
(A) Designate hours for watering landscaped areas.
(B) Install a portable pump to transfer water from the west industrial well field system to the
main distribution system.
(C) Initiate preparations for pro rata curtailment of deliveries to wholesale and commercial
customers.
(2) Water use restrictions for retail customers.
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the
hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of
hand-held hoses, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or by
permanently installed automatic irrigation systems. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited
at all times.
(B) The watering of golf course fairways is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water
source other than that provided by the municipal water system.
(C) The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special
permit is to be discontinued.
(3) Water use restrictions for wholesale and industrial customers.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/430
(A) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate weekly contact with wholesale and industrial
water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of a pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries.
(B) The mayor, or his/her designee, will request wholesale water customers to initiate
mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g., implement stage 3 of the customer's
drought contingency plan).
(C) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries by preparing a monthly water usage
allocation baseline for each wholesale and industrial customer according to the procedures
specified in section 13.02.036, application, of this plan.
The mayor, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to the news media with information regarding
current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought
conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices.
(e) Stage 4 response–Critical water shortage conditions.
Target: Achieve a 35% reduction in total water use.
All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except:
(1) Best management practices for supply management.
(A) Prohibit vehicle washing except at commercial carwashes.
(B) Prohibit the filling of swimming pools, etc.
(C) Contract with a private water system to supply one of the local industries.
(2) Water use restrictions for retail customers.
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the
hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of
hand-held hoses, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or by drip
irrigation systems. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler
systems is prohibited at all times.
(B) Use of water to wash any vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not
occurring on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station
and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Further,
such vehicle washing at commercial carwashes or commercial service stations shall occur
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(C) The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzitype
pools is prohibited.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are
equipped with a recirculation system.
(E) No new application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service
connections, meters, service lines, main line extensions, or water service facilities of any kind
shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for
such time as this drought response stage or a higher numbered stage shall be in effect.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/430
(3) Water use restrictions for wholesale and industrial customers.
(A) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate weekly contact with wholesale and industrial
water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of a pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries.
(B) The mayor, or his/her designee, will request wholesale water customers to initiate
mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g., implement stage 4 of the customer's
drought contingency plan).
(C) The mayor, or his/her designee, will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro
rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries by preparing a monthly water usage
allocation baseline for each wholesale and industrial customer according to the procedures
specified in section 13.02.036, application, of this plan.
The mayor, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to the news media with information regarding
current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought
conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices.
(f) Stage 5 response–Emergency water shortage conditions.
Target: Achieve a 50% to 70% reduction in daily water demand.
Whenever emergency water shortage conditions exist as defined in section 13.02.038, criteria for initiation and
termination of drought response stages, of the plan, the mayor, or his/her designated official shall:
(1) Best management practices for supply management.
(A) Arrange to supply bottled water to citizens if necessary.
(2) Assess the severity of the problem and identify the actions needed and time required to solve
the problem.
(3) Notify the public as efficiently as possible to reduce water use until service is restored.
(4) Inform critical water customers by telephone or in person of any foreseen situation that might
present a threat to public health, safety, and welfare.
(5) Inform the utility director or other responsible official of each wholesale and industrial water
customer by telephone or in person and suggest actions, as appropriate, to alleviate anticipated
problems.
(6) If appropriate, notify city, county, and/or state emergency response officials for assistance.
(7) Undertake necessary actions, including repairs and/or cleanup as needed.
(8) Prepare a post-event assessment report on the incident and critique of emergency response
procedures and actions.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(I), adopted 9/6/05; Ordinance O-009-09 adopted 10/20/09)
Sec. 13.02.040 Pro rata water allocation
(a) Single-family residential customers. The allocation to residential water customers residing in a singlefamily
dwelling shall be as follows:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/430
Persons per Household Gallons per Month
1 or 2 6,000
3 or 4 7,000
5 or 6 8,000
7 or 8 9,000
9 or 10 10,000
11 or more 12,000
“Household” means the residential premises served by the customer's meter. “Persons per household” includes
only those persons currently physically residing at the premises and expected to reside there for the entire billing
period. It shall be assumed that a particular customer's household is comprised of two (2) persons unless the
customer notifies the municipal water system of a greater number of persons per household on a form prescribed
by the mayor. The mayor shall give his/her best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or
made available to every residential customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be
the customer's responsibility to go the municipal water system offices to complete and sign the form claiming
more than two (2) persons per household. New customers may claim more than two persons per household at the
time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the mayor. When the number of persons per
household increases so as to place the customer in a different allocation category, the customer may notify the
municipal water system on such form, and the change will be implemented in the next practicable billing period.
If the number of persons in a household is reduced, the customer shall notify the municipal water system in
writing within two (2) days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two (2) persons per household,
the mayor shall adopt methods to insure accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal negligence falsely reports the number of persons in a household or fails to timely notify the municipal
water system of a reduction of the number of persons in a household shall be fined not less than $50.00.
Residential water customers shall pay the following surcharges:
(1) A rate one and one-half (1-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for 1 to 3 thousand gallons
over allocation.
(2) A rate two (2) times the customer's regular rate for 4 to 9 thousand gallons over the allocation.
(3) A rate two and one-half (2-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for amounts of 10 thousand
gallons or more over the allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(b) Master-metered multifamily residential customers. The allocation to a customer billed from a master meter
that jointly measures water to multiple permanent residential dwelling units (example: apartments, mobile
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/430
homes, or duplexes) shall be allocated 6,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit. It shall be assumed that
such a customer's meter serves two (2) dwelling units unless the customer notifies the municipal water system of
a greater number of units on a form prescribed by the mayor. The mayor shall give his/her best effort to see that
such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every such customer. If, however, a customer
does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go the municipal water system offices to
complete and sign the form claiming more than two (2) dwellings. A dwelling unit may be claimed under this
provision whether it is occupied or not. New customers may claim more dwelling units at the time of applying
for water service on a form prescribed by the mayor. If the number of dwelling units served by the master meter
is reduced, the customer shall notify the municipal water system in writing within two (2) days. In prescribing
the method for claiming more than two (2) dwelling units, the mayor shall adopt methods for insuring the
accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely reports the
number of dwelling units served by a master meter or fails to timely notify the municipal water system of a
reduction of the number of dwelling units served by a master meter shall be fined not less than $150.00.
Customers billed from a master meter shall pay the following surcharges:
(1) A rate one and one-half (1-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for 1 to 3 times the dwelling
unit (3 x # units) per thousand gallons over allocation.
(2) A rate two (2) times the customer's regular rate for 4 to 9 times the number of dwelling units (4
x # units to 9 x # units) per thousand gallons over the allocation.
(3) A rate two and one-half (2-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for amounts of 10 times the
number of dwelling units (10 x # units) per thousand gallons or more over the allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(c) Commercial customers. The mayor, or his/her designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer
other than an industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes, shall establish a monthly water
allocation. Generally the allocation shall be approximately 75% of the customer's usage for the preceding 12-
month period. However, the impact of each commercial customer's water use for public health, safety, and
welfare will be evaluated and allocations set accordingly. The mayor shall give his/her best effort to see that
notice of each commercial customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not
receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the municipal water system to determine
the allocation. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the mayor, the allocation may be reduced or
increased if, (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage, (2) one
nonresidential commercial customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another nonresidential commercial
customer, or (3) other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present
conditions. A nonresidential commercial customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the mayor
or alternatively to a special water allocation review committee appointed by the city council.
Commercial water customers shall pay the following surcharges:
(1) A rate one and one-half (1-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for 1 to 3 thousand gallons
over allocation.
(2) A rate two (2) times the customer's regular rate for 4 to 9 thousand gallons over the allocation.
(3) A rate two and one-half (2-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for amounts of 10 thousand
gallons or more over the allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(d) Wholesale customers. In the event that the triggering criteria specified in section 13.02.038, criteria for
initiation and termination of drought response stages, of the plan for stage 3, severe water shortage conditions,
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/430
have been met, the mayor is herby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis in
accordance with the Texas Water Code section 11.039.
During any period when pro rata allocation of available water supplies is in effect, wholesale customers shall
pay the following surcharges on excess water diversions and deliveries:
(1) A rate one and one-half (1-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for usage between 0 and 10%
over the allocation.
(2) A rate two (2) times the customer's regular rate for usage between 11 and 20% over the
allocation.
(3) A rate two and one-half (2-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for all usage above 20% of the
allocation.
(e) Industrial customers. The mayor, or his/her designee, for each industrial customer who uses water for
processing purposes, shall establish a monthly water allocation. The industrial customer's allocation shall be
approximately 90% of the customer's water usage baseline. Ninety (90) days after the initial imposition of the
allocation for industrial customers, the industrial customer's allocation shall be further reduced to 80% of the
customer's water usage baseline. The industrial customer's water use baseline will be computed on the average
of water use for the past 12-month period ending prior to the date of implementation of stage 2 of the plan. The
mayor shall give his/her best effort to see that notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to such
customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to
contact the municipal water system to determine the allocation, and the allocation shall be fully effective
notwithstanding the lack of receipt of written notice. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the
mayor, the allocation may be reduced or increased if, (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the
customer's normal water use because the customer had shut down a major processing unit for repair or overhaul
during the period, (2) the customer has added or is in the process of adding significant additional processing
capacity, (3) the customer has shut down or significantly reduced the production of a major processing unit, (4)
the customer has previously implemented significant permanent water conservation measures such that the
ability to further reduce water use is limited, (5) one industrial customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation
to another industrial customer, or (6) other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is
inaccurate under present conditions. A nonresidential commercial customer may appeal an allocation established
hereunder to the mayor or alternatively to a special water allocation review committee appointed by the city
council.
Industrial water customers shall pay the following surcharges:
(1) A rate one and one-half (1-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for usage between 0 and 10%
over the allocation.
(2) A rate two (2) times the customer's regular rate for usage between 11 and 20% over the
allocation.
(3) A rate two and one-half (2-1/2) times the customer's regular rate for all usage above 20% of the
allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(J), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.041 Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the municipal water system for
residential, commercial, wholesale, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/430
contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage
in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the mayor, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of
this plan.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day that
one or more of the provisions of this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted
of three or more distinct violations of this plan, the mayor shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized
to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such
circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, and any other costs incurred by the
municipal water system in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the mayor that
the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought
through injunctive relief in the district court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the municipal water system, in apparent
control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that
the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in
apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that
he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor
children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on the property within the parents' control
shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be
excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in
violation of this plan and the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any employee of the municipal water system, police officer, or other employee of the city designated by
the mayor, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this division. The
citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known,
the offense charged, and shall direct him/her to appear in the city municipal court on the date shown on the
citation for which the date shall not be less than 3 days nor more than 10 days from the date the citation was
issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon
delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 14 years
of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged
violator shall appear in the municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If
the alleged violator fails to appear in the municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons
to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting
in the municipal court before all other cases.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(K), adopted 9/6/05)
Sec. 13.02.042 Variances
(a) The mayor, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise
prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting the health, safety, welfare, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person
requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this division shall file a petition for variance with
the municipal water system within 5 days after the plan or a particular drought stage has been invoked. All
petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the mayor, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/430
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner
or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this
division.
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take
to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the municipal water system shall be subject to the following conditions, unless
waived or modified by the mayor, or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has
failed to meet the specified requirements.
(3) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to
the issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance O-07-05, sec. 51.059(L), adopted 9/6/05)
ARTICLE 13.03 SEWER SERVICE*
Sec. 13.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Approving authority. The city manager or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of
20°C.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called
the house lateral and house connection).
City. The city or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD (chemical oxygen demand). The measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic
matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not
necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/430
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
Discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of,
or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from
the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the
development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater.
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewer
system.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of violation of the city's TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title III, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act (CAA); the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuary Act.
mg/l (milligrams per liter). The same as parts per million, and is a weight-to-volume value which when
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary
sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 mg/l and BOD is
not more than 300 mg/l.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
design capacity.
Pass-through. A discharge which exits the wastewater treatment plant into waters of the United States in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation.
Person. Any individual, including any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, or other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Plumbing fixtures. Water closets, lavatories, bathtubs, household laundries, separate showers, kitchen sinks, or
any other similar receptacles that discharge waste into the sewer system.
Public sewer. A pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting
properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/430
Residence. A home or dwelling in which no business is conducted that requires plumbing fixtures other than
water closets, bathtubs, showers, lavatories, kitchen sinks, household laundry sinks and other plumbing fixtures
designed for residential use and that only has sanitary sewage. For the purpose of this definition, roominghouses,
duplex apartments, apartment houses, tourist and trailer camps of not more than ten rooms served by one water
meter shall be considered as a residence.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both,
and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Sewage. The water or waterborne waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers,
household laundries, basement floor drains, garage floor drains, storerooms, soda fountains, cuspidors,
refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, and other similar fixtures and receptacles that discharge waste into the
sewer system.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or
in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, five times the average 24-hour
concentration or flow during normal operation.
SS (suspended solids). Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of
analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (Standard Methods) as prepared,
approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Environment Federation.
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic
wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
TPDES. Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other
harmful substances.
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing the following:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as
determined by the state commission on environmental quality; and
(7) Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as
specified in Standard Methods.
Utility director. The department head of the water and sewer utility department of the city or his duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/430
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural, or industrial activities.
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and
industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and
industrial wastes.
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and
treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge from the sanitary sewers.
Watercourse. A natural or human-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.020)
Sec. 13.03.002 Connection required
All residences and places of business situated on property which is immediately adjacent to the city sewer mains
are hereby required to establish connection with the sewer mains when such connection is reasonably feasible.
Such connection shall be made at the expense of the owner of the residence or place of business as is authorized
under Tex. Local Gov't Code section 214.013, and all other authority under the laws of the state. (1998 Code,
sec. 51.021)
Sec. 13.03.003 Prohibited discharges generally
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes
may do any of the following:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public sewers any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass-through or interference at the wastewater facilities.
(c) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public sewers the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater facilities, including, but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.022)
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0, or any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(Ordinance O-001-12, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/12)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/430
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
wastewater facilities resulting in interference.
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singularly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the wastewater facilities.
(5) Liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C), or that causes the temperature of the total wastewater plant influent to increase at a rate of
10°F or more per hour.
(6) Petroleum, oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that
will cause interference or pass-through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the wastewater
facilities in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the utility director.
(d) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.022)
Sec. 13.03.004 Chemical discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain any of the following:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 350 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
(5) Substances causing an excessive COD.
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain any of the following:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32–150°F (0–65°C);
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the approving authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the
provisions of section 13.03.003(a).
(1998 Code, sec. 51.023)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/430
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than
5.5 or higher than 9.0, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. (Ordinance O-001-12, sec. 2, adopted 2/7/12)
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odorproducing
substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After
treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by
state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.(1998 Code, sec. 51.023)
Sec. 13.03.005 Discharge of hazardous metals and toxic materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection
(b) of this section.
(b) The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to
inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are as
follows:
Not to Exceed
Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3
Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0
Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0
Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0
Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5
Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0
Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/430
Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0
Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2
Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2
Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0
(c) No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from
the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentration, volumes, and other applicable
provisions.
(d) Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Antimony;
(2) Beryllium;
(3) Bismuth;
(4) Cobalt;
(5) Molybdenum;
(6) Uranyl ion;
(7) Rhenium;
(8) Strontium;
(9) Tellurium;
(10) Herbicides;
(11) Fungicides; and
(12) Pesticides.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.024)
Sec. 13.03.006 Discharge restrictions relating to particle size
(a) No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that
all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension are prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.025)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/430
Sec. 13.03.007 Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers any of the following:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters;
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
(b) No person may make any new connections from inflow sources.
(c) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Control Act, being Tex. Water Code section 26.001 et seq. and
other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted
drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.026)
Sec. 13.03.008 Discharge restrictions relating to temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C), or any substance
which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10°F or
more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to 104°F. (Ordinance O-001-12, sec. 3, adopted
2/7/12)
Sec. 13.03.009 Discharge of radioactive wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the
approving authority.
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations,
regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.028)
Sec. 13.03.010 Discharge of substances causing impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing the following:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which
exert or cause concentrations of the following:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries; and
(C) Lime residues;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/430
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 1500 mg/l, including, but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride; and
(B) Sodium sulfate;
(3) Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes; and
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment
processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a)
of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/430
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Slops;
(21) Chemical residues;
(22) Paint residues; or
(23) Bulk solids.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.029)
Sec. 13.03.011 Discharging waste to outlet or location other than sanitary sewer
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by
all persons discharging the following:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste;
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the state commission on environmental quality, no person may deposit or discharge
any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property or into or adjacent to any of the
following:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/430
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive
suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and
local governments.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.030)
Sec. 13.03.012 Acceptance of restricted wastes
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the
approving authority shall require the following:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does
not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.031)
Sec. 13.03.013 Design and operation of pretreatment and control facilities
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and
installation of equipment and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes,
ordinances and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall
provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.032)
Sec. 13.03.014 Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include the following:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public
sewers;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/430
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the
approving authority provide for the following:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and
inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.033)
Sec. 13.03.015 Requirements for building sewers carrying industrial wastes
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own
expense and as required by the approving authority:
(1) Install an accessible control manhole;
(2) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the waste;
(3) Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps, and the like), where needed; and
(4) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.034)
Sec. 13.03.016 Sampling and testing of wastes
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
(Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of
the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and SS analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour
or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease.)
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be as
follows:
(1998 Code, sec. 51.035)
(1) Conducted in accordance with 40 CFR part 136 approved methods; and (Ordinance O-001-12,
sec. 4, adopted 2/7/12)
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point
authorized by the approving authority.
(c) BOD and SS shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges.
(d) All samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of
a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/430
(e) The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which
is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be
sampled for flow, BOD, SS and pH at least annually.
(f) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and SS, if necessary. Flow
may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other
source of raw water is used.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.035)
Sec. 13.03.017 User charge system
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of
collection and treatment.
(b) When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its
authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing the following:
(1) Terms of acceptance by the city;
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as
established in subsection (e) of this section;
(1998 Code, sec. 51.036)
(3) Sewer connection procedures and requirements which are in accordance with the plumbing
code adopted in section 3.06.001; (1998 Code, sec. 51.036; Ordinance adopting Code)
(4) A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and
(5) That construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use.
(c) Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the
operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system.
(d) The city will apply excess revenues collected from each class of users to the cost of operation and
maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the charges accordingly.
(e) The user charge system is contained in the user charge ordinance, set forth in article 13.05 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.036)
Sec. 13.03.018 Permit to discharge
(a) Existing discharge. The city may grant a permit to discharge to a person meeting all the requirements
provided that the person:
(1) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when
required;
(2) Gives proof of compliance with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including,
but not limited to, provisions for the following:
(A) Payment of charges;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/430
(B) Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required; and
(C) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city.
(3) Provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this article
and approval of the approving authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.038; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) New discharge. A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.038)
Sec. 13.03.019 Periodic reports
(a) Any person to whom the city has issued a permit pursuant to section 13.03.018 shall, at a frequency
determined by the city, but in no case less than twice a year (in June and December), submit a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
(b) Any person discharging into the wastewater facilities that is not required to obtain a permit pursuant to
section 13.03.018 shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require.
(c) Any person required to complete a compliance report pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12 shall submit such report
to the appropriate authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.039)
Sec. 13.03.020 Notification requirements
(a) A person must notify the city of any planned significant changes to its operations or systems which might
alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.
(1) The city may require the person to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed conditions, including the submission of a permit application under section
13.03.018.
(2) The city may issue a permit to discharge under section 13.03.018 or modify an existing permit
in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
(b) In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the
wastewater facilities, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the utility director of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.040)
Sec. 13.03.021 Power to enter property
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/430
(a) The utility director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning
safety, internal security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of a person to maintain safe conditions, the city shall
indemnify the person against loss or damage to property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person and growing out of the sampling
operation.
(d) The utility director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for
the purposes of the following:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within the easement; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity.
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this section may inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.041)
Sec. 13.03.022 Authority to disconnect service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system
when:
(1) Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the
sewer, potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper
conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is
no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is
delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that
is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) The customer:
(A) Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving
authority;
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an
imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/430
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited waste to public sewers in violation of section
13.03.003 through section 13.03.010 as stated above.
(b) If service is being disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer's service;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all
pertinent information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment, additional
pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his waste.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.042)
Sec. 13.03.023 Notice of violation; continuation of violation
(a) The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance.
(b) No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the
notice.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.043)
Sec. 13.03.024 Penalty; additional remedies
(a) Continuing prohibited discharge.
(1) A person who continues prohibited discharges shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished in conformity with section 1.01.009 for each act of violation and
for each day of violation.
(2) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the city is entitled
to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or
other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
(b) Failure to pay. In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions
provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay a bill for water and sanitary sewer service when
due.
(c) Penalty for criminal mischief. The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled
under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by
tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.044)
ARTICLE 13.04 RATES AND CHARGES GENERALLY*
Sec. 13.04.001 Application for service
Written application shall be made to the city, upon forms furnished therefor, for water, sewer, refuse collection or
any other utility service that may be furnished by the city. Such application shall state the name and address of
the applicant, the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and such other
information as the city may request. (1998 Code, sec. 51.070)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/430
Sec. 13.04.002 No service to defaulters
The city shall not furnish any utility service to any person who shall be in debt to the city, except for taxes.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.071)
Sec. 13.04.003 Amount of water deposit
(a) Residential dwelling. A deposit is required for each residential dwelling in an amount appropriate for the
meter size as listed in article 8.000.
(b) Business or commercial establishment. A deposit is required for each business or commercial
establishment in an amount appropriate for the meter size as listed in article 8.000.
Sec. 13.04.004 Water meter installation fee
(a) Water meter installations, upsizing, and/or downsizing for new or existing taps shall be charged as listed in
article 8.000.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) Water meter installations larger than 2 inch, or which require a nonstandard meter box, additional lines
and/or materials, street boring, or other site specific requirements, shall be charged based on the cost of material,
labor, and equipment required for the installation plus fifteen percent (15%). (Ordinance O-002-11, sec. 7,
adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 13.04.005 Refund of deposit
Any deposit made to the city by any applicant shall be held by the city until such applicant's utility service for
which the deposit was made shall be terminated. Upon termination of such service, the applicant shall be entitled
to a refund of such deposit, less any amount which is due and owing to the city. (1998 Code, sec. 51.074)
Sec. 13.04.006 Water meters required; installation and maintenance
(a) Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of water service furnished by the city.
(b) All meters required by this article used to measure the consumption of water service furnished by the city
shall be installed and maintained by the city.
(c) All meters used for the measurement of the consumption of water service furnished by the city shall be the
property of the city, except under special contract or agreement with the city. It shall be unlawful for any person
to install or maintain any meter for such purposes anywhere within the city which is not owned by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.075)
Sec. 13.04.007 Testing of water meters; failure of meter to register correctly
(a) Should any consumer feel that his water meter is registering improperly, he shall make request in writing
to the city to have his meter tested. The same shall be tested as quickly as possible and if there is as much as a
2% error in the registering of a meter 1 inch or less, or an error of 3% in a meter larger than 1 inch, there shall be
no charge for testing; however, in case there is not such an error, then the consumer shall pay a fee as listed in
article 8.000 multiplied by the size of the meter for the test. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) Should any meter used to measure the consumption of water service furnished by the city fail to register
correctly, the amount of water used by any consumer since the previous reading shall be estimated by the city
upon the basis of any previous continuous three months' service. (1998 Code, sec. 51.076)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/430
Sec. 13.04.008 Tampering with meters
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to tamper with any meter;
or to in any manner injure any meter; or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to
affect its registration or measurement of the metered utility service. (1998 Code, sec. 51.077)
Sec. 13.04.009 User classifications
(a) Established. A user classification is hereby established for all users of municipal water and wastewater
facilities, as follows:
(1) Class A: Residential users.
(2) Class B: Commercial users.
(3) Class C: Industrial or wholesale users.
(b) Defined. The user classifications established in subsection (a) above are herein defined:
(1) Class A users shall include all residential-type users, including, but not limited to, residences,
apartment units, trailer court units, duplexes, or any other service primarily intended for domestic or
residential-type use. The city may include small office buildings, churches and other low-volume
(similar to domestic volume) users in class A.
(2) Class B users shall include commercial users including, but not limited to, restaurants, cafes,
carwashes, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, offices, hotels, motels, laundries, grocery stores,
department stores, and the like, not included in class A.
(3) Class C users are generally industrial or wholesale customers, including, but not limited to, any
users of:
(A) Untreated or raw water;
(B) Effluent or other nonpotable water;
(C) City-produced potable well water;
(D) Canadian River Municipal Water Authority (CRMWA) raw surface water or well water;
or
(E) Any combination of the above, that requires, among other things:
(i) Oversized additions to the city's water system;
(ii) Water delivery at a particular range of pressure;
(iii) Delivery of a particular source (city well water and/or CRMWA water);
(iv) Delivery at a high flow rate; and/or
(v) Delivery in quantities in excess of that required by a typical class B commercial
customer.
(4) Class C water service will normally be provided pursuant to a written water supply agreement
upon such terms and conditions as agreed to by the city council and at a rate for each source of water
set to fully recover the city's cost of providing such service. Class C water rates shall be calculated
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/430
using a cost-of-service rate methodology developed by the city and designed to recover the cost of
providing such service. Rates for each source will be recalculated pursuant to section 13.04.010(c) of
this article and effective for water taken on or after each January 1st of every fiscal year.
(Ordinance O-004-15 adopted 9/8/15)
Sec. 13.04.010 Water rates
Base and volumetric rates for each class and size of meter are listed in article 8.000. (Ordinance O-008-18
adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 13.04.011 Payment; disconnection for nonpayment
(a) Due date. The rates and charges fixed and prescribed by the provisions of this article shall be due and
payable at the city hall on the day as reflected on the bill rendered to the utility customer.
(b) Delinquency. In the event that the rates and charges due and payable under the provisions of this article are
not paid by the due date as reflected on the bill rendered to the utility customer, a penalty of ten percent (10%)
on the total bill for water, sewer and trash (excluding tax and donation) shall be charged; further, a delinquent
notice shall be mailed to the address of the defaulting customer, and shall state that unless the rates and charges
are paid within ten days after the date of the notice, all utility services furnished by the city shall be terminated,
and the city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of such customer due to such termination of
service.
(c) Disconnection for late payment.
(1) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment
of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form
for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room
number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable
provisions to the effect that:
(A) All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill;
(B) If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a
cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
(C) Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at
which time he or she may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or
her choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final
determination of the customer's complaint.
(2) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and
correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(3) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for
nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a reconnection charge, as set forth in section 13.04.012.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.080)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/430
Sec. 13.04.012 Resumption of service after disconnection for nonpayment; reconnection fee
Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city whose utility services have been disconnected or terminated for
the nonpayment of the rates and charges therefor may have such utility services resumed by paying all rates and charges
due by him/her to the city, and, in addition thereto, as listed in article 8.000 for reconnection during normal working hours
or after-hours and holidays will be assessed.
Sec. 13.04.013 Payment by bad check
In the event that a customer tenders payment for service by check, and the same is refused by the paying bank, the bill
shall be declared delinquent, and the city shall forthwith notify the customer, either in person or by written notice as above
provided, of the refused check, and the consumer shall immediately redeem such check; otherwise, service shall be
disconnected. Each consumer who gives the city a check which is refused by the paying bank shall be assessed an
additional service charge as listed in article 8.000.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
State law references–Issuance of bad checks, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 32.41; processing fee by holder of dishonored checks,
V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code, sec. 3.506.
ARTICLE 13.05 USER CHARGE SYSTEM FOR DOMESTIC WASTEWATER TREATMENT
Sec. 13.05.001 User classifications
(a) Established. A user classification is hereby established for all users of the municipal wastewater facilities,
as follows:
(1) Class A: Residential users.
(2) Class B: Commercial users.
(b) Defined. The user classifications established in subsection (a) above are herein defined:
(1) Class A users shall include all residential-type users, including, but not limited to residences,
apartment units, trailer court units, duplexes, or any other service primarily intended for domestic or
residential-type use. The city may include small office buildings, churches and other low-volume
(similar to domestic volume) users in class A.
(2) Class B users shall include commercial users, such as, but not limited to, restaurants, cafes,
carwashes, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, offices, hotels, motels, laundries, grocery stores,
department stores, and the like, not included in class A.
(c) Authority to establish other classifications. In the future, the city may establish other user classifications,
as necessary, to meet local, state, or federal regulations, or the general needs of the area.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.095)
Sec. 13.05.002 Rates established; basis of charges
(a) All users of the municipal wastewater facilities shall be charged a minimum base rate per month plus a
charge per each one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered water consumption as listed in article 8.000.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(b) The water consumption per month to be billed for class A users shall be the average water consumption
per month during the January through March period of each year in order not to account for any water used
during other months for purposes such as lawn and garden watering from which water is not conveyed into the
waste water facilities. The water consumption per month to be billed for class B users shall be the actual water
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/430
consumption recorded each month for the purpose of water billing. In the case of users not on metered basis, the
city shall establish an estimated water consumption on a comparison of the nonmetered user with a metered user
of similar class. (Ordinance 0-014-05, sec. 51.096, adopted 9/13/05)
Sec. 13.05.003 Determination of charges
(a) Determination of charges. All users of municipal wastewater facilities shall be charged on a volume basis,
as the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), SS and other pollutant concentrations discharged are approximately
equal for both class A and class B users. The charges shall be determined in accordance with the following
formula:
Cu = Cb + Ct Vt(Vu)
(b) Symbols and definitions.
Cu = A user's charge per unit of time.
Cb = A user's base minimum charge per unit of time for costs not associated with
operations and maintenance of flow-related units of wastewater facilities.
Ct = Total operation and maintenance (O&M) costs per unit of time of flow-related
units of wastewater facilities.
Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per unit of time. (May include
extraneous flows.)
Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.097)
Sec. 13.05.004 Excessive strength charges
(a) Calculation of surcharge. For any user, when the BOD exceeds 300 mg/l, or the SS exceed 300 mg/l, or
when other pollutant concentrations exceed the range of concentrations of these pollutants in normal domestic
sewage, a surcharge shall be added to the basic charge. This surcharge shall be calculated by the following
formula:
CS = [Bc(B) + Sc(S) + Pc(P)] Vu
(b) Symbols and definitions.
Cs = A surcharge for wastewater of excessive strength.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/430
Bc = Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs for treatment of a unit of BOD.
B = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level.
Sc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of SS.
S = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level.
Pc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant.
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level.
Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.098)
Sec. 13.05.005 Review and revision of rates
(a) The user charge ordinance shall be reviewed annually regarding the wastewater contribution of users and
user classes, the total costs of the operation and maintenance of the treatment works and the approved user
charge system.
(b) The charges for users or user classes shall be revised to:
(1) Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and
user classes.
(2) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the
proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works.
(3) Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance
attributable to that class for the next year, and with the rates being adjusted accordingly.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.099)
Sec. 13.05.006 Toxic pollutants charges
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/430
Each user that discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the
sludge of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. (1998 Code, sec. 51.100)
Sec. 13.05.007 Notification
Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with the regular bill, of the sewer use rate and the
portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. Costs shall be broken down
to show the operation and maintenance costs attributable to that user. (1998 Code, sec. 51.101)
Sec. 13.05.008 Charges for extraneous flows
The costs of operation and maintenance for all flows not directly attributable to users (such as
infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among users on the same basis as operation and maintenance charges.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.102)
Sec. 13.05.009 Records
A recordkeeping system shall be established and maintained by the city to document compliance with federal
regulations pertaining to the user charge ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 51.103)
Sec. 13.05.010 Billing
(a) Procedure; delinquency notice. Users will be billed on a monthly basis with payment due ten days after the
date of billing. Users on metered water service will be billed on the same notice as water charges and will be
designated as a separate entry. Users of the wastewater system not on metered water service will be billed
monthly on an individual notice for wastewater service at the rate established by the city. Users with delinquent
accounts will be notified in writing by the city that water and/or wastewater services will be terminated within
ten days unless the account is paid in full. The city will utilize its current utilities collection procedures as
required in the control and management of the user charge system.
(b) Disconnection for late payment.
(1) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment
of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form
for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room
number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable
provisions to the effect that:
(A) All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill;
(B) If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a
cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
(C) Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at
which time he or she may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or
her choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final
determination of the customer's complaint.
(2) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and
correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/430
(1998 Code, sec. 51.104)
(3) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for
nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a reconnection charge, as set forth in article 8.000. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 13.05.011 Precedence of system over terms of contracts or agreements
The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between
the city and any of the users which are inconsistent with applicable federal regulations regarding user charge
systems. (1998 Code, sec. 51.105(c); Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 13.06 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.06.001 Definitions
Refuse. Includes all rubbish, such as feathers, coffee grounds, paper boxes, glass, yard clippings and leaves,
waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels,
processing plants, and rooming and boarding houses, and other deleterious substances, none of which is liquid.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.01)
Sec. 13.06.002 Burning of refuse
No person shall burn trash, construction or demolition debris, landscape waste, or other materials within the city
limits unless specific authority is granted by the appropriate state agency and the fire chief. (1998 Code, sec.
50.02)
Sec. 13.06.003 Disposal of used or scrap tires
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to place within any refuse container
provided by the city or its agents or to set out for collection or otherwise dispose of any quantity of used or scrap
tires unless the tires are first shredded, split or quartered. (1998 Code, sec. 50.03)
Sec. 13.06.004 Disposal of explosives
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to place in any container used for storage
of refuse any shotgun shells, rifle, pistol, or revolver cartridges, or any other explosive. Disposal of such articles
shall be done under the supervision of a member of the police department. (1998 Code, sec. 50.04)
Sec. 13.06.005 Disposal of lead-acid batteries
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to place within any refuse container
provided by the city or its agents or to set out for collection or otherwise dispose of any lead-acid battery. Leadacid
batteries are recyclable and shall be disposed of at the retail level or scrap yard collecting lead acid batteries
for recycling. (1998 Code, sec. 50.05)
Sec. 13.06.006 Disposal of refrigerators, freezers, and air conditioners
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to place within any refuse container
provided by the city or its agents or to set out for collection or otherwise dispose of any refrigerator, freezer, or
air conditioner unless the refrigerant has been evacuated and recovered by an authorized recycler and the
appliance is properly tagged and certified that refrigerant has been removed in accordance with state law. (1998
Code, sec. 50.06)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/430
Sec. 13.06.007 Disposal of oil and oil filters
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to place within any refuse container
provided by the city or its agents or set out for collection any used oil or oil filter. It shall be a violation of this
code for any person, firm or corporation to pour, drain, or otherwise dispose of used oil or used oil filters upon
the ground or any alleyway, utility easement, street, sewer manhole, or storm drain. (1998 Code, sec. 50.07)
Sec. 13.06.008 Disposal of dead animals
It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to dispose of a dead animal within any
refuse container provided by the city or its agents or set out for disposal any dead animal. The owner of any
animal which dies within the corporate limits of the city shall cause such animal to be properly disposed of at the
owner's expense. (1998 Code, sec. 50.08)
Sec. 13.06.009 Disposal of construction and demolition material; covering of vehicles transporting loose
materials
(a) It shall be unlawful for any construction or demolition contractor, or person in charge of such a project, to
fail to provide on-site refuse containers, bulk containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper,
building material waste, scrap building material, and other trash produced by those working at the site. All such
debris shall be containerized by the end of each day, and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean and litterfree
condition. Such containers shall be provided by the contractor or person in charge of such a project. Dirt,
mud, construction materials, or other debris deposited upon any public or private property because of the
construction, demolition, remodel, or repair shall be immediately removed by the contractor or person
responsible therefor at their own expense. Construction and demolition sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all
times.
(b) It shall be a violation of this code for any person, firm or corporation to operate any vehicle upon public or
private streets, alleyways, or other rights-of-way transporting loose materials within the city limits without a
suitable cover which prevents any part of the contents from falling or being scattered upon any such public
street, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.09)
Sec. 13.06.010 Disposal of tree and shrub trimmings
(a) Private contractors engaged in the trimming of trees and shrubs shall remove from any public or private
property at their own expense any such tree or shrub trimmings. Such trimmings shall not be placed in any
street, alleyway, utility easement, or any other public or private right-of-way for removal by the city.
(b) Residents may deposit tree limbs, tree branches, and shrub trimmings in the alley adjacent to their
property. Such limbs, branches, or trimmings shall not be longer than ten feet and not more than a regular pickup
load. If the load is larger than a regular pickup load the citizen will be required to remove limbs, branches, or
shrub trimmings at their own expense. Depositing of tree and shrub trimmings shall not block any alley or
easement way.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.10)
Sec. 13.06.011 Disposal of liquid animal waste, grease and similar waste
Commercial establishments having liquid animal waste, grease, or any similar waste shall provide at their own
expense a steel container with a tight-fitting lid or cover. Such container shall not be hauled by the city or its
agents. Disposal shall be at the owner's expense. Such waste shall not be placed in any refuse container provided
by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 50.11)
Sec. 13.06.012 Littering prohibited
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/430
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alleyway,
sidewalk, or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers,
rubbish, bottles or any other form of litter or waste matter. (1998 Code, sec. 50.12)
Sec. 13.06.013 Responsibility of business owners or managers to keep premises clean
The owner or manager of any business situated within the city shall keep the premises clean of waste materials
thrown or left on premises by customers, and shall take measures to prevent such material from drifting or
blowing to adjacent properties or premises. Containers of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the
premises and made readily available to customers for disposal of waste materials. (1998 Code, sec. 50.13)
Sec. 13.06.014 Tampering with refuse
(a) It shall be a violation of this code for any individual, firm or corporation to meddle or tamper with any
refuse, trash, or rubbish containers, or any refuse, trash, or rubbish, or to in any manner pilfer such containers or
such refuse, trash, or rubbish, or to scatter the contents thereof in any street, alleyway, sidewalk, or any private
or public premises within the city.
(b) This section shall not apply to authorized officials, including but not limited to authorized sanitation
personnel, firefighters in the performance of their official duties, and law enforcement officers in the
performance of their official duties.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.14)
Secs. 13.06.015–13.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. Collection
Sec. 13.06.041 Containers required; use
(a) Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the
corporate limits of the city for residences, churches, schools, lodges, commercial, business and other purposes,
and served by a container system which is mechanically emptied, shall be provided containers of sufficient
number and size to hold all refuse that will normally accumulate on the premises from one collection period
until the next.
(b) All refuse accumulated shall be placed in containers provided by the city and all rubbish such as boxes,
cartons, and crates shall be collapsed and flattened before placing in containers. Lids shall be kept closed except
when placing refuse in containers.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.25)
Sec. 13.06.042 Location and placement of containers
(a) Refuse containers provided by the city shall be assigned locations by the director of public works. Said
containers shall be moved by city crews only, and as authorized by the director of public works.
(b) Where hand pickup is provided, trash shall be in secure bags and placed a minimum of three feet behind
the curb.
(1998 Code, sec. 50.26)
Sec. 13.06.043 Draining and wrapping of refuse
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/430
All refuse that is mixed with water or other liquid shall be drained and wrapped before being placed in a
container for collection and removal. (1998 Code, sec. 50.27)
Sec. 13.06.044 Frequency of collection
The frequency of collection and removal of refuse from premises within the corporate limits of the city shall be
as frequent as deemed necessary by city officials for maintaining sanitary conditions. (1998 Code, sec. 50.28)
Sec. 13.06.045 Charges
(a) Generally.
(1) Residential single-family property. The per month rate to be charged for the removal of refuse
from single-family units shall be as listed in article 7.000. In the event a single-family unit is vacant,
no charge shall be made during the time that the same is unoccupied, provided the utility customer
makes application with the customer service office prior to billing, and thence, renews application
with each 30-day period of vacancy.
(2) Multiple-family dwelling units, three units or less. Duplexes or triplexes connected to a single
water meter shall be charged the same rate as a single-family dwelling unit.
(3) Commercial establishments. The rate to be charged for the removal of refuse from commercial
establishments, including schools, churches and multiple-family dwelling units comprised of more
than three (3) units, shall be as listed in article 7.000.
(4) Determination of actual charge. The number of containers utilized by each customer and the
number of pickups per week shall determine the actual monthly charge.
(5) Inspections by director. The director of public works is hereby authorized to make such
inspections as deemed reasonable to determine the number of containers and the number of pickups
per week necessary to provide the level of service commercial establishments require for the removal
of refuse; however, in no case shall the rate charged per month be less than the current minimum
commercial rate.
(b) Extra charge for vector control program. To each utility account that includes a charge for refuse collection
services, there shall be added a monthly surcharge as listed in article 7.000 beginning with the utility bills due
and payable on or after the first day of October, 2005.
(c) Extra pickups from commercial establishments. In the event unscheduled collection and hauling of refuse
from commercial establishments is requested an additional charge as listed in article 7.000 will be assessed for
each pickup regardless of the size container.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/430
Sec. 14.01.001 Enacting clause
There is hereby enacted an ordinance regulating the use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, the size of
buildings, the size of yards and courts and the density of population, which ordinance shall be known as the
zoning ordinance of the city, and shall read as follows in this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 158.001)
Sec. 14.01.002 Purpose
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive
plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. They have been
designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district, and its
peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified, and with a view to conserving the value of the buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. No
provision of this chapter is intended to cause or encourage any discrimination in housing based upon race, color,
sex, national origin, handicap, or familial status, nor shall any provision be interpreted, construed or applied in
such a way as to violate any provision of the Fair Housing Act, being 42 USC 3601 et seq. (1998 Code, sec.
158.002)
Sec. 14.01.003 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Accessory use. A use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the main building or to the primary use
of the premises.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
Adult arcade. A business which offers its customers in one (1) or more viewing booths motion or still pictures
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore/film store. A business in which a substantial portion of its stock in trade consists of books,
videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, slides, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or both.
Adult cabaret. A business which offers to customers live performances characterized by exposure of specified
anatomical areas.
Adult lounge. An adult cabaret which serves alcoholic beverages.
Adult motel or hotel. A business which offers its customers a sleeping room or sitting room for a period of time
less than ten (10) hours and provides motion picture or still picture entertainment characterized by exposure of
specified anatomical areas.
Adult retail store. A business in which a substantial portion of the stock in trade consists of items or products
other than printed matter characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, or both.
Adult theater. A business with a capacity of more than five (5) persons which offers customers motion or still
pictures or live entertainment or performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.003, adopted 1/20/04)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/430
Alley. A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting
thereon.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment house arranged, designed or
occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals.
Apartment house. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied
as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or
more families living in independent dwelling units.
Area of the lot. The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and
alleys.
Basement. A building story which is partly underground but having at least one-half of its height above the
average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height.
Block. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if said word is used as a term of
measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect
said street on the said side.
Board of adjustment. Zoning board of adjustment as provided for in sections 14.07.001 through 14.07.003.
Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for five or more persons are served for
compensation.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire each portion so
divided may be deemed a separate building. Building includes the word “structure.”
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom
marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
Building permit. An official permit issued by the city to allow a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any structure in accordance with city
ordinances.
Canopy. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which is attached to, supported by or projects from the wall
of a structure.
Carport. A roofed structure which may not be enclosed and must meet the appropriate setback requirements for
a main building or accessory building if detached.
Cellar. A building story with more than one-half its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
cellar shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Certificate of occupancy or compliance. An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official
which indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes
legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
City council. The governing body of the city.
Clinic. A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists to treat sick or injured outpatients
who do not remain overnight.
Comprehensive plan. A periodically updated series of documents that unify all elements and aspects of city
planning. This plan serves as a policy guide to zoning and subdivision decisions reflecting the best judgment of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/430
the staff, planning and zoning commission and the city council.
Convalescent home. Any structure used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from illness or
suffering from infirmities of age.
Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is
a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to
a street, alley, yard or other permanent space.
Depth of lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
District. A section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the land and
buildings are uniform.
Dwelling, multiple-family. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be
occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or residence of three or
more families.
Dwelling, one-family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one
family, or by one family and not more than four boarders and lodgers.
Dwelling, two-family. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than
two families, or by two families and not more than four boarders and lodgers.
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as
living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Easement. A right held by the city or franchised utility companies to be used for access, drainage or the
placement of utilities such as water, sewer, telephone lines, electrical lines or gas lines.
Family. A collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a
continuing nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping
unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or
group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an
anticipated limited duration of a school term or other determinable period.
Floor area. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor
level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages.
Grade. Average finished ground elevation of the lot at the base of the existing or proposed structure.
Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from
the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat
surface, to the deck line of mansard roofs or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable
roofs and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water
towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding ten feet in height. If
the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard grade shall be used for a base level.
Living unit. The room or rooms occupied by a family and must include cooking facilities.
Lodginghouse. A building where lodging for five or more persons is provided for compensation.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as
are required under this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.
Includes the words “plot” or “tract.”
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/430
Lot coverage. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings
located on the lot.
Lot depth. The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See exhibit A at the end of this chapter,
illustration 2.)
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county
clerk or a parcel of land, the deed for which is recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to the adoption of
this chapter.
Lot width. The width of a lot at the front building line. (See exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration 1.)
Main building. The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
Manufactured home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the
traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on the site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis,
and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to required
utilities, to include plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical service. This definition does not include a
recreational vehicle.
Mobile home. A structure constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in
the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on the site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis,
and is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to required
utilities to include plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical service. Mobile homes are not allowed
within the city limits.
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
Motel. An inn or group of cabins designed for occupancy by paying guests; a hotel.
Multiple-family building. The same meaning as “apartment house.”
Nonconforming use. A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of
this chapter or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it
is situated.
Occupancy. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and
unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves and porches.
Parking space. An enclosed or unenclosed all-weather surfaced area of not less than 180 square feet (measuring
approximately 9 feet by 20 feet) not on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway
connecting the area with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress without encroachment on the street
or alley. Any parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering is done on the public street shall not be
classified as off-street parking in computing the parking area requirements for any use.
Planning and zoning commission. The agency appointed by the city council as an advisory body to it and which
is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/430
Private garage. An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building; if
occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage space. It must meet the appropriate setback requirements for a
main building or an accessory building if detached.
Residence. Same as a dwelling; also, when used with “district,” an area of residential regulations.
Room. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living or
sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
Roominghouse. See “lodginghouse.”
Shall. Mandatory and not discretionary.
Sign. An outdoor advertising device that is a structure or that is attached to or painted on a building or that is
leaned against a structure or display on premises.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock;
human genitals in a discernable erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or any combination of the
aforementioned.
Specified sexual activities. Depiction of male genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; female genitals;
acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality; touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus; or any combination of the aforementioned.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.003, adopted 1/20/04)
Story. The height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. The standard
height for a story is 11 feet, 6 inches.
Street. Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and more than 30 feet in width, which has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the right-of-way line.
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column,
beams or girders.
Structure. (Same as “building.”) Something built or constructed and/or the arrangement or assembly of all the
parts of a whole. Parabolic or dish-type antennae shall be considered for the purposes of this chapter a structure.
Thoroughfare. Same as “street.”
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
Topless establishments. Any business activity which offers the opportunity (whether as a single activity or in
conjunction with any other business activity) to view male or female naked breasts or breasts that are partially
clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or visible through less than opaque clothing any portion of the breast
below the areola, and where the genital areas and anus are covered by a G-string or other opaque covering.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.003, adopted 1/20/04)
Trailer camp or park. An area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of two or more auto trailers
which are occupied or intended for occupancy as living quarters by individuals or families.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/430
Viewing booth. An enclosure or partial enclosure which contains any electrical or mechanical device which
displays or projects any film, videotape or photographic reproduction into the viewing area of motion or still
pictures characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas, and which enclosure or partial enclosure is
authorized for occupancy by International Building Code standards by no more than five (5) persons. (Ordinance
O-001-04, sec. 158.003, adopted 1/20/04)
Yard. An open space, other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is not obstructed
from a point 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided for roof
overhangs and similar special architectural features.
Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extended across the front of the lot between the
side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or street line with the minimum horizontal distance
between the street line and the main building line as specified for the district in which it is located. (See exhibit
A at the end of this chapter, illustrations 3 and 5.)
Yard, rear. An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted, extending across the
rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the building and the rear
lot line as specified in the district in which the lot is situated. (See exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration
3.)
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one or two sides of a main building and on the same lot with
the building, situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to
the rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. (See exhibit A at the end of
this chapter, illustrations 3 and 4.)
Zoning district map. The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are
drawn and which is an integral part of the zoning ordinance.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.003)
Sec. 14.01.004 Temporary zoning for annexed territory
(a) All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily classified as “EA” estate and agricultural
district, until permanent zoning is established by the city council. The procedure for establishing permanent
zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of original
zoning regulations.
(b) In an area temporarily classified as “EA” estate and agricultural district:
(1) No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any
building or structure or to add to any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly
annexed territory to the city without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate of
occupancy therefor from the building inspector or the city council as may be required herein.
(2) No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the building
inspector other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in the “EA”
estate and agricultural district, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district
other than the “EA” estate and agricultural district by the city council in the manner provided by law
except as provided in subsection (3) below.
(3) An application for a permit for any other use than that specified in subsection (2) above shall be
made to the building inspector and by him referred to the planning and zoning commission for
consideration and recommendation to the city council concerning any such permit shall take into
consideration the appropriate land use for the area. The city council, after receiving and reviewing the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/430
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission may by majority vote authorize the
issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy or may disapprove the application.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.004)
Sec. 14.01.005 Compliance required
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the city, which are hereafter occupied,
used, erected, altered or converted, shall be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations
prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located. (1998 Code, sec. 158.005)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Sec. 14.02.001 Zoning districts established
The city is hereby divided into twelve (12) zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations as set out herein
are uniform in each district. The twelve (12) districts established herein shall be known as:
EA Estate and agriculture district
1F-1 One-family dwelling district
1F-2 One-family dwelling district
GR General residence district
NS Neighborhood service district
R Retail district
CB Central business district
C Commercial district
LI Light industrial district
HI Heavy industrial district
PD Planned development
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/430
MHD Manufactured housing district
(Ordinance O-009-03, sec. 158.015, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 14.02.002 Zoning district map
(a) The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map of the city,
said map being a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
(b) Two original, official and identical copies of the zoning district map are hereby adopted bearing the
signature of the mayor and the attestation of the city secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows:
(1) One copy shall be filed with the city secretary and retained as the original record and shall not
be changed in any manner.
(2) One copy shall be filed with the building inspector and shall be maintained up-to-date by
posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing building permits,
certificates of compliance and occupancy and enforcing the zoning ordinance.
(3) Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of the official zoning
district maps.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.016)
Sec. 14.02.003 Zoning district boundaries
The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district maps are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or
extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning
maps, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys
shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following
city limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1)
through (3) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning
maps shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(5) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council,
or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side
of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such
vacated street, alley or way and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all
regulations of the extended districts.
(6) Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the official
zoning district map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned
and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections (1) through (5) above, the
property shall be considered as classified “EA” estate and agricultural district temporarily in the same
manner as provided for newly annexed territory and the issuance of a building permit and the
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/430
determination of permanent zoning shall be in accordance with the provisions provided in section
14.01.004 for temporarily zoned areas.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.017)
ARTICLE 14.03 USES
Sec. 14.03.001 Use of land and buildings
Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses
but no land shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or converted,
which is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as
set forth by the following schedule:
S = Use that may be approved as specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
(1998 Code, sec. 158.030)
Sec. 14.03.002 Explanatory notes pertaining to use regulations
The following definitions and explanatory notes supplement, restrict and define the meaning and intent of the
use regulations as set forth in the use schedule and provisions of sections 14.03.003 through 14.03.011 inclusive.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(1) One-family housing unit, detached. A housing unit designed and constructed for occupancy by
only one family and located on a separate building tract or platted lot and having no physical
connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and is declared a rural or urban homestead
prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ordinance O-002-04 adopted 3/16/04)
(2) One-family dwelling, attached. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more
sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one family.
(3) Two-family housing unit. A single structure containing two connected housing units.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(4) Multiple-family housing unit (apartment). Any building or portion thereof, which is designed,
built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more housing units or apartments or which is
occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent housing
units. In the central business district a portion of the ground floor (store front) shall remain retail
space. (Ordinance O-013-07 adopted 11/20/07)
(4a) Group housing for handicapped persons. Shared group housing for handicapped persons shall
mean a shared residential living arrangement which provides a family-type environment for up to and
including four handicapped persons, supervised by one or more primary caregivers subject to
compliance with the permit conditions listed in section 14.06.001(d).
(A) As used in this section, with respect to a person “handicap” means:
(i) Physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's
major life activities as defined in subsection (B) below.
(ii) A record of having such impairment.
(iii) Being regarded as having such impairment, but such term does not include current,
illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined by chapter 481 of the Texas
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/430
Health and Safety Code.
(B) As used in this section, “physical or mental” impairment includes:
(i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss
affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal,
special sense organs, respiratory, speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive,
genitourinary, hemic or lymphatic skin and endocrine;
(ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain
syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific learning disabilities. The term
“physical or mental impairment” includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and
conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, pre-senile dementia,
cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart
disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than caused
by current illegal use of a controlled substance) and alcoholism.
(C) For the purpose of this exception, “major life activities” include functions such as caring
for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning
and working.
(5) Boardinghouse or roominghouse. A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for
four or more persons are served for compensation.
(5a) Bed and breakfast. Tourist lodging services within rooms of the property owner's principal
residence or one separate guest house within a single property served by a single water meter and
electrical meter and subject to the limitations of home occupation. To qualify as a bed and breakfast,
the owner must provide proof of collection and payment of state and local hotel/motel occupancy tax
to the city upon request.
(6) Hotel or motel. A building or group of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary
habitation for individuals. To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment shall contain a
minimum of six individual guest rooms or units and shall furnish customary hotel services such as
linen, maid service, telephone, use and upkeep of furniture.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(7) Manufactured housing/recreational vehicle park. A unified development containing three (3) or
more manufactured home or recreational vehicle spaces, on two (2) or more acres, under private
ownership.
(7a) Manufactured home district. A manufactured home district (MHD) shall be an area containing
not less than two (2) acres and shall comply with article 3.13, Manufactured Housing and
Recreational Vehicle Parks, section 3.13.062 and section 3.13.066 located elsewhere in this code. The
manufactured housing district is not intended to be utilized for the placement of a single
manufactured home.
(7b) Manufactured home subdivision. A unified development of manufactured home sites or
platted lots which have been divided for the purpose of individual ownership, and which is governed
by the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the city.
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(8) Mobile home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/430
more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems. Mobile homes are not allowed within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec. 158.031;
Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(8a) Manufactured home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules
of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, to include plumbing, heating, airconditioning
and electrical service. Manufactured homes shall be skirted. This definition does not
include a recreational vehicle.
(8b) Manufactured home (new). A new manufactured home meeting the definition of
“manufactured home in (8a) above shall be a minimum twenty-two (22) body feet in width as
measured at all points perpendicular to the length of the manufactured home, and when erected on
site is nine hundred (900) or more square feet, and is designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a
permanent foundation (all towing equipment, i.e., tongue and axles, removed). For the purposes of
this subsection a new manufactured home is defined as having never been occupied for any reason
including as a sales office, temporary residence or for commercial use, having never been involved in
an accident, having never received weather-related damage that at any time has affected its structural
integrity, and having no visible signs of damage.
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(9) Travel trailer park. A unified development under private ownership designed for transient
service on which travel trailers and motorized vehicles for temporary habitation are parked, situated
or used for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for such vehicles. A travel trailer is
a transportable structure which is less than eight feet in width, less than 50 feet in length which
contains facilities for temporary habitation, and which does not meet the requirements of the
International Building Code as amended and adopted by the city for residential housing units. (1998
Code, sec. 158.031)
(9b) Recreational vehicle. A vehicular, portable structure, built on a single chassis, that is selfpropelled
or permanently towable behind an accessory vehicle and is primarily designed not for use
as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal
use. This definition includes campers, motor homes, fifth wheels and travel trailers, but does not
include manufactured homes. (Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(10) Church and rectory. A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions
including the on-site housing of minister, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel.
(11) College, university or private school. An institution established for educational purposes and
offering a curriculum similar to the public schools or an accredited college or university, but
excluding trade and commercial schools.
(12) Country club (private) with golf course. An area containing a golf course, and clubhouse and
associated uses available only to private specific membership.
(13) Day nursery and kindergarten school. An establishment where more than six children are left
for care and training during the day or portion thereof, where there is monetary remuneration for the
care offered and given. However, this chapter in no way prohibits any person from caring for or
training, in that person's home, any member of that person's family. For the purposes of this
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/430
definition, “family” shall be defined as any number of individuals living together in a single
housekeeping unit related by blood, marriage or adoption.
(14) Farm, ranch, garden or orchard. An area of five acres or more which is used for growing of
usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, grass and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual
farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle and sheep, and including the necessary
accessory uses for raising, treating and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the
commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of
agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
(15) Hospital (general acute care). An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical
or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life and which is licensed by the
state.
(16) Hospital (chronic care). An institution where those persons suffering from generally
permanent types of illness, injury, deformity, deficiency or age are given care and treatment on a
prolonged or permanent basis and which is licensed by the state.
(17) Institutions of religious or philanthropic nature. Institutions sponsored or operated by
organizations established for religious or philanthropic purposes including orphans' homes, aged
homes, training and educational facilities, meeting establishments and places of residence.
(18) Nursing home. A home where primarily elderly people are provided with lodging and meals
with or without nursing care.
(18a) Personal care facility. All regulations of this chapter apply to the personal care facilities. An
establishment including a board and care home that:
(A) Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are
unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment;
(B) Provides personal care services, meaning:
(i) Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing or other personal needs or
maintenance;
(ii) The administration of medication by a person licensed to administer medication or
the assistance with or supervision of medication;
(iii) General supervision or oversight of the physical or mental well-being of a person
who needs assistance to maintain a private and independent residence in a personal care
facility or who needs assistance to manage a personal life, regardless of whether a
guardian has been appointed for that person.
(19) Sports complex. An outdoor complex or group of playing fields or areas where one or a
combination of sports such as but not limited to tennis, softball, baseball, football, or soccer is
performed.
(20) School, public or parochial. A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency
having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not
including private or trade or commercial schools.
(21) Tennis and/or swim club. A private recreational club with restricted membership, usually of
less area than a country club, but including a clubhouse and swimming pool, tennis courts and similar
recreational facilities, none of which are available to the general public.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/430
(22) Commercial communications tower. A structure situated on a nonresidential site that is
intended for transmitting or receiving radio, television, or telephone communications, excluding
those used for dispatch communications.
(23) Railroad track and right-of-way, but not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks,
loading facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas.
(24) Telephone line and exchange, but not including public business facilities, storage or repair
facilities.
(25) Accessory building. In a residence district, a subordinate building, attached or detached and
used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure such as private garage for automobile
storage, toolhouse, lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop, children's
playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of a business. In
nonresidential districts any use incidental or subordinate to the primary use and housed in a separate
building or structure. In no instance shall the use of the detached subordinate building be contrary to
the land uses permitted in the zoning district in which said building is located.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(25a) Shipping or cargo container. Generally, an all steel container with strength to withstand
shipment, storage and handling. Such containers include reusable steel boxes, freight containers and
bulk shipping containers; originally a standardized reusable vessel that was designed for and used in
the parking, shipping, movement, transportation or storage of freight, articles of goods or
commodities; generally capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car, truck trailer or loaded on a
ship.
(25b) Non-steel storage container. A portable or moveable, weather-resistant receptacle designed
and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, valuables, or merchandise (typically
known as PODS, MODS, etc.).
(Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 3, adopted 10/17/17)
(26) Home occupations. A home occupation is an occupation customarily carried on in the home
by a member of the occupant's family, or such other persons as may be authorized by the zoning
board of adjustment when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance and shall
prescribe such conditions that are deemed necessary for the protection of the abutting residential
property. Additional persons shall not be employed except as provided herein, no sign larger than two
feet by two feet shall be used to advertise the occupation, nor shall commodities be displayed for sale
on the premises and the outside appearance of the dwelling shall not be changed. The home
occupation shall not occupy more than 25% of the dwelling, and which requires no additional
parking spaces other than that available on the premises and which does not create obnoxious noise
or other obnoxious conditions to abutting residential property, such as odor, increased traffic, light or
smoke.
(27) Nameplate. An accessory sign which in a residential area does not exceed two square feet in
area on a single side and which is used only to identify the name and address of the owner or
occupant of a premises and which is not illuminated in a flashing or intermittent manner.
(28) Off-street parking incidental to main use. Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance
with requirements specified by this chapter and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use,
on an immediately adjacent lot or tract, or on an immediately adjacent lot or tract across an alley or a
street and located within the same zoning district as the main use or a zoning district which would
permit the establishment of the main use or a commercial parking lot or structure.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/430
(29) Parabolic or dish-type antennae. A device used for the reception of audio and video signals.
Parabolic or dish-type antennae larger than one meter (39.37 inches) shall be classified as structures
and shall comply with the applicable sections of this chapter for structures; all parabolic or dish-type
antennae located outside of a building shall comply with all setback and building line requirements
for structures or buildings in their respective zoning districts. No antenna larger than one meter
(39.37 inches) may be located upon the roof of a residential building. Parabolic or dish-type antennae
may be located on the roof of a commercial building provided adequate provisions have been made
for its support and proof of such provisions are certified by a registered professional engineer and
shall be presented with the request for a permit.
(30) Swimming pool (private). A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive private use of the
residents of a one-family, two-family or multiple-family housing unit and fenced.
(31) Signs, church and schools. Nameplates and bulletin boards for schools and churches, but not
exceeding 30 square feet in area and not of a flashing, intermittent, revolving or similarly lighted
type.
(32) Signs, real estate development. Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property not
exceeding 20 square feet in area and advertising property only for a use for which it is legally zoned.
(33) Field offices (temporary). Portable building or temporary building used as field office for a
real estate development or construction project and subject to removal at direction of the building
inspector.
(34) Commercial auto parking lot. An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of
automobiles for a fee.
(35) Parking lot, truck. Facility for parking or storage of currently licensed trucks.
(36) Auto storage facility. A garage, building or any type of facility or establishment used for
storing or parking of motor vehicles as defined in article 8.07, abandoned and junked motor vehicles,
of this code. Vehicles stored in such a facility shall not be visible from any public place or public
right-of-way.
(37) Gasoline service station. An establishment for the retail sale of petroleum products,
automobile accessories and/or minor automobile tune-up, muffler installation incidental to the
primary use, oil change or other lubricating services in which all services provided and all storage,
supplies, parts, equipment and accessories are indoors. This definition shall not include any major
automotive repairs (engine and transmission exchange or overhauls, and the like).
(38) Antique shop. An establishment offering for sale within a building, articles such as glass,
china, furniture or similar furnishings and decorations which have value and significance as a result
of age, design or sentiment.
(39) Cleaning, small plant or shop. A custom cleaning shop not exceeding 5,000 square feet of
floor area or a pickup shop where the actual cleaning is performed at another location.
(40) Custom personal service shop such as a tailor, shoe repair, barber, beauty shop, health studio
or travel consultant.
(41) Flea market. A collection or group of outdoor stalls, booths, tables or other similar
arrangement, used by individual vendors, for the permanent display and sale of various items of new
or used personal property. Permanent flea markets that are adjacent to any residential district shall be
screened. This restriction shall not apply to flea markets set up temporarily for 30 days or less.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/430
(42) Greenhouse, nursery for retail plant sales. The display of plants offered for sale must be
behind the front yard line established in the district in which the nursery or greenhouse is located.
(43) Household appliance service and repair shop, including radio and television, but not involving
the use of equipment which generates noise, odor or electrical frequencies so as to interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
(44) Laundry and cleaning, self-service, automatic. Equipment in self-service laundry and dry
cleaning establishment to be of similar size as customarily found in the home and of the customer
self-service type and not a commercial laundry or cleaning plant.
(45) Restaurant. Any eating or drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is
the primary business of such establishment. The term “primary business” means that the gross
receipts from the sale of food exceed 60% of the entire gross receipts of such establishment.
(46) Retail stores and shops offering all types of consumer goods for sale, but excluding the
display and sale in the open outside a building, of new or used automobiles, heavy machinery,
building materials, used appliances, furniture or salvage materials.
(47) Billboard or advertising sign. Poster panel, painted bulletin or other advertising device which
promotes and advertises commodities or services not offered on the premises on which such sign is
located.
(48) Business sign and pole sign. A graphic device which advertises only commodities or services
offered on the premises where such sign is located.
(49) Building materials sales. The sale and/or storage of building materials where a minimum of
60% of the building materials are new products which have not previously been used in the
construction of, or as a part of, any structure.
(50) Amusement, commercial (indoor). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building
which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not audible at the bounding
property line and including, but not limited to, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
(51) Amusement, commercial (outdoor). Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or
games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place
in the open, including but not limited to a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf
course.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(51a) Coin-operated machine business. As regulated by Article 4.09, a business enterprise
providing Skill or Pleasure Coin-Operated or Slot Machines of any kind or character whatsoever,
when such machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or
pleasure or when such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or
pleasure, or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of merchandise, music,
movies, or service. (Ordinance O-001-18 adopted 1/16/18)
(52) Mini-storage facilities. A unified development of leasable self-storage units built on site, each
unit not to exceed 300 square feet in floor area. Units 300 square feet and larger shall be of four-hour
wall construction and shall meet current building and fire code requirements. No outside storage, no
known storage of explosives, flammable materials or materials emitting noxious odors shall be
allowed.
(53) Paint shop, but excluding cooking or baking or varnish, paint or lacquer.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/430
(54) Secondhand merchandise dealers. The keeping, handling, storage or use of furniture,
appliances and/or other merchandise or goods for sale or display. “Secondhand merchandise” is
defined as an item which has previously been sold at the wholesale or retail level or previously used
by an individual or business. Except in an HI zoning district, any outdoor storage or display of such
merchandise shall require visual screening to the standards set out in section 14.06.007, when such
secondhand merchandise is visible from a public street or adjacent to a GR, 1F-1, 1F-2, NS or R
zoning district.
(55) Storage and repair of furniture and/or appliances inside a building. All exterior storage of
furniture, appliances or similar material must be located behind the front yard line established in the
district in which the use is located. Used furniture, appliances or similar material stored outside a
building shall not be visible from any public place or public right-of-way.
(56) Storage warehouse. The keeping, handling, or storage of items, equipment, or materials (other
than hazardous materials) totally within a building. Outside storage areas shall be screened if such
area is visible from any public street or adjacent to GR, 1F-1, 1F-2, NS, or R zoning districts.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(56a.) A building and/or property that the main use is for personal storage including minor body
work and auto repair on personal vehicles; or storage of other personal items that are nonhazardous
or that would not create a nuisance and that any outdoor storage would be screened from any public
or private property. The use of a personal storage does not allow the property to be used
commercially unless the property is located in Commercial (C), Light Industrial (LI), or a Heavy
Industrial (HI) district. (Ordinance O-001-17, sec. 2, adopted 3/21/17)
(57) Light manufacturing processes which do not emit detectable dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes
beyond the bounding property lines of the lot or tract upon which the use is located and which do not
generate noise or vibration at the boundary of the LI district which is generally perceptible in
frequency or pressure above the ambient level of noise in the adjacent areas and including:
(A) Woodworking and planing mill with dust and noise control.
(B) Textile manufacture with dust and odor control.
(C) Ceramic and pottery manufacture with dust, odor, and fume control.
(D) Plastic products manufacture with dust and fume control.
(E) Paint, oil, shellac and lacquer manufacture when hoods and fume destructors are used in
the cooking process.
(F) Grain processing with hoods, dust and odor controls.
(G) Electroplating or battery making with acid, fume and odor controls.
(H) Manufacturing or industrial operations of any type which meet the general conditions set
forth above and which are not offensive by reason of emission of noise, odor, smoke, gas,
fumes or dust.
(58) Salvage or scrap metal yard. Any land or building where metals, vehicle parts, rags or paper
(inside a building only), machinery or similar items are salvaged, dismantled and/or offered for sale
as salvaged parts, or a processed materials.
(59) Recycling collection facility. A facility designed to collect, sort and package by manual or
mechanical processes, recyclable items for transport to a reprocessing plant. The facility must be
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/430
located indoors with no outdoor storage or collection bins, except when located in the HI zoning
district. The term “recyclable items” shall mean a previously used product such as aluminum,
plastics, paper, oil, or nonferrous metals which can then be reprocessed and used again as raw
material in the manufacturing of same or similar products and is not attached or combined with
products containing other materials. The term “mechanical processes” shall mean sorting and
packaging by machinery in which the composition of the item remains constant but the shape of the
product is altered.
(60) Any manufacturing, industrial service or storage process not prohibited by law may be located
in the HI district upon approval by the city council in accordance with the procedure established in
section 14.06.001, “specific use permits”; provided, however, the following uses may not be
permitted in any zoning district:
(A) Animal slaughtering or chicken killing.
(B) Acid manufacture.
(C) Ammonia manufacture.
(D) Automobile wrecking yard.
(E) Carbon black manufacture.
(F) Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
(G) Chlorine manufacture.
(H) Explosive storage or manufacture.
(I) Glue and fertilizer manufacture.
(J) Petroleum and petroleum products refining and manufacture.
(K) Petrochemical plant.
(L) Rendering plant.
(M) Tanning, curing, treating or storage of skins or hides.
(N) Any use which due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust,
odor or vibration or danger of explosion or fire presently or in the future is determined a hazard
and subject to special control.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.031)
(61) Auto sales and repair. An establishment for the sale or repair of any road or off-road vehicle
that requires a title issued by the department of transportation of any state, or a vehicle having a
manufacturer's certificate of origin. (Ordinance O-012-06 adopted 10/17/06)
(62) Adult business. Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view specified sexual
activity or view, or touch, for entertainment, specified anatomical areas. Such definition further
includes but is not limited to adult arcade, adult bookstore/film store, adult cabaret, adult lounge,
adult motel or hotel, adult retail store, adult theater, and topless business establishments. (Ordinance
O-001-04, sec. 158.031, adopted 1/20/04)
Sec. 14.03.003 Primary residential uses
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/430
Primary Residential Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
One-family dwelling
detached (1)
X X X X X X
X X
X X
One-family dwelling
attached (2)
X X X
X X
X
Two-family dwelling
(3)
X X X
X X
X
Multiple-family or
apartment building
(4)
X X X S X X
X
Group housing for
physically or
mentally impaired
persons (4a)
X X X X X X X S
Boarding or rooming
house (5)
X X X
X X
Bed and breakfast
(5a)
S S S X X
X X
Hotel or motel (6) S
X X X X X X
Manuf. housing park
(7)
X X X X X
RV park (7)
X X X X
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/430
Manuf. housing
subdivision (7a)
X X X X X
Manuf. housing
(new) (8b)
S S S S S
S X
X
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(Ordinance O-002-04, sec. 158.032, adopted 3/16/04; Ordinance O-013-07 adopted 11/20/07)
Sec. 14.03.004 Additional uses
Additional Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Airport, heliport or
landing field
S
S S S CB C LI HI PD
Carnival or circus
(temporary)
EA
CB C LI HI
Cemetery or
mausoleum
S NS R CB C LI HI PD
Church or rectory
(10)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R
C LI HI PD MHD
College, university
or private school
(11)
EA S S GR NS R CB C LI
PD
Country club
(private) w/golf
course (12)
EA S S GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Day nursery or S S S S NS R CB C
PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/430
kindergarten
schools (13)
Fairgrounds or
exhibition area
S
S S CB C LI HI PD
Farm, ranch, garden
or orchard (14)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Lodge or civic club S
S NS R CB C LI HI PD
Home for care of
alcoholic, narcotic
or psychiatric
patients
S
S CB C LI
Hospital (general
acute care) (15)
S S S GR NS R CB C LI
PD
Hospital (chronic
care) (16)
S
S NS R CB C LI
PD
Institutions of
religious or
philanthropic nature
(17)
S
S NS R S C LI HI PD
Park, playground,
community center
(public)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI
PD
Nursing home (18) S
S NS R CB C LI
PD
Personal care
facility (18a)
1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R
S S
Sports complex
(19)
S S S S NS R CB C LI
PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/430
Schools, public or
parochial (20)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI
PD
Tennis and/or swim
club (21)
S S S S NS R CB C LI HI PD
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.033; Ordinance O-013-07 adopted 11/20/07)
Sec. 14.03.005 Utility and service uses
Utility and Service Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Electrical substation S S S S NS R CB C LI HI PD
Electrical
transmission line
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Fire station EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Gas transmission
line and metering
station
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Local utility
distribution lines
EA 1F-1 IF-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Commercial
communications
tower (22)
S S S S NS R CB C LI HI PD
Sewage pumping
station
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/430
Sewage treatment
plant
S S S S S S S S LI HI PD
Railroad tracks and
right-of-way (23)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Telephone line and
exchange (24)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Utility company
shops and storage
yards
C LI HI PD
Water reservoir,
pump station and
well
EA 1F-1 S GR NS R CB C LI HI S
Water treatment
plant
EA S S S S S CB C LI HI S
Solid waste transfer
station
S
S S S LI HI S
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.034)
Sec. 14.03.006 Accessory and incidental uses
Accessory and Incidental Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Accessory buildings
(25) EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Farm accessory
building EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/430
Field offices
(temporary) (33)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Home occupations (26) EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Nameplate (27) EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Off-street parking
incidental to main use
(28)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Parabolic or dish-type
antenna EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Shipping or cargo or
storage container (25a)
S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T
Signs, church and
schools (31) EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Signs, real estate
development (32) EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Signs, special
development
*Subject to control
of building
inspector (see
section 14.06.005)
C LI HI
Signs, refer to section
14.06.005 and article
3.14
C LI HI S
Storage container (nonsteel),
(25b)
S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T S,T
Swimming pool
(private) (30)
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/430
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001)
T = A (90-day) temporary permit may be obtained
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.035; Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 3, adopted 10/17/17)
Sec. 14.03.007 Automobile type uses
Automobile Type Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Commercial auto
parking lot (34)
NS R CB C LI HI
Parking lot, trucks
(35)
C LI HI
New or used car lot
(open)
R CB C LI HI
Auto sales and
repair (61)
S CB C LI HI
Auto storage
facility (36)
C LI HI
Automobile
painting and
rebuilding
CB C LI HI
Auto laundry
S CB C LI HI
Drag strip or
commercial racing
S LI HI
Go-cart track
S LI HI
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/430
Used auto parts,
sales in building
C LI HI
Gasoline service
station (37)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Tire retreading and
capping
C LI HI PD
New auto
accessory and parts
sales store
R CB C LI HI
Seat cover, muffler
or auto glass shop
CB C LI HI
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.036; Ordinance O-012-06 adopted 10/17/06)
Sec. 14.03.008 Retail and service type uses
Retail and Service Type Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Antique shop (38)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Bakery
R CB C LI HI PD
Cafeteria
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Cleaning, small
plant or shop (39)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Convenience store
with gasoline
NS R CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/430
service
Custom personal
service shop (40)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Candy or cake shop
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Drapery shop
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Flea market (41)
NS R CB C LI HI
Florist and garden
shop
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Greenhouse,
nursery for retail
plant sales (42)
R CB C LI HI PD
Handicraft shop
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Household
appliance service
and repair shop (43)
R CB C LI HI PD
Laundry and
cleaning, selfservice
automatic
(44)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Mimeograph,
stationery or letter
shop
R CB C LI HI PD
Mortuary and
funeral parlor
S R CB C LI HI PD
Offices,
professional and
administrative
NS R CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/430
Pawn shop
R CB C
Restaurant without
drive-in service (45)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Restaurant with
drive-in service (45)
R CB C LI HI PD
Retail stores and
shops offering
goods for sale (46)
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Studio for
photographer,
musician, artist
NS R CB C LI HI PD
Studio for radio or
television
R CB C LI HI PD
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.037)
Sec. 14.03.009 Commercial and related service uses
Commercial and Related Service Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD MHD
Adult business (62) HI
Bakery and
confectionery
commercial wholesale or
bottling works
CB C LI HI PD
Billboard and advertising
sign (47)
C LI HI S
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/430
Business signs and pole
signs (48) NS R CB C LI HI PD
Building material sales
(49) CB C LI HI
Cabinet or upholstery
shop CB C LI HI
Cleaning and dyeing
plant, commercial CB C LI HI
Coin-operated machine
business (51a) S S S S S
Contractors shop and
storage yard C LI HI
Commercial amusement
(indoor) (50) NS R CB C LI HI PD
Commercial amusement
(outdoor) (51) S CB C LI HI PD
Dance hall, public CB C LI HI
Feed store CB C LI HI
Heavy machinery sales
and storage or repair
(new or used)
C LI HI
Job printing CB C LI HI PD
Laundry plant
(commercial) CB C LI HI
Milk depot, dairy or ice
cream plant
CB C LI HI
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/430
Mini-storage (52) S S S C LI HI
Mobile home rental or
sales CB C LI HI
Newspaper printing CB C LI HI
Paint shop (53) CB C LI HI
Personal Storage (56a)
S R
C LI HI
Plumbing, electrical, or
heating and air
conditioning shop
CB C LI HI
Railroad or bus
passenger station CB C LI HI PD
Railroad team track,
freight depot and docks C LI HI
Recreational vehicle
sales and repair CB C LI HI PD
Scientific and research
laboratories CB C LI HI PD
Secondhand
merchandise dealers (54) R C LI HI PD
Storage and repair of
new or used furniture
and/or appliances inside
a building (55)
CB C LI HI PD
Storage warehouse (56) R C LI HI PD
Trade and commercial
CB C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/430
schools
Transfer storage and
baggage terminal CB C LI HI
Veterinarian clinic and
kennels S S S S PD
Welding or machine
shop C LI HI PD
Wholesale office and
sample room CB C LI HI PD
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.038; Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.038, adopted 1/20/04; Ordinance O-013-07 adopted
11/20/07; Ordinance O-001-17, sec. 3, adopted 3/21/17; Ordinance O-009-17, sec. 3, adopted 10/17/17;
Ordinance O-001-18 adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 14.03.010 Industrial uses
Industrial Uses
EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Light manufacturing
processes (57)
LI HI PD
Asphalt or concrete batching
plant (temporary only by
resolution/city council)
S HI
Concrete products
manufacture
LI HI
Salvage or scrap metal yard
(58)
S S
Oil field equipment, service,
C LI HI PD
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/430
sales and/or storage
Petroleum products storage
and wholesale
C LI HI PD
Petroleum well, line or
storage
S S S S NS R CB C LI HI S
Recycling collection facility
(59)
S S S
Sand, gravel or stone
extraction
s
S LI HI
Any manufacturing,
industrial or storage process
not prohibited by law except
those mentioned in section
14.03.002 (60)
HI PD
S = Use that may be approved by specific use permit (see section 14.06.001).
Numbers in parentheses refer to the corresponding subsection of section 14.03.002.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.039)
Sec. 14.03.011 Classification of new and unlisted uses
It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate
in the city. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate
classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:
(1) The building inspector shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the
planning and zoning commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into
which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied
by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales,
processing, type of product, storage, and amount of nature thereof, enclosed or opened storage,
anticipated employment and the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration
likely to be generated.
(2) The planning and zoning commission shall consider the nature and described performance of
the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine
the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.
(3) The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the
city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall, by
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/430
resolution, approve the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or make such
determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.040)
Sec. 14.03.012 Planned development district uses
(a) The city council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendation
from the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned
development districts:
(1) Shopping center on tracts of three acres or more.
(2) Housing development on tracts of three acres or more or a community unit development.
(3) Industrial parks or districts on tracts of ten acres or more.
(4) Medical center and hospital.
(5) Civic center and community center.
(6) Office center.
(7) Recreation center.
(8) A combination of any of the developments listed in (1) to (7) above.
(9) Transition districts as an extension of an existing district whereby the provision of off-street
parking, screening walls, open space and planting would create a protective transition between a
lesser and a more restrictive district.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.041)
(10) Manufactured housing subdivision on tracts two (2) acres or larger.
(11) Manufactured housing or RV parks on tracts two (2) acres or larger.
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(b) In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this section, the city council shall
require a comprehensive site plan of the development. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the
ordinance prior to the issuance of any building permit in a planned development district. Such required plan and
ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public or private streets or
drives, with adequate right-of-way to conform to the thoroughfare plan of the city, sidewalks, utilities, drainage,
parking space, height of building, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and
other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to and
protection of the adjacent property.
(c) Every planned district approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as an amendment
to the ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In approving the planned development district, the city
council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development and such conditions shall be complied
with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure which is part of the
planned development district and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval
of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of
occupancy.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/430
(d) The first planned development district created shall be shown on the zoning district maps as PD-1, and
each subsequent planned development district created shall be given the next numerical number. The director of
planning shall maintain a register and file in his office of all planned development districts created which shall
contain the site plan, a copy of the ordinance creating the district, and all other information concerning the
planned development district. The area or areas which are designated in the planned development districts are set
forth on the zoning district map, which is made a part of this chapter. The boundaries of the PD district may
from time to time be altered or adjusted in accordance with the amendment provisions set forth herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.041)
Sec. 14.03.013 Manufactured home district
A manufactured home district (MHD) shall be an area containing not less than two (2) acres and shall comply
with article 3.13, Manufactured Housing and Recreational Vehicle Parks, section 3.13.062 and section 3.13.066
located elsewhere in this code. The manufactured home district (MHD) is not intended to be utilized for the
placement of a single manufactured home. (Ordinance O-009-03, sec. 158.042, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 14.03.014 Supplemental regulations for adult businesses
(a) A structure housing an adult business shall be located at least fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from any
residential PD, 1F-1, 1F-2, and GR zoning district boundary line, or from any structure used as a residence; from
a church, public or denominational schools, hospitals, licensed child care facilities, hotel or motel, parks or
playgrounds (public), play fields or stadiums (public), institutions of religious, charitable, or philanthropic
nature, and from any other structure housing an adult business.
(b) Distance requirements are to be measured in a straight line in all directions from the structure housing the
adult business to any residentially zoned district boundary line; to any structure used for a residence, church,
school, or hospital; any lot used for a park; and from structure to structure of those facilities housing adult
business.
(1) Any premises that is already used as a topless establishment on the date of first reading of
Ordinance O-001-04 (January 6, 2004), and which does not comply with the location requirement of
Ordinance O-001-04, may continue in operation as a nonconforming use until any of the following
events occurs:
(A) Cessation of doing business as a topless establishment for a continuous period of 180
days or more; or
(B) A change in (1) the ownership of the real estate upon which the topless establishment is
located or (2) the tenant which operates a topless establishment on the premises, either or both
of which occurs after February 28, 2007; or
(C) Destruction of the topless establishment by fire, the elements, or other causes that
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the structure's value as shown on the current tax rolls.
(c) The measurements to a structure shall be taken from the farthest point that a structure extends in the
direction of the measurement, including overhanging roofs and all other projects [projections] or portions of said
structure.
(d) Should an adult business be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said adult
business is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for example, an adult business in a shopping
center), measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space occupied by the adult business.
(e) Should an adult business be located in a manner where said adult business is situated above the ground
level of a multistory structure and is clearly separated from other activities within the structure, the adult
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/430
business measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space occupied by the adult business, thence to
the nearest point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence to the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line in
all directions to any residential zoned district boundary line; to any structure used for a residence, church,
school, or hospital; any lot used for a park; and from structure to structure of those facilities housing an adult
business.
(f) Viewing booths in an adult business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of the interior area of the viewing booth from outside the entrance to the viewing booth at all times.
(g) Wall or partitions of viewing booths between two (2) feet and six (6) feet above floor level shall have no
holes or voids in such walls or partitions.
(h) A viewing booth shall at all times be illuminated with not less than that amount of light provided by a
twenty-watt bulb.
(i) It shall be the duty of the person accepting payment from customers of an adult business to ensure that the
viewing booth requirements in this section are in compliance at all times.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.042, adopted 1/20/04)
ARTICLE 14.04 AREA REGULATIONS
Sec. 14.04.001 Conformance required
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for
any use permitted in the district in which it is located unless it is in conformity with all minimum regulations
herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage and front, side and rear yards.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.055)
Sec. 14.04.002 Lot area
(a) The minimum residential lot area for the various districts shall be in accordance with the following
schedule except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official “lot of record” prior to the
adoption of this chapter may be used for a one-family dwelling and no lot existing at the time of passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
(b) In the following zoning districts the minimum lot area for residential use shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
Schedule of Minimum Lot Areas per Dwelling Unit
Type Use EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Onefamily
dwelling
detached
2
acres
10,000 7,200 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 Residential
uses not
permitted
6,000
Onefamily
2,500 2,500 2,500 2,000 2,000 2,000
2,500
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/430
dwelling
attached
Twofamily
dwelling
3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000
3,000
Multiplefamily
dwelling
1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500
1,500
Lot area shown in feet per dwelling unit
(1998 Code, sec. 158.056)
Sec. 14.04.003 Lot width
(a) The minimum lot width for lots in the various districts used for residential purposes shall be in accordance
with the following schedule, except that a lot having less width than herein required which was an official “lot of
record” prior to the adoption of this chapter may be used as a one-family dwelling and no lot existing at the time
of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in width below the minimum set forth herein.
(b) In the following zoning districts the minimum lot width for residential uses shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
Schedule of Minimum Lot Widths – Residential Uses
Type Use EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
One-family
dwelling
detached
100 75 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 None
specified
50
One-family
dwelling
attached
20 20 20 20 20 20
20
Two-family
dwelling
60 60 60 60 60 60
60
Multiplefamily
60 60 60 60 60 60
60
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/430
dwelling
Minimum width of lot in feet
See illustration 1 of exhibit A at the end of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.057)
Sec. 14.04.004 Lot depth
(a) The minimum lot depth for the various districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule, except
that a lot having less depth than herein required which was an official “lot of record” prior to the adoption of this
chapter may be used for a one-family dwelling and no lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in depth below the minimum set forth herein.
(b) In the following zoning districts the minimum lot depth for residential uses shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
Schedule of Minimum Lot Depth – Residential Uses
Type Use EA 1F-1 1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Minimum
depth of lot in
feet for
residential
uses
180 120 120 100 100 100 100 100 100 None 100
Minimum depth of lot in feet
See illustration 2 in exhibit A at the end of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.058)
Sec. 14.04.005 Dwelling area
(a) The minimum enclosed living area for a dwelling unit located in various districts shall be in accordance
with the following schedule:
Schedule Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit
District Minimum floor area each dwelling
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/430
EA 1,200 square feet
1F-1 1,000 square feet
1F-2 850 square feet
GR
NS
R
BC
C
LI
One-family dwelling 600 square feet
Two-family dwelling 450 square feet
Apartment unit 450 square feet
PD Subject to establishment by amending ordinance
(1998 Code, sec. 158.059)
MHD 900 square feet
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(b) Minimum floor area as herein specified shall be computed exclusive of breezeways, garages or accessory
buildings or accessory space not directly used for primary dwelling purposes. (1998 Code, sec. 158.059)
Sec. 14.04.006 Yard requirements
(a) Front yard. No building, structure or use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered so as to have a
smaller front yard than hereinafter required.
(1) Schedule of minimum front yard requirements. In the following zoning districts the minimum
required front yard shall be in accordance with the following schedule and no building, structure or
use shall hereafter be located, erected, or altered so as to have a smaller front yard than hereinafter
required:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/430
Schedule of Minimum Front Yards
Type Use EA 1F-
1
1F-2 GR NS R CB C LI HI PD
Minimum
front yard in
feet except
as
hereinafter
provided
35 25 25 20 20
Section
14.04.
006
(a)(2)
(F)
20
Section
14.04.
006
(a)(2)
(F)
None
Section
14.04.
006
(a)(2)
(F), (G)
None
Section
14.04.
006
(a)(2)
(F), (G)
None
Section
14.04.
006 (a)
(2)(F),
(G)
None
Section
14.04
.006 (a)
(2)(F),
(G)
See
section
14.04.
006 (a)
(2)(H)
See illustration 3 in exhibit A at the end of this chapter.
(2) Special front yard regulations.
(A) Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by
two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most
restrictive district for the entire frontage. (See exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration
7.)
(B) Where a building line has been established by plat or ordinance and such line requires a
greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the
building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so
established by such ordinance or plat.
(C) The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building,
covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may
project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet and subsurface
structures, fences, walls, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height
greater than 40 inches above the average grade of the yard. (See exhibit A at the end of this
chapter, illustration 5.)
(D) Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required
front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has
been established along one frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only one
required front yard need be observed. (See exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration 6.)
(E) If 30% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersection streets in
any residential district is improved with buildings prior to the effective date of this chapter that
have observed an average front yard line with a variation in depth of not more than six feet,
then the average front yard so established shall be observed; provided, however, that this
regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a front yard line of more than 30 feet. (See
exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration 8.)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/430
(F) Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than 18 feet to the front
property line.
(G) In the CB, C, LI and HI districts no front yard is required except that no structure may be
erected nearer than 30 feet to the centerline of any street upon which such structure fronts.
(H) In the PD district, the following front yards shall be provided:
(i) Commercial or retail development. Sixty feet except drive-in service buildings may
have a minimum 30-foot front yard and gasoline service station pump islands may not be
located nearer than 18 feet to the front property line.
(ii) Housing development. 25 feet.
(iii) Industrial development. 30 feet.
(iv) Office, medical or other development. 25 feet.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.060)
(3) Manufactured housing shall comply with minimum setbacks in those zoned districts where
allowed. (Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(b) Side yard.
(1) In the following zoning districts the minimum required side yard shall be in accordance with
the following schedule and no building, structure or use shall hereafter be located so as to have a
smaller side yard on each side of such building than herein required:
(A) Minimum required side yard - one-family or two-family residential uses.
District Minimum Side Yard
EA district 10 feet except as provided in subsection (b)(2)
(D) below
1F-1 district 6 feet except as provided in subsection (b)(2)
(D) below
1F-2 district 5 feet except as provided in subsection (b)(2)
(D) below
GR district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
NS district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/430
R district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
CB district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
C district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
LI district 5 feet except as provided in subsections (b)(2)
(D) and (E) below
PD district Minimum side yard, PD district, shall be
established by site plan and amending
ordinance
(1998 Code, sec. 158.060)
MH manufactured
housing district
5 feet
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
Note: Minimum side yard for one-family or two-family detached dwellings shall be
measured exclusive of roof overhang, eaves or porches.
(B) Minimum required side yard, multiple-family residential use. See subsections (2)(B) and
(C) below.
(C) No minimum side yard required. No minimum side yard shall be required in the NS, R,
CB, C, LI or HI districts for nonresidential uses except as provided in subsection (2)(F) below.
(D) Institutional uses. Institutional uses such as schools or churches shall observe the same
minimum side yard standards specified for residential uses in the respective districts.
(2) Special side yard regulations.
(A) Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory
buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses,
cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed 12 inches into the required
side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed 36 inches into the required side yard.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/430
(B) Multiple-family dwellings shall provide a minimum side yard of 15 feet between any
building wall containing openings for windows, light and air and any side lot line except that
any such building face or wall not exceeding 35 feet in width may provide a minimum side yard
of ten feet. Where a building wall contains no openings for windows, light or air a minimum
side yard of ten feet shall be provided between such wall and the side lot line. (See exhibit A at
the end of this chapter, illustration 9.)
(C) On a corner lot a side yard adjacent to a street for a multiple-family dwelling not
exceeding three stories in height shall not be less than 15 feet and no balcony or porch or any
portion of the building may extend into such required side yard except that a roof may overhang
such side yard not to exceed four feet.
(D) On a corner lot used for one-family or two-family dwellings both street exposures shall
be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of this chapter, except that
where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat
approved by the planning and zoning commission containing a side yard of ten feet or more, the
building line provisions on that plat shall be observed. On lots which were official lots of record
prior to the effective date of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall
comply with the maximum required side yard for the respective districts as specified in
subsection (b)(1) above (see exhibit A at the end of this chapter, illustration 4) except that,
where any original lot platted 25 feet in width is separately owned and not assembled under
common ownership with any other lot or portion of a lot, a minimum side yard of three feet
shall be provided on each side of a dwelling structure.
(E) A one-family attached dwelling shall provide a minimum required side yard adjacent to a
side street of ten feet and no complex of attached one-family dwellings shall exceed 300 feet in
length. A minimum required side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of each onefamily
attached dwelling complex so that the end of any two adjacent building complexes shall
be at least ten feet apart.
(F) No side yard is specified for nonresidential use in the NS, R, CB, C, LI, or HI districts
except where a commercial, retail or industrial or other nonresidential use abuts upon a district
boundary line dividing such districts from a residential district in which event a minimum fivefoot
side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to such residential district.
(c) Rear yard. No building or structure for residential use shall hereafter be located, erected or altered to have
a rear yard smaller than herein required.
(1) In the EA, 1F-1, 1F-2, GR, NS, R, CB, LI or PD districts, no main residential building may be
constructed nearer than ten feet to the rear property line. The main residential building and all
accessory buildings shall not cover more than 50% of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line
erected joining the midpoint on one side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line. For
accessory building standards, see section 14.06.002.
(2) In the NS, R, CB, C, LI or HI districts, no rear yard is specified except where retail,
commercial or industrial uses back upon a common district line, whether separated by an alley or not,
dividing the district from any of the residential districts listed herein, a minimum rear yard of ten feet
shall be provided.
(3) Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point 30
inches above the general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings as permitted
in section 14.06.002 and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof
overhangs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four feet into the required rear
yard.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/430
(1998 Code, sec. 158.060)
Sec. 14.04.007 Height regulations
(a) No building or structure shall be located, erected or altered so as to exceed the height limit hereinafter
specified for the district in which the building is located.
Zoning District Maximum Height of Buildings and
Structures
EA, estate and agriculture district Three stories except as noted in subsection
(b) below
1F-1, one-family dwelling district Two stories except as noted in subsection (b)
below
1F-2, one-family dwelling district Two stories except as noted in subsection (b)
below
GR, general residence district Three stories except as noted in subsection
(b) below
NS, neighborhood service district Two stories except as noted in subsection (b)
below
R, retail district Two stories except as noted in subsection (b)
below
CB, central business district To any legal height not prohibited by other
laws or ordinances
C, commercial district To any legal height not prohibited by other
laws or ordinances
LI, light industrial district To any legal height not prohibited by other
laws or ordinances
HI, heavy industrial district To any legal height not prohibited by other
laws or ordinances
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/430
PD, planned development district To any legal height provided that the total
floor area does not exceed the total site area
(1998 Code, sec. 158.061)
MH manufactured housing district Two (2) stories
(Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(b) In the districts where the height of buildings is restricted to two or three stories, cooling towers, roof
gables, chimneys and vent stacks may extend for an additional height not to exceed 40 feet above the average
grade line of the building. Water standpipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires and school buildings
and institutional buildings may be erected to exceed three stories in height, provided that one additional foot
shall be added to the width and depth of front, side and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceed three
stories. (1998 Code, sec. 158.061)
ARTICLE 14.05 OFF-STREET PARKING
Sec. 14.05.001 Off-street parking spaces to be provided
Off-street parking shall be provided on the lot or tract or on an immediately contiguous lot or tract sufficient to
produce the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the districts designated. (1998 Code, sec.
158.075)
Sec. 14.05.002 Schedule of required parking spaces for residential uses
Zoning District Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces for
Residential Uses
EA, estate and agriculture district Two spaces for each dwelling unit
1F-1, one-family dwelling
district
One space for each dwelling unit
1F-2, one-family dwelling
district
One space for each dwelling unit
GR, general residence district One space for each dwelling unit
NS, neighborhood service
district
One space for each dwelling unit - other requirements
in accordance with section 14.05.003
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/430
R, retail district One space for each dwelling unit - other requirements
in accordance with section 14.05.003
CB, central business district One space for each dwelling unit - no off-street
parking requirements specified for nonresidential uses
C, commercial district One space for each dwelling unit - other requirements
in accordance with section 14.05.003
LI, light industrial district One space for each dwelling unit - other requirements
in accordance with section 14.05.003
PD, planned development district One space for each dwelling unit - other requirements
in accordance with section 14.05.003
(1998 Code, sec. 158.076)
Sec. 14.05.003 Parking space schedule for nonresidential uses
Parking space schedule, nonresidential uses in all districts except CB district:
(1) Bowling alley - six spaces for each lane.
(2) Churches - one space for each four seats in auditorium or sanctuary.
(3) Clinics or doctor's offices - one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(4) Hospitals - one space for each one bed in the hospital.
(5) Hotel or motel - one space for each room, unit or guest accommodation.
(6) Manufacturing, storage, processing, repairing and warehousing - one space for each two
employees or one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is the larger.
(7) Offices, general - one space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
(8) Mortuary - one space for every two persons to be normally accommodated by seating in the
chapel or service room.
(9) Recreational, private or commercial area building (other than listed) - one space for every two
persons to be normally accommodated in the establishment.
(10) Schools, colleges or universities.
(A) Elementary or junior high schools - one space for each classroom plus one space for each
four seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly.
(B) High school, college or university - one space for each classroom, laboratory or
instruction area plus one space for each three students accommodated in the institution.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/430
(11) Restaurant or cafeteria - one space for every four seats under maximum seating arrangement.
(12) Retail or personal service - one space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
(13) Theaters, meeting rooms and places of public assembly - one space for every three seats.
(14) Any unlisted nonresidential use shall provide off-street parking adequate to accommodate the
normal parking demand generated by such use.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.077)
Sec. 14.05.004 Special off-street parking regulations
(a) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements
shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building or
development.
(b) Any lights used to illuminate a parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect away from an), adjacent
residential uses or residential districts.
(c) When handicapped access to a building is required by the International Building Code, the vehicular
parking spaces shall be designated “handicapped” accessible parking spaces. The number of spaces required
shall be according to the following:
Total Parking Spaces
Available
Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
10–50 1
51–100 2
101–300 3
301–500 5
Over 500 1.0% of total
(d) Parking spaces shall be designated by signs or other markings as required by city standards. Accessible
spaces shall be located as near as possible to the accessible primary entry to a building.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.078)
ARTICLE 14.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 14.06.001 Specific use permits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/430
(a) The city council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendations
by the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the issuance of specific use permits for the following
types of uses in the following districts:
(1) Airport, landing field or heliport in any EA, GR, NS or R district.
(2) Carbon black manufacture in the HI district.
(3) Auto laundry in the R district.
(4) Cemetery or mausoleum in the GR district.
(5) Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture in the HI district.
(6) Concrete batching plant or asphalt batching plant for temporary construction use are subject to
approval by resolution of the city council or in the LI district.
(7) Commercial amusement in the R district.
(8) College, university in the 1F-1 and 1F-2 districts.
(9) Country club in the 1F-1 and 1F-2 districts.
(10) Drive-in theater in the R district.
(11) Electric generating plant or substation and other similar utility installation in the 1F-1, 1F-2
and GR districts.
(12) Radio and television broadcasting towers and transmitting station in the EA, 1F-1, 1F-2 and
GR districts.
(13) Go-cart track, drag strip or commercial vehicle racing in the C district.
(14) Hospital, acute care, in the EA district.
(15) Hospital, chronic care, convalescent home, residence home for aged, in the EA or GR district.
(16) Hotel or motel in the EA, GR or NS district.
(17) Home for alcoholic, feeble-minded or narcotic patients in the R district.
(18) Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature not specifically mentioned
herein in the GR district.
(19) Lodge or civic club in the EA and GR districts.
(20) Nursery school, day nursery or kindergarten school in the EA, 1F-1, 1F-2 and GR districts.
(21) Tennis club or swim club in the EA, 1F-1, 1F-2 or GR districts.
(22) Rock quarry, sand, gravel and caliche excavations in the EA or C district.
(23) Mortuary in the NS district.
(24) Animal slaughtering plant in the HI district.
(25) Acid, ammonia and chlorine manufacture in the HI district.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/430
(26) Fairgrounds or exhibition area in the NS or R district.
(27) Tanning, curing or storage of skins or hides in the HI district.
(28) Explosive storage or manufacture in the HI district.
(29) Glue and fertilizer manufacture in the HI district.
(30) Greenhouse or nursery in the EA district.
(31) Petroleum well, line or storage in the EA, 1F-1, 1F-2, GR or PD district.
(32) Petroleum refining and petrochemical manufacture in the HI district.
(33) Rendering plant in the HI district.
(34) Sewage treatment plant in any district except the LI and HI districts.
(35) Water treatment plant in the 1F-1, 1F-2, GR, NS or R district.
(36) Salvage or scrap metal yard in the LI or HI district.
(37) Any use which is determined to come under the provisions of section 14.03.002(60)(N).
(38) Veterinarian clinic and/or kennels in the CB, C, LI, and PD zoning districts.
(39) Mini-storage in NS, R and CB zoning districts.
(40) Sports complex in the EA, GR, 1F-1, and 1F-2 zoning districts.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.090)
(41) Manufactured housing in EA, 1F-1, 1 F-2, and GR if on a fifty (50) feet minimum wide lot.
The facing of the unit shall be in relationship to a public street where allowed, and shall be located
where the apparent entrance or front of the home faces or parallels the street frontage, except where
the lot size exceeds one (1) acre, is setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, or is in the same
facing as adjacent or neighboring structures, except as provided herein or approved by the
commission. (Ordinance O-009-03 adopted 6/3/03)
(42) Group housing for physically or mentally impaired persons in the LI district. (Ordinance O-
002-04 adopted 3/16/04)
(b) The planning and zoning commission in considering and determining its recommendation or the city
council on any request for a specific use permit may require from the applicant plans, information, operating
data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use
proposed. The city council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with this chapter,
establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is
authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific use permits, the city council may
impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the
welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor,
explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.
(c) The first specific use permit granted shall be shown on the zoning district map as S-1 and each subsequent
specific use permit granted shall be given the next numerical number. The director of planning shall maintain a
register on file in his office of all specific use permits granted which shall contain the site plan, a copy of the
ordinance granting the specific use permit, and all other information concerning the specific use permit. The area
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/430
or areas which are granted specific use permits are set forth on the zoning district map, which is made part of
this chapter. The boundaries of a specific use permit area may, from time to time, be altered or adjusted in
accordance with the amendment provisions set forth herein.
(d) Permit required of group housing. No group or home for physically or mentally impaired persons as
defined in section 14.03.002(4a) shall hereafter operate until the director of zoning and planning or his/her
designee has received a site plan from the applicant and issued a permit, both indicating compliance with the
following provisions:
(1) Any single-family dwelling unit which is proposed to be utilized for shared group housing for
the physically or mentally impaired shall provide, at the minimum, the following square footage in
each bedroom:
(A) To house one physically or mentally impaired person per bedroom, the dwelling unit
must provide 100 square feet of space per bedroom utilized for this purpose.
(B) To house two physically or mentally impaired persons per bedroom, the dwelling unit
must provide 120 square feet of space per bedroom utilized for this purpose.
(2) Any single-family dwelling unit which is proposed to be utilized for shared group housing for
physically or mentally impaired persons shall provide a separate bedroom for the care provider or
providers.
(3) An inspection shall be conducted by the city health department using as its criteria the
appropriate portions of the requirements of the minimum licensing requirements for facilities serving
persons with mental retardation and related conditions, or its most current amendments as established
by the department of state health services, bureau of long-term care, or the minimum licensing
standards for personal care facilities as established and amended under Texas Health and Safety
Code, section 247.001 et seq. In the event the facility is licensed by the state, the director of planning
and zoning or his/her designee may waive all or any portion of the city health department's
inspection. The health department shall prepare a report describing the property and any remedial
improvements which must be completed in order for the property to meet the minimum standards.
The report shall be forwarded to the applicant and to the director of planning and zoning or his/her
designee, and no permit shall be issued until the proposed home has met the minimum standards.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.090)
(4) A fee as listed in article 5.000 shall be assessed to defray administrative and inspection costs
for each permit issued. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(5) The facility shall comply with all applicable fire and building codes of the city.
(6) No other living arrangements shall be located within a radius of 600 feet of the home for which
the permit is requested. Such measurements shall be measured from property line to property line.
Other group living arrangements shall include, but are not limited to, homes for the mentally
retarded, personal care facilities, adult foster care homes and group housing for physically or
mentally impaired persons. In making determination that no home exists within 600 feet, the director
of planning and zoning shall consider information provided by the applicant, information contained
in city records, and information obtained by physical inspection of the premises, if any.
(7) The holder of the permit shall be in charge of and responsible for the operation of the dwelling
unit for shared group housing.
(8) Permit shall be renewed annually so long as the facility continues to comply with the standards
described in (3) above. Permits are nontransferable.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/430
(9) City personnel shall have the right to conduct inspections to ensure continued compliance with
standards at any time (pursuant to a valid search warrant or consent). In the event a home is found to
be in violation of the standards, the inspector shall forward to the director of planning and zoning a
report describing the violations, and the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee may
withdraw the permit. Following withdrawal of the permit and issuance of a vacate order, the permit
holder shall have the right to appeal the decision of the director of planning and zoning or his/her
designee to the zoning board of adjustment within ten days.
(10) The permit shall be prominently displayed in the facility at all times. Permits shall include the
following statement: “The City does not license facilities as to qualities of care. This structure has
been inspected and has met the minimum requirements for Group Housing for Physically or Mentally
Impaired Persons specified in section 14.03.002(4a) of the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Borger.”
(11) Any permit issued under this section shall become null and void and of no further effect in the
event the use of the premises is discontinued for a period of one year, or if the property is restored to
use as a single-family residence.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.090)
(12) Nothing in this section shall be construed as attempting to regulate or affect the right of
physically or mentally impaired individuals to purchase their own housing for single-family
residences or to affect the right of individuals to care for physically or mentally impaired family
members. Nothing in this section shall be construed as attempting to regulate homes established
pursuant to V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code, chapter 123. (1998 Code, sec. 158.090; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(e) Adult business.
(1) Permit fees required.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, or permit to be operated for his
benefit, an adult business as defined by section 14.01.003, definitions, without first having
obtained a license as required herein, which license shall at all times be displayed in some
conspicuous place within the licensed premises.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.090, adopted 1/20/04)
(B) The annual license fee for each adult business as listed in article 5.000, shall be paid
before a license may be issued. (Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(2) Application and issuance.
(A) A license for an adult business shall be obtained from the chief of police by completing
an application and meeting the requirements of this section.
(B) The application shall be sworn to and acknowledged and shall state:
(i) The street address of the premises to be licensed;
(ii) The full name, date of birth, driver's license number and physical address of the
residence of the applicant;
(iii) If the premises are leased, the names of the lessor and lessee;
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/430
(iv) If the application is on behalf of a partnership of an adult business, the partners'
names, dates of birth, drivers' license numbers and physical addresses shall be listed.
(v) If the application is on behalf of a corporate owner of an adult business, the name of
the corporation, the name and address of the registered agent, and the name and address,
date of birth and driver's license number of the person who is primarily responsible for the
management of the adult business.
(vi) Whether or not the applicant, any partner who is an owner of an adult business, or
any person who is or will be primarily responsible for the management of the adult
business has ever been convicted of a crime involving sex.
(C) Any misrepresentations of the facts required by the license application shall be cause for
revocation or refusal to issue a license.
(D) Upon the filing of an application for an adult business license, the chief of police shall
promptly investigate the premises to determine whether or not the premises meets the
requirements of this Code of Ordinances concerning construction, plumbing, electricity, fire
safety, sanitation, zoning and the requirements of this section.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.090, adopted 1/20/04)
(E) If the chief of police shall determine that the application meets the requirements and that
the persons listed in subsection (e)(2)(B)(vi) above have not been convicted of a crime
involving sex, he shall issue a license to the applicant within eleven (11) days of filing the
application. Should the chief of police find a deficiency in the application or the premises, he
will notify the applicant before the expiration said eleven-day period, who will have five (5)
working days (of city hall) to correct the deficiency and request a reinspection. Reinspection
will occur within three (3) working days, and upon correction of the noted deficiencies having
been found a license will be issued on the following working day. The applicant will be
required to pay a fee as listed in article 5.000 per reinspection per application. (Ordinance O-
008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
(F) An applicant who is denied a license may appeal the denial to district court as authorized
by law.
(3) Duration, nonassignable, nontransferable.
(A) A license issued under this subsection (e) shall terminate one (1) year from the date of
issuance.
(B) No refund of any license fee paid hereunder shall be made.
(C) A license issued under this subsection (e) may not be assigned or transferred to another
location or individual, and shall terminate upon the death or bankruptcy of the licensee or
transfer of ownership of the business.
(4) Inspections; violations; revocation of license.
(A) As a condition of issuance, the applicant for a license under this subsection (e) shall
agree to maintain the premises in compliance with the requirements of this Code of Ordinances
and to authorize the agents and employees of the city to inspect the premises or any portion
thereof at any time during business hours.
(B) The person in control of an adult business shall not authorize or allow any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter or patronize such adult business. A single violation of
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/430
this requirement shall constitute an offense and cause for revocation of the license for the adult
business.
(C) Should the chief of police determine that an adult business is not in compliance with the
requirements of this Code of Ordinances, he may at any time give notice in writing to the
licensee, or person in control if the licensee cannot be easily located, of the violation and that
the license is in jeopardy of revocation if the violation is not corrected by the following
business day. Should the violation not be corrected by the following business day, the chief of
police may revoke and cancel the license.
(D) The licensee may abate the revocation by filing an appeal with a district court and
obtaining a temporary restraining order.
(E) Every day of operation of an adult business after cancellation and revocation of a license
shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500).
(F) Any person, firm, corporation, or partnership who has had a license revoked for a
violation of the license or zoning requirements regulating adult businesses shall not be granted a
license for a period to ten (10) years from the date of revocation.
(5) Violators of any of the provisions of this subsection (e) shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable according to section 1.01.009. Each
and every day that the provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.090, adopted 1/20/04)
Sec. 14.06.002 Accessory building regulations
(a) Definition and use regulation.
(1) In a residence or an apartment district, an accessory building is a subordinate building, attached
to or detached from the main building, without separate bath or kitchen facilities, not used for
commercial purposes and not rented or leased.
(2) In other districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental
to and used only in conjunction with the main building.
(b) Area regulations for accessory buildings in residential and apartment districts.
(1) Front yard. Attached accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than the main
building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in the area defined as the rear yard.
(2) Side yard. There shall be a side yard not less than three feet from any side lot line, alley line or
easement line, except that no side yard shall be required for carports, garages, or other detached
accessory buildings located within the rear portion of the lot provided a masonry or concrete wall is
constructed adjacent to the lot line of the adjoining lot. Said wall shall be a minimum of eight inches
thick and eight feet high and shall contain no openings. The area of such carport, garage, or other
detached accessory building located within the rear portion of the lot shall not exceed 800 square feet
and roof extensions of any part of the structure shall not extend beyond the lot line or easement line.
In no case shall the roof drainage water from a building be permitted to flow onto the adjacent lot.
(3) Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required for a detached accessory building, except that if no
alley exists the rear yard shall not be less than ten feet as measured from the rear lot line. Roof
extensions, steps, ramps or any part of a structure shall not extend over the rear lot line, alley line or
easement line a distance greater than one foot. In areas where alleys or easements are less than 20
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/430
feet in width, detached accessory buildings shall have a rear yard not less than three feet from any lot
line, alley line or easement line. In residential districts the main building and all accessory buildings
shall not cover more than 50% of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the
midpoint of one side lot line. Carports, garages, or other detached accessory buildings located within
the rear portion of the lot as heretofore described shall not be located closer than ten feet to the main
building.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.091)
Sec. 14.06.003 Courts
Where an apartment building or buildings are erected so as to create inner courts, the faces of all opposite walls
in such courts shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such
court area for a distance greater than five feet. (1998 Code, sec. 158.092)
Sec. 14.06.004 Location of dwellings and buildings
Only one main building for one-family, two-family or multiple-family use with permitted accessory buildings
may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. Every dwelling shall face or front upon a public street, or approved
place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of 30 feet. Where a lot is used for
retail, commercial, industrial purposes, or a combination of same, or for a combination of retail and dwelling
purposes, more than one main building may be located upon a lot, but only when such buildings conform to all
the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts and when all such main
buildings face upon a public street, other than an alley. Whenever two or more main buildings, or portions
thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street, the same may
be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the planning and zoning commission and
the city council so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. No parking area, storage area, or
required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area requirements for
any other dwelling or other use. (1998 Code, sec. 158.093)
Sec. 14.06.005 Special development signs
Special temporary development and promotion signs not exceeding 400 square feet in area may be erected on
private property upon approval of the building inspector. The building inspector shall control the location and
duration of such sign use to assure that the occupancy and use of adjacent lots are not interfered with and that no
safety hazard is created. Such special development signs will be removed at the direction of the building
inspector after completion of the development of 90% of the project advertised. (1998 Code, sec. 158.094)
Sec. 14.06.006 Temporary construction buildings
Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be
permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the building inspector and subject
to periodic renewal by the inspector for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or
expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the building inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.095)
Sec. 14.06.007 Fence and wall regulations
In any zoning district or within ten feet of the boundary of any residential district where a wall, fence or
screening separation is erected, the following standards for height and design shall be observed.
(1) Height of fence or wall.
(A) Any fence or wall erected on the property line, or within ten feet of the property line and
generally parallel thereto, and located to the rear of the minimum required front yard line as
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/430
determined by the provisions of section 14.04.006(a) shall not exceed eight feet in height above
the adjacent grade.
(B) Any fence or wall erected on the property line and located between the front property line
and the minimum required front yard line as determined by the provisions of section
14.04.006(a) or within the minimum front yard space shall not exceed 40 inches in height above
the adjacent grade, with the following exceptions:
(i) That, on a corner lot, the 40 inches maximum fence height shall apply to the front
yard along the property line of least dimension and to that portion of the front yard within
ten feet of the property line of greatest dimension;
(ii) That, on a lot which abuts a cul-de-sac and also sides into another street, any fence
or wall erected on the side property line adjacent to the non-cul-de-sac street, and
generally parallel thereto, shall not exceed eight feet in height above the adjacent grade.
(C) No fence, screen wall or other visual barrier shall be so located or placed that it obstructs
the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley or drive intersection.
Regulations governing sight restrictions at intersections shall conform to sections 3.15.071
through 3.15.075.
(2) Screening walls or visual barriers.
(A) Screening walls or visual barriers required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
constructed of masonry or of a permanent and substantial type wall or fence material, supported
by a frame or base constructed of concrete, metal or other substantial material, and not readily
subject to damage by operations within the enclosure or by the effects of winds or other weather
elements. Such wall or barrier shall be maintained in good repair and shall not contain openings
constituting more than 40 square inches in each one square foot of wall or fence surface, and
the surface of such wall or fence shall constitute a visual barrier. All walls or fences shall not be
less than six feet in height and all openings in such walls or fences shall be equipped with gates
equal in height and screening characteristics to the wall or fence and shall be closed and
securely latched at all times except during business hours. In lieu of a screening wall or fence, a
landscaped strip containing a solid planting or hedge not less than six feet in height, which
planting shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition and constituting a visual barrier,
may be used with approval of the building inspector.
(B) Screening and landscaping strips with adjacent vehicle parking shall be protected from
vehicle wheels by a bumper rail or wheel barrier.
(C) Stored materials or commodities shall not be stacked so as to exceed the heights of the
screening fence, wall or visual barrier, and such materials or commodities shall not be placed
outside the fence, wall or visual barrier.
(D) Screening walls or visual barriers shall be placed along all portions of any affected
premises which abut any paved public street (with or without curb and gutter) and extend along
the first 150 feet beyond the frontage of such premises along any side thereof; provided,
however, this requirement shall not apply where any building, structure or any natural vision
barrier exists which effectively screens the portions of such premises.
(E) Fencing not allowed. Any corrugated metal, used lumber, or fiberglass unless one good
coat of primer and two coats of neutral paint are applied. The use of used or salvage materials
shall be prohibited unless specifically noted on plans and approved by the building official.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/430
(F) Maintenance of landscaped screening. All required screening materials shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include, but not be limited to,
pruning, fertilizing, watering, mowing, weeding, and other such activities common to the
maintenance of landscaping. Appropriate facilities for watering any plant material shall be
installed at time of planting. Screening areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other
such materials or plants not part of the screening or landscaping. All plant material shall be
maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. All
plant material which dies shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size.
(3) Barbed wire and electrical fencing.
(A) Barbed wire shall not be used on fencing except under the following circumstances:
(i) Fencing for property used for agriculture or grazing purposes.
(ii) Security fencing for nonresidential uses in central business, commercial, light
industrial and heavy industrial districts where the barbed wire is five feet or more above
the ground level.
(iii) Security fencing for a site operated by a local, state or federal government agency
or a franchised utility company where the barbed wire is five feet or more above the
ground level.
(B) Electrical fences shall be installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the city and may be used only for the purposes designed for and shall be
Underwriters' Laboratory approved. Electrical fencing may be used on property used for
agriculture or grazing purposes only and shall not be used for fencing adjacent to or in any
residential district.
(4) Further requirements of council. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and
the city council may require screening, fencing and landscaping requirements on any zoning case in
addition to or in lieu of screening or fencing requirements set out specifically in each use district
when the nature and character of surrounding or adjacent property dictate a need to further provide
protection for the general health, welfare, and morals of the community in general.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.096)
Sec. 14.06.008 Nonconforming uses and structures
(a) Nonconforming status. A nonconforming status shall exist under the following provisions of this chapter:
(1) When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in
which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the effective
date of this chapter and has been operating since without discontinuance.
(2) When at some subsequent date a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations
prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence at the time of
annexation to the city, and has since been in regular and continuous use.
(3) Except for reasonable repairs, no nonconforming use may be structurally altered, or extended,
expanded, or increased in any manner beyond the use existing as of the effective date of this chapter
except for reasonable repairs. A nonconforming use may be extended beyond the lot or tract upon
which such nonconforming use is located to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space and
only upon the approval of the zoning board of adjustment.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/430
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be changed unless it is changed to a conforming use. After any
such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming use.
(5) Whenever a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease and the use
of the premises shall henceforth be in conformance to this chapter. Abandonment shall involve the
intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming use and the actual act of discontinuance.
Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for, or which remains vacant for, a period of 12
consecutive months shall be considered to have been abandoned.
(6) Salvage or scrap metal yard. Nonconforming use involving salvage or scrap metal yards
required by this chapter to screen such salvage or scrap metal yard shall:
(A) Provide such screening in all zoning districts no later than two years from the effective
date of this chapter.
(B) When located in LI or HI zoning districts and where a specific use permit is required,
shall make application and obtain such specific use permit no later than two years from the
effective date of this chapter.
(7) Uses, as described in (6) above, and which are annexed into the city, subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter or created as nonconforming uses by the rezoning to a more restrictive zoning
classification shall, from the date of such annexation or rezoning, as the case may be, fall within and
be subject to the provisions as set forth therein.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.097)
(8) An adult business which is in operation on the effective date of an annexation which does not
conform to the location and zoning requirements pertaining to an adult business shall be a
nonconforming use which may continue for three (3) years from the effective date of annexation.
Upon the expiration of three (3) years, all nonconforming use rights shall terminate, and the use shall
be illegal and shall terminate.
(A) The nonconforming use, as defined herein, shall not be increased, enlarged or altered
except to comply with the requirements of section 14.03.013, supplemental regulations (f)
through (i).
(B) If two (2) or more adult businesses are rendered nonconforming by the required
separation in section 14.03.013, supplemental regulations, (a) through (e) only, first in time is
first in right. It shall be the burden of the adult business asserting a priority to prove its prior
right.
(C) If the owner of an adult business is unable to recoup its investment in such business prior
to termination, it may request an extension of time by filing a request with the planning and
zoning department ninety (90) days prior to the termination date.
(i) The application for an extension shall contain all of the data the applicant wishes to
be considered in determining whether or not an extension should be granted.
(ii) The city council may consider the application for extension and may grant
additional time not to exceed one (1) year if it finds that the applicant's need outweighs
the public interest in termination.
(Ordinance O-001-04, sec. 158.097, adopted 1/20/04)
(b) Amortization of nonconforming uses. One of the goals of the zoning ordinance is to eventually eliminate
nonconforming uses within the city, and thereby establish a uniform use of property consistent with a
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/430
comprehensive zoning plan. A nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for specified periods
of time subject to such regulations as the board of adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the
adjoining property prior to the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use.
(c) Destruction of nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use destroyed or damaged to the extent of 50% or
more of its fair market value above its foundations at the time of the damage or destruction shall not be repaired
or reconstructed for the purpose of continuing the nonconforming use. If the extent of damage is less than 50%
of the fair market value of the property at the time of the damage, it may be repaired for such continued use,
provided that such repairs be completed within six months from the date of the damage, and provided further
that such nonconforming use shall not be changed, expanded or extended.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.097)
Sec. 14.06.009 Mobile home regulations
CHARACTERISTIC MH Regulations effective as of 4/30/03
Mobile Home Manufactured Home
(Type C)
Date manufactured Built before 6/15/76 New MH only
HUD-code inspected No Yes
Habitability inspection required
prior to installation of used MH
No Yes
Minimum width None 22 ft. wide
Minimum area None 900 sq. ft.
Permanent foundation, towing
equipment, i.e., tongue and axles
must be removed
No Yes
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/430
Type of skirting/stem wall Panel skirting for exterior
exposure
Concrete or masonry
stem walls or fiber
cement skirting
Roof pitch None 3:12 or greater, 6" eaves
Roof material None Solid deck with shingle
or metal
Accessory building/addition None None required,
garage/addition must
match MH material
Allowable zoning districts Not allowed anywhere in
city
MH and by S-permit in
EA, GR, and C only if on
a min. 50 ft. wide lot.
Note: Development standards such as setbacks, area, bulk, driveways, and parking requirements set forth by the
zoning ordinance will be enforced.
When nonconforming mobile homes or manufactured homes are removed from a site, the unit may only be
replaced with a manufactured home that complies with this chapter.
(Ordinance O-009-03, sec. 158.098, adopted 6/3/03)
ARTICLE 14.07 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 14.07.001 Board of adjustment
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five members, each to be appointed by
resolution of the city council for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon
written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose
place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. Each member
reappointed or each new appointee shall serve for a full term of two years unless removed as hereinabove
provided. Provided however, that the city council may appoint two alternate members of the board of adjustment
who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or
the city manager so that all cases to be heard by the board of adjustment will always be heard by a minimum
number of the four members. The alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the
regular members, which is for a term of two years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they
shall be subject to removal the same as the regular members.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/430
(b) The board of adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are
not inconsistent with this chapter or statutes of the state. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the
call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his
absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
board shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
board and shall be a public record.
(c) Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department or
board of the municipality affected by the decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
15 days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken, and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(d) An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
(e) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the
hearing any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.110)
(f) Upon the filing of an appeal to the board of adjustment as provided in subsection (c) above, the applicant
shall pay to the city an amount as listed in article 5.000 to help defray the cost of processing the appeal and
publication of the public notice required by this section and applicable state laws. In the event the appellant
requests withdrawal of the appeal prior to the public hearing by the board of adjustment as provided in
subsection (e) above, then one half the sum paid shall be refunded to the appellant. (Ordinance O-008-18
adopted 9/18/18)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
Sec. 14.07.002 Special exceptions
When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will not be substantially or permanently injured, the
board of adjustment may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the regulations herein established as follows:
(1) Permit the location in any use district of a state or municipal building, municipally owned park
or athletic field, or hospital.
(2) Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, or permit the
extension of a nonconforming use of a building upon the lot occupied by such use or building at the
time of the passage of this chapter.
(3) Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted district, immediately adjacent
thereto, but not more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which such building or
use is authorized.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/430
(4) Grant in undeveloped sections of the city temporary and conditional permits for not more than
a two-year period for any structure or use.
(5) Permit in any district such modification of the requirements of these regulations as said board
may deem necessary to secure any appropriate development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on
two or more sides there are buildings that do not conform to these regulations.
(6) Permit such modification of the yard, open space, lot area, or lot width regulations as may be
necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately
owned at the time of the passage of this chapter and is of such restricted area that it cannot be
appropriately improved without such modifications.
(7) Permit as an accessory use a parking lot in a residential district where the lot is adjacent to a
neighborhood service, retail, central business, commercial, or light industrial district or to
nonconforming business uses, or is separated from such districts or use by a street or alley not over
50 feet in width. Where permission for such parking lot is granted, such parking lot shall not be used
for repair work or for servicing of any kind and no charge may be made for parking and no signs,
except an identification sign not larger than four square feet in area may be erected or maintained
thereon.
(8) Require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structures under any plan
whereby the full value of the property can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into
consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform
to the regulations of this chapter. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land or structure
shall be taken with due regard to the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the
light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming
use and the conservation and preservation of property. The board shall, from time to time, on its own
motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners inquire into the existence, continuation
or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city.
(9) The zoning board of adjustment shall on its own motion, or upon appeal, make any
determinations or decisions regarding the creation, continuation or existence of any home occupation
and in the public interest shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions and safeguards to
insure that the home occupation conforms to the requirements and intent of the zoning ordinance. In
any case where the conditions as set by the board of adjustment have not been complied with, or
where such home occupation in the board's opinion has become a nuisance to adjacent property
owners, the zoning board of adjustment shall give notice for the discontinuance of such home
occupation and set a time limit therefor. Failure to comply with such notice shall be deemed a
violation of the zoning ordinance and subject the property owner to a penalty as provided therein.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.111)
Sec. 14.07.003 Actions of the board
(a) In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of Tex. Local
Gov't Code section 211.001 et seq., as amended, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decisions, or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken
including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant.
(b) The concurring vote of 75% of the members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to affect any variance in said
chapter.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/430
(c) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any
taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision by the board of adjustment
and its recommendation in the minutes and not thereafter.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.112)
Sec. 14.07.004 Creation of building site
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building
site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions:
(1) The lot or tract is part of a plat record, properly approved by the planning and zoning
commission and city council, and filed in the plat records of the county.
(2) The site plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the planning and zoning
commission, which site plan provides all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other
public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting including the
designation of building areas and such easements, alleys and streets have been required and properly
dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided.
(3) The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to the
effective date of this chapter or prior to annexation to the city, whichever is applicable, in which
event a building permit for only one main building may be issued on each original separately owned
parcel without first complying with subsection (2) or (3) above.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.113)
Sec. 14.07.005 Certificate of occupancy and compliance
(a) No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use
and no land may be used nor shall any basic change of use in land or structure be made until a certificate of
occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector stating that the building or proposed
use of building or land complies with the provisions of: Chapter 3, Building Regulations; Chapter 4, Business
Regulations; this Chapter, and all other regulations or ordinances of the City, State and/or Federal laws.
Becoming out of compliance with any of these provisions may be grounds for revocation of the certificate of
occupancy. (Ordinance O-001-18 adopted 1/16/18)
(b) A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit and will be issued within ten days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion
of such building or land provided such construction or change has been made in complete conformity to the
provisions of this chapter.
(c) A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or
land complies with all the building or health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished
on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.114)
Sec. 14.07.006 Completion of building under construction
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this chapter and which entire building shall be
completed within one year from the date of the passage of this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 158.115)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/430
Sec. 14.07.007 Amendments
(a) Any person or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property may petition the city council for a
change or amendment to the provisions of this chapter, or the planning and zoning commission may on its own
motion or on request from the city council institute study and proposal for changes and amendments in the
public interest.
(b) The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the
districts or the regulations herein established as provided by the statutes of the state.
(c) Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change the governing body shall submit
the same to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report.
(d) The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any amendment or
change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city council. Written notice of all public hearings
before the planning and zoning commission on a proposed amendment or change shall be sent to all owners of
real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given
not less than ten days before the date set for hearing by posting such notice properly addressed and postage paid
to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
(e) A public hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting any proposed amendment,
supplement, or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in the official publication of the city
stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of
publication.
(f) Unless a proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission or if a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the city
secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots included in
such a proposed change or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 200 feet therefrom or of
those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment
shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the governing body.
(g) (1) Upon filing of any petition for any change or amendment to the provisions of this chapter
as provided in subsection (a) above, the petitioner shall pay to the city the sum of $150 to help defray
the cost of publication and mailing of notices required by this section and applicable state laws.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.116)
(2) In all petition filings an amount as listed in article 5.000 shall be permanently retained by the
city, and shall be used to pay the necessary administrative costs of processing the petition for zoning
district classification change through the planning and zoning commission.
(3) In the event a public hearing shall not be held as provided in subsection (e) above, then one
half the sum required under subsection (g)(2) above shall be refunded to the petitioner.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 14.07.008 Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or
held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provisions
thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. In any complaint and in any action or
proceedings brought for the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to negative
any exception, excuse, proviso, or exemption contained in this chapter, and the burden of proof of any such
exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant or person charged. (1998 Code, sec.
158.117)
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/430
Sec. 14.07.009 Remedies
(a) If a building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained or if a building, other structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter or regulation, the city, in
addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate action to:
(1) Prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use;
(2) Restrain, correct, or abate the violation;
(3) Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or
(4) Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use on or about the premises.
(b) In addition to the other penalties and remedies of this section and in section 14.07.010, the right is hereby
conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district, where such property owner
may be affected or invaded, by a violation of the terms of this chapter, to bring suit in such court or courts
having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of
the rights of such property owners.
(1998 Code, sec. 158.118)
Sec. 14.07.010 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable according to section 1.01.009. Each and every day that the provisions of
this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1998 Code, sec. 158.999)
EXHIBIT A
ILLUSTRATIONS
Illustration
1. Lot width
2. Lot depth
3. Yards
4. Corner lots
5. Method of measuring front yard
6. Double frontage lots
7. Front yard where zoning changes in a block
8. Average front yard where yard depth varies
9. Special apartment side yard and spacing standards
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/430
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/430
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/430
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/430
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE 1.000 ANIMAL SERVICES
Sec. 1.001 In general
(a) Animal adoption: $45.00.
(b) Boarding fee: $10.00 per day.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/430
(c) Owner surrender:
(1) Animal is heartworm negative, current on vaccinations, altered and deemed adoptable by the
animal control supervisor: $30.00 per animal.
(2) Animal deemed adoptable but needs vaccinations: $80.00 per animal.
(3) Litters (under 10 weeks of age): $60.00.
(d) Pick-up:
(1) Deceased animal: $35.00 per occurrence.
(2) Deceased animal - after hours: $50.00 per occurrence.
(e) Impound fee:
(1) Live animal: $35.00 per occurrence.
(2) Live animal - after hours: $50.00 per occurrence.
(f) Rabies quarantine: 10 days boarding fee + impound fee.
(g) Rabies vaccination: $25.00 per year.
(h) Reclaim charges:
(1) Loose animals that are picked up (1st annual occurrence): $35.00.
(2) Loose animals that are picked up (2nd annual occurrence): $55.00.
(3) Loose animals that are picked up (3rd annual occurrence): $75.00.
(4) Loose livestock that are picked up: $65.00 per occurrence.
(i) Animal identification microchip: $35.00 per animal.
(j) Low cost spay/neuter: $65.00 per animal.
ARTICLE 2.000 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2.001 Fire department permits/fees
(a) Site and subdivision plans: $100.00.
(b) False alarm (after 3rd alarm): $50.00 per occurrence.
(c) Special events - includes plan review and inspection (also see planning and development fees): $100.00.
(d) Controlled burn in city limits - approved: $50.00.
(e) Controlled burn in city limits - unapproved: $300.00 per occurrence fine.
(f) Fire reports: $3.00.
Sec. 2.002 Fire inspections
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/430
(a) CSI inspection: $40.00.
(b) Annual safety inspection - commercial building: $0.00.
(1) Re-inspection fee after 2nd inspection: $50.00.
(c) Fire final inspection: $100.00.
(d) Assisted living institutions: $50.00.
(e) Day-care centers (providing care for less than 10): $50.00.
(f) Day-care centers (providing care for 11 or more): $75.00.
(g) Nursing homes: $100.00.
(h) Hospital: $100.00.
(i) Foster/adoption home: $25.00.
Sec. 2.003 Test/acceptance test/plans review
(a) Fuel distribution tank and pipe installation (plans review and testing): $150.00.
(b) Hydrant flow test: $100.00.
(c) Suppression system plans review: $300.00 per system.
(d) Suppression system test: $50.00.
(e) Suppression system test: $100.00.
(f) Suppression system fire pump test/acceptance test: $25.00.
(g) Fire alarm system plan review: $100.00.
(h) Fire alarm system/acceptance test: $75.00.
(i) Carnival inspection: $100.00.
(j) Interior seasonal event: $100.00.
(k) Kitchen vent hood suppression system plan review: $100.00.
(l) Kitchen vent hood suppression system/acceptance test: $50.00.
(m) LP tank storage installation (plans review and testing): $150.00.
(n) Alternative fire suppression systems (spray booths, dry/wet chem, etc.): $50.00.
(o) Alternative fire suppression system plans review: $100.00.
Sec. 2.004 Apparatus, personnel and equipment
(a) The following list is not all-inclusive of equipment that may be damaged or contaminated during the
course of a response effort. Additional equipment that is not herein listed may be charged at actual replacement
costs.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/430
(b) The following fees may be assessed against the person/company requesting fire/EMS service at which the
city's fire department responded. The same fees may be charged for specialized use or rental - such as, but not
limited to, stand by services or industrial contracted use.
(1) Apparatus:
(A) A real apparatus: $600.00 per truck, per hour.
(B) Class A pumper: $450.00 per truck, per hour.
(C) Heavy rescue vehicle (staffed with 2 personnel): $500.00 per truck, per hour.
(D) Brush truck: $350.00 per truck, per hour.
(E) Command vehicle: $150.00 per truck, per hour.
(F) Tanker apparatus: $350.00 per truck, per hour.
(2) Personnel:
(A) Fire inspector: $35.00 per hour.
(B) Fire investigator: $75.00 per hour.
(C) Firefighter: $22.00 per hour.
(D) Fire driver: $25.00 per hour.
(E) Fire lieutenant: $28.00 per hour.
(F) Fire captain: $32.00 per hour.
(G) Fire chief: $68.00 per hour.
(H) Wild firefighter: $20.00 per hour.
(3) Haz-Mat:
(A) Absorbent: $17.00 per bag.
(B) Barricade tape: $20.00 per roll.
(C) Broom: $20.00 each.
(D) Disposable coveralls: $20.00 each.
(E) Disposable goggles: $20.00 each.
(F) Drum liners: $8.00 each.
(G) Latex gloves: $5.00 per pair.
(H) Lite-Dri: $20.00 per 50lb bag.
(I) Plug and patch kit: $30.00 each.
(J) Poly sheeting: $50.00 per roll.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/430
(K) Shovel: $50.00 each.
(L) Top-Sol: $30.00 per bag.
(4) Protective equipment replacement:
(A) Bunker coat: $900.00 each.
(B) Bunker pants: $900.00 each.
(C) FF boots: $275.00 each.
(D) FF gloves: $65.00 per pair.
(E) Helmet: $275.00 each.
(F) Nomex hood: $25.00 each.
(5) Firefighting agents:
(A) AFFF foam: $22.00 per gallon.
(B) Class A foam: $17.00 per gallon.
(C) Light water: $20.00 per gallon.
(D) Micro-Blaze: $30.00 per gallon.
(6) Emergency medical service:
(A) AED (use of FD automatic external defibrillator): $200.00 per each use.
(B) AED pads: $25.00 per each use.
(C) Biohazard: $10.00 per incident.
(D) Dispatch fee: $80.00 per incident.
(E) Spinal immobilization: $200.00 per patient.
(7) Firefighting equipment replacement:
(A) A-Frame combo ladder: $414.00 each.
(B) Attic folding ladder 10': $255.00 each.
(C) Attic folding ladder 8': $230.00 each.
(D) Deluge monitor w/o pic and tips: $2,080.00 each.
(E) Extension ladder 24': $525.00 each.
(F) Extension ladder 35': $925.00 each.
(G) Foam aerator tube: $396.00 each.
(H) Fog nozzle 1.0": $510.00 each.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/430
(I) Fog nozzle 1.5 - 1.75": $625.00 each.
(J) Fog nozzle 2.5": $680.00 each.
(K) Fog nozzle 2.5" master: $825.00 each.
(L) fog nozzle 2.5" play pipe: $1,095.00 each.
(M) Hose 1.0": $75.00 per 50'.
(N) Hose 1.0" booster: $125.00 per 50'.
(O) Hose 1.75": $115.00 per 50'.
(P) Hose 2.5": $145.00 per 50'.
(Q) Hose 3.0": $225.00 per 50'.
(R) Hose 5.0": $685.00 per 100'.
(S) Motorola portable VHF radio: $1,800.00 each.
(T) BK portable VHF radio: $2,000.00 each.
(U) PASS alarm: $200.00 each.
(V) Roof ladder 12': $275.00 each.
(W) Roof ladder 14': $335.00 each.
(X) SCBA air mask: $240.00 each.
(Y) SCBA air mask complete: $2,300.00 each.
(Z) SCBA spare cylinders: $1,000.00 each.
(AA) Stacked tips w/shaper: $566.00 each.
(8) Rescue equipment used:
(A) Acetylene cutting kit: $185.00 per hour.
(B) Air bags: $275.00 per hour.
(C) Air impact tool: $85.00 per hour.
(D) Ajax cutting tool: $35.00 per hour.
(E) Milwaukee saws - all: $65.00 per hour.
(F) Oxygen with mask: $90.00 per hour.
(G) Porta power: $85.00 per hour.
(H) Rescue tools: spreaders, cutters, rams: $300.00 per hour.
(9) Fire equipment used:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/430
(A) ABC extinguisher: $45.00 each.
(B) Axe(s): $12.00 per hour.
(C) Barricade/scene tape: $20.00.
(D) Bolt cutters (HD): $12.00 per hour.
(E) Cellular phone with long distance charges: $25.00.
(F) Chain saw: $40.00 per hour.
(G) CO2 extinguisher: $45.00 each.
(H) Explosive meter: $180.00.
(I) Gas plug/gasoline plug kit: $45.00.
(J) Generator: $45.00 per hour.
(K) Hall runner: $15.00 each.
(L) Halligan tool: $12.00 per hour.
(M) Hand lights: $15.00 each.
(N) K-tool: $20.00.
(O) PPV fan(s): $50.00 per hour.
(P) Purple K extinguisher: $75.00 each.
(Q) Rescue (K-12) saw: $40.00 per hour.
(R) Rolls of plastic: $30.00 each.
(S) Salvage covers: $25.00 each.
(T) Scene lights: $32.00 per hour.
(U) Tank, portable/fold-a-tank: $150.00.
(V) Water extinguisher: $15.00 each.
(W) Windshield tool: $10.00.
ARTICLE 3.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND PERMITS
Sec. 3.001 Taxicab
(a) Vehicle permit fee: $150.00 per vehicle.
(b) Taxicab driver's permit: $25.00 per year.
(c) Horse drawn carriage permit: $25.00 per 6 months.
Sec. 3.002 Street closures
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/430
(a) Special event: No fee.
(b) Parade: No fee.
Sec. 3.003 Alley paving
Cost of material calculated by the street department.
Sec. 3.004 Peddlers, solicitors, hawkers and itinerant vendors
(a) Peddler master permit:
(1) 7 day permit: $50.00.
(2) 14 day permit: $75.00.
(3) 30 day permit: $100.00.
(4) 90 day permit: $150.00.
(b) Peddler individual permit:
(1) 7 day permit: $25.00.
(2) 14 day permit: $25.00.
(3) 30 day permit: $25.00.
(4) 90 day permit: $25.00.
(c) Solicitor/hawker master permit:
(1) 7 day permit: $50.00.
(2) 14 day permit: $75.00.
(3) 30 day permit: $100.00.
(4) 90 day permit: $150.00.
(d) Solicitor/hawker individual permit:
(1) 7 day permit: $25.00.
(2) 14 day permit: $25.00.
(3) 30 day permit: $25.00.
(4) 90 day permit: $25.00.
(e) Distributor permits:
(1) Master 7 day permit: $25.00.
(2) Individual 7 day permit: $25.00.
(f) Mobile street vendor: $100.00 per year.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/430
(g) Transient retail master permit: $180.00 per year.
ARTICLE 4.000 PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. 4.001 Cofield Community Building
(a) Rental fee:
(1) City residents: $100.00 per day.
(2) Nonresidents: $150.00 per day.
(b) Refundable security deposit:
(1) City residents: $100.00.
(2) Nonresidents: $150.00.
(c) Rental cancellation fee (with less $25.00 than 14 day notice): $25.00.
Sec. 4.002 Huber Park Community Building
(a) Rental fee:
(1) City residents: $40.00 per day.
(2) Nonresidents: $60.00 per day.
(b) Refundable security deposit:
(1) City residents: $40.00.
(2) Nonresidents: $60.00.
(c) Rental cancellation fee (with less than 14 day notice): $25.00.
Sec. 4.003 Johnson Park Youth Center
(a) Swimming pool admission: $2.00 per person per day.
(b) Swimming pool individual season pass: $50.00 per person.
(c) Bounce house admission: $3.00 per person per day.
(d) Bounce house season passes: $30.00 per person per day.
(e) Swimming pool rental (maximum 75 swimmers):
(1) Rental fee:
(A) City residents: $75.00 per hour.
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00 per hour.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $75.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/430
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00.
(f) Youth center and swimming pool rental (maximum 75 swimmers):
(1) Rental fee:
(A) City residents: $125.00 per hour.
(B) Nonresidents: $150.00 per hour.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $125.00.
(B) Nonresidents: $175.00.
(g) Youth center (300 guest maximum):
(1) Rental fee:
(A) City residents: $50.00 per every 75 guests.
(B) Nonresidents: $75.00 per every 75 guests.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $75.00.
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00.
(3) DJ service: $25.00 per hour.
(h) Johnson Park Gym (300 guest maximum):
(1) Rental fee:
(A) City residents: $50.00 per every 75 guests.
(B) Nonresidents: $75.00 per every 75 guests.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $75.00.
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00.
(i) Johnson Park Gym with climbing wall (300 guest maximum):
(1) Rental fee:
(A) City residents: $150.00 per every 75 guests.
(B) Nonresidents: $175.00 per every 75 guests.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $75.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/430
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00.
(j) Johnson Park party package (2 hours with youth center and 3 bouncy houses):
(1) Rental fee (maximum 75 guests):
(A) City residents: $150.00.
(B) Nonresidents: $200.00.
(2) Refundable security deposit:
(A) City residents: $75.00.
(B) Nonresidents: $100.00.
(3) Climbing wall addition: $100.00.
(4) Rental cancellation fee (with less than 14 day notice): $25.00.
(k) Park event permit (organized events larger than 75 people): $100.00 per event per
day.
(l) Park event deposit (refunded after confirmation of park condition): $150.00 per
event.
(m) Park alcohol permits (excludes Johnson Park Youth Center, Agnes Howe, Huber Park
Stadium and Huber Park Community Building):
(1) Parties of 50 or less: $100.00.
(2) Parties of 51 to 100: $200.00.
(3) Parties of more than 100: $500.00.
ARTICLE 5.000 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 5.001 Building permits
(a) New single-family residential and residential additions:
(1) Building permit fee: $0.15 per square foot ($100.00 minimum).
(2) Electrical permit fee: $0.05 per square foot ($40.00 minimum).
(3) Plumbing permit fee: $0.05 per square foot ($40.00 minimum).
(4) Mechanical permit fee: $0.05 per square foot ($40.00 minimum).
(5) Plan review fee: $75.00 per structure.
(6) Technology fee: $10.00 per each permit.
(b) New commercial and commercial additions:
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/430
(1) Building permit fee: $0.20 per square foot ($250.00 minimum).
(2) Electrical permit fee: $0.10 per square foot ($60.00 minimum).
(3) Plumbing permit fee: $0.10 per square foot ($60.00 minimum).
(4) Mechanical permit fee: $0.10 per square foot ($60.00 minimum).
(5) Plan review fee: $250.00 ($0.10 per sq. ft over 3,000 sq. ft.).
(6) Technology fee: $25.00 per each permit.
(c) Residential remodel (single-family, duplexes, triplexes) + $10.00 technology fee: $10.00 per estimated
value ($50.00 minimum).
(d) Apartment renovations + $10.00 technology fee: $75.00 per unit.
(e) Commercial remodeling + $10.00 technology fee: $15.00 per estimated value ($100.00 minimum).
(f) Inspection/reinspection fee: $40.00 per inspection.
(g) Inspections after normal hours: $100.00 per hour.
(h) Work without a permit - first offense: 2 x the calculated permit fee.
(i) Work without a permit - second and subsequent offense: 3 x the calculated permit fee and charges filed in
municipal court.
Sec. 5.002 Electrical permits (flat fee)
(a) Residential remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $40.00.
(b) Commercial remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $60.00.
(c) HVAC electric hook-up: $20.00.
(d) “T” pole: $20.00.
(e) Meter loop: $40.00.
(f) Reinspection fee: $50.00 per inspection.
(g) Inspection fee/after hours: $100.00 per hour.
(h) Work without a permit - first offense: 2 x the calculated permit fee.
(i) Work without a permit - second and subsequent offense: 3 x the calculated permit fee and charges filed in
municipal court.
Sec. 5.003 Mechanical permits (flat fee)
(a) Residential remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $40.00.
(b) Commercial remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $60.00.
(c) HVAC change out: $20.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/430
(d) HVAC change out > 2,000 CFM: $40.00.
(e) Reinspection fee: $50.00 per inspection.
(f) Inspection fee/after hours: $100.00 per hour.
(g) Work without a permit - first offense: 2 x the calculated permit fee.
(h) Work without a permit - second and subsequent offense: 3 x the calculated permit fee and charges filed in
municipal court.
Sec. 5.004 Plumbing permits (flat fee)
(a) Residential remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $40.00.
(b) Commercial remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $60.00.
(c) Apartment remodel + $5.00 technology fee: $75.00.
(d) Yard line repair- residential gas (gas test): $40.00.
(e) Reinspection fee: $50.00 per inspection.
(f) Inspection fee/after hours: $100.00 per hour.
(g) Work without a permit - first offense: 2 x the calculated permit fee.
(h) Work without a permit - second and subsequent offense: 3 x the calculated permit fee and charges filed in
municipal court.
Sec. 5.005 Business license and associated fees
(a) Coin-operated business license: $5,000.00.
(b) Coin-operated machine permit: $500.00 per machine.
(c) Coin-operated occupational tax: $15.00 per machine.
(d) Operating without a machine permit: $500.00 plus machine permit.
(e) Adult business license: $500.00 per year.
(f) Adult business reinspection fee: $50.00 per inspection.
Sec. 5.006 Miscellaneous permits and fees (flat fee)
(a) Accessory structure less than 200 square feet: No cost.
(b) Accessory structure 200 square feet or more: $0.10 per square foot ($50.00 minimum).
(c) Alarm permit (registration): $35.00.
(d) False intrusion alarm 4–6: $50.00 each alarm.
(e) False intrusion alarm 7–9: $75.00 each alarm.
(f) False intrusion alarm 10 +: $100.00 each alarm.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/430
(g) Alcohol permit: TBD; 1/2 state fee.
(h) Certificate of occupancy inspection (CSI) commercial (inspection is performed if the water account is
switched from one business/tenant to another. Includes zoning verification): $50.00.
(i) Certificate of occupancy inspection (CSI) residential (inspection is performed if the residence was vacant
for 6 months or more): $20.00.
(j) Demolition permit (cash bond between $100.00 and $500.00 required): $50.00.
(k) Driveway/ROW permit (no charge if associated with residential or commercial site plan approval): $40.00.
(l) Fence permit (residential or commercial):
(1) Under 7': No cost.
(2) 7' and over: $40.00 (7 foot and up; permit required).
(m) Residential roof permit: $40.00.
(n) Commercial roof permit: $60.00.
(o) RV/manufactured home park: $400.00.
(p) RV/manufactured home park additions or alterations: $25.00 per space.
(q) Moving permit: $75.00 + $65.00 escort fee.
(r) Pool permit (above ground): $50.00.
(s) Pool permit (in-ground): $100.00.
(t) Contractor registration fee + $5.00 technology fee: $95.00 per year.
(u) Electrical contractor only registration fee + $5.00 technology fee (Texas Occupations Code 1305.201):
$0.00.
(v) Plumbing contractor only registration fee + $5.00 technology fee (Texas Occupations Code 1305.551):
$0.00.
(w) Right-of-way (excludes cell nodes): $50.00.
(x) Facelift program (voluntary demolition agreement): At cost tipping/landfill fees.
(y) Code variance (nonzoning) + $15.00 technology fee: $50.00.
(z) Oil, gas, disposal or injection well drilling application fee: $250.00.
(aa) Oil, gas, disposal or injection well drilling permit: $500.00.
Sec. 5.007 Shipping, cargo, and/or storage containers
(a) Temporary shipping or cargo and nonsteel storage containers: $20.00.
(b) Permanent shipping or cargo and nonsteel storage containers: $20.00.
Sec. 5.008 Sign permits
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/430
(a) Banner/portable sign (approved banner/portable signs shall be displayed for a maximum of 60 days from
the date of issuance.): $25.00.
(b) New sign or to reface a sign + $5.00: $40.00.
(c) Technology fee (per square foot of the outer dimension of surface area, rounded up to the nearest dollar): +
$0.12 per sq. ft.
Sec. 5.009 Site plan review fees
(a) Planning and development:
(1) New apartment and apartment addition + $15.00 technology fee: $150.00.
(2) New commercial and commercial additions + $15.00 technology fee: $150.00.
(b) Fire department:
(1) New apartment and apartment addition + $15.00 technology fee: $100.00.
(2) New commercial and commercial additions + $15.00 technology fee: $100.00.
Sec. 5.010 Subdivision fees
(a) Administratively approved plat + $15.00 technology fee: $250.00 + $10.00 per lot.
(b) Amend plat + $15.00 technology fee: $250.00.
(c) Plat filing fee + $15.00 technology fee: County filing fee.
(d) Plat variance + $15.00 technology fee: $100.00.
(e) Replats + $15.00 technology fee: $250.00 + $10.00 per lot.
(f) Subdivision plat – final + $15.00 technology fee: $100.00.
(g) Subdivision plat – preliminary + $15.00 technology fee: $150.00.
Sec. 5.011 Zoning fees
(a) Special use permit + $15.00 technology fee: $150.00.
(b) Rezoning request + $15.00 technology fee: $150.00.
(c) Planned developments + $15.00 technology fee: $200.00.
(d) Zoning variance + $15.00 technology fee: $75.00.
(e) Zoning notices: $1.00 per mailed notice.
(f) Notices in newspaper: $75.00.
Sec. 5.012 Wide format printing (36" wide)
(a) Black and white: $5.00 per every 24" length.
(b) Color: $10.00 per every 24" length.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/430
(c) 1:400 scale city map: $10.00 per page.
(d) 1:600 scale city map: $8.00 per page.
(e) 1:800 scale city map: $6.00 per page.
(f) Small city map set: $200.00 per set.
(g) Large city map set: $400.00 per set.
ARTICLE 6.000 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 6.001 In general
(a) Accident report: $6.00 per report.
(b) Applicant finger printing: $10.00 per set.
(c) Police report less than 25 pages: $5.00.
(d) Police report 25 pages or more: $0.25 per page.
(e) Marked police unit: $25.00 per hour.
(f) Off-duty police officer 3 hrs minimum and work must be approved by the chief: $40.00 per hour.
ARTICLE 7.000 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
Sec. 7.001 Collection
(a) Residential:
(1) Month base fee: $25.50.
(2) Additional polycart for curbside service accounts: $25.50 per month.
(b) Commercial:
(1) 1-1/2 yd container: $25.50 per month per container.
(A) Additional pickup per week: $25.50 per month.
(2) 3 yd container: $46.50 per month per container.
(A) Additional pickup per week: $46.50 per month.
(c) Unscheduled requested pickup: $31.00 per request.
Sec. 7.002 Roll-off service
(a) Residential:
(1) Person requesting the roll-off must match the name on the utility bill at the address where the
roll-off will be used. Churches and registered nonprofits will be charged the residential rate.
Addresses without active utility accounts will be charged the commercial rate.
(2) Set fee: $50.00.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/430
(3) Daily fee for days 0–14: $0.00.
(4) Daily fee for day 15+: $10.00 per day.
(5) Pull fee: $50.00.
(6) Disposal fee: $50.00 per ton.
(7) Tires with wheels: $5.00 per set.
(8) Noncompliance fee: $100.00.
(b) Commercial:
(1) Set fee: $200.00.
(2) Daily fee: $10.00 per day.
(3) Disposal fee: $50.00 per ton.
(4) Pull fee: $150.00.
(5) Re-set fee: $100.00.
(6) Tires with wheel: $5.00 per set.
(7) Noncompliance fee: $100.00.
Sec. 7.003 Tipping fee
Solid waste dropped off at the transfer station): $50.00 per ton.
Sec. 7.004 Vector control fee
Account per month: $2.00.
ARTICLE 8.000 UTILITIES
Sec. 8.001 Water deposits
(a) Residential:
(1) 3/4" to 1" meter: $75.00.
(2) 1-1/2" meter: $100.00.
(3) 2" meter: $150.00.
(b) Commercial:
(1) 3/4" to 1" meter: $100.00.
(2) 1-1/2" meter: $150.00.
(3) 2" meter: $225.00.
Sec. 8.002 Water tap fees
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/430
(a) 3/4" meter: $1,000.00.
(b) 1" meter: $1,300.00.
(c) 1-1/2" meter: $1,600.00.
(d) 2" meter: $2,000.00.
(e) Water meter installations larger than 2" or with a nonstandard meter box will be charged at: Cost + 15%.
Sec. 8.003 Water meter downsize fee
(a) 1", 1-1/2" or 2" downsized to 3/4": $750.00.
(b) 1-1/2" or 2" downsized to 1": $950.00.
(c) 2" downsized to 1-1/2": $1,200.00.
(d) 3" or larger downsized: Cost plus 15%.
Sec. 8.004 Water rates
(a) Class A and B:
(1) Monthly minimum rate:
(A) 3/4" meter: $16.50 per month base fee.
(B) 1" meter: $17.74.
(C) 1-1/2" meter: $22.69.
(D) 2" meter: $27.64.
(E) 3" meter: $43.31.
(F) 4" meter: $63.94.
(G) 6" + meter: $117.56.
(2) Rate per 1,000 gallons of consumption: $3.20.
(3) Class A and B customers located outside of the city limits requiring city water service will pay
a rate of 150% the current rate for in city customers.
(b) Class C: Class C industrial customers (absent specific terms of a particular water supply or other mutually
approved contract terms).
(1) Rate per 1,000 gallons of consumption per water source.
(A) City system water (potable): $3.20 per 1,000 gallons.
(B) City well water (potable): $2.33 per 1,000 gallons.
(C) City effluent (nonpotable): $1.17 per 1,000 gallons.
(D) CRMWA raw surface water (nonpotable): $1.25 per 1,000 gallons.
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/430
(E) CRMWA well water (nonpotable): $2.36 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Class C customers located outside of the city limits requiring city water service will pay a rate
of: 150% the current rate for in city customers.
Sec. 8.005 Sewer rates
(a) Class A residential (metered consumption will be averaged over the months of January, February and
March to calculate the consumption amount for residential customers):
(1) Month base fee: $17.50.
(2) Rate per 1,000 gallons of metered consumption: $3.10.
(b) Class B commercial/industrial customers (metered consumption for commercial customers shall be the
actual water consumption recorded each month for the purpose of water billing):
(1) Month base fee: $17.50.
(2) Rate per 1,000 gallons of metered consumption: $3.10.
Sec. 8.006 Additional utility service fees
(a) After hours connection fee: $50.00.
(b) Connect fees: $25.00.
(c) Damaged water meter: Cost of meter; damage due to customer tampering.
(d) Damaged ERT (encoder receiver transmitter): Cost of ERT; damage due to customer
tampering.
(e) Fire hydrant meter base monthly fee: $100.00.
(f) Fire hydrant meter deposit: $500.00.
(g) Late fee: $25.00.
(h) Lock fee: $25.00.
(i) Plugged/pulled meter: $75.00.
(j) Reconnect fee: $25.00.
(k) Re-read fee: $20.00.
(l) Return check and NSF electronic draft fee: $30.00.
(m) Return trip fee: $20.00.
(n) Transfer fee: $20.00.
(o) Unauthorized usage fee (customer turns water back on to avoid the afterhours charge): $75.00.
ARTICLE 9.000 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE PROW
7/13/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/430
Sec. 9.001 Right-of-way fees
(a) Application fees (certificate of insurance required):
(1) Application (5 nodes): $500.00.
(2 Additional nodes in application: $250.00 per node.
(3) Node support pole: $1,000.00 per support pole.
(b) Annual and monthly rates:
(1) Node (annual): $250.00 per node.
(2) Node pole collocation (annual): $20.00 per pole.
(3) Service pole attachment (annual): $20.00 per pole.
(4) Transport facility (monthly): $28.00 per node.
(Ordinance O-008-18 adopted 9/18/18)