CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BROWNWOOD, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted August 28, 2007 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BROWNWOOD, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Honorable Bert V. Massey, II 
Mayor 
____________ 
Darrell Haynes, Ward 1 
Ed McMillian, Ward 2 
Grady Chastain, Ward 3 
Dave Fair, Ward 4 
Charles Lockwood, Ward 5 
City Council 
____________ 
William P. Chesser 
Interim City Manager/City Attorney 
____________ 
Jan Kaase 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Brownwood, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, as supplemented through December 28, 1999, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1 LAND USE REGULATIONS INDEX LURi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Leesa A. Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Jan Kaase, City Secretary, William P. Chesser, City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brownwood, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brownwood, Texas. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brownwood, Texas. 2007. 
ORDINANCE NO. 07-13 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BROWNWOOD, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BROWNWOOD: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Brownwood, Texas" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 28, 2006, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. Where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 28, 2006, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on First Reading this the 22ND day of MAY , 2007. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on Second Reading this the 12TH day of JUNE , 2007. 
PASSED AND APPROVED on Third/Final Reading this the 12TH day of JUNE , 2007. 
/s/   
      BERT V. MASSEY, II, Mayor   SEAL 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      JAN KAASE, City Secretary   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      WILLIAM P. CHESSER, City Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-29 11-9-2010 Included 6 10-31 11-23-2010 Included 6 11-02 2-22-2011 Included 6 11-12 6-14-2011 Included 6 11-16  9- 6-2011 Included 7 11-26 11-22-2011 Included 7 11-30 12-13-2011 Included 7 12-06  4-10-2012 Included 7 12-07  4-24-2012 Included 7 12-10  6-12-2012 Included 7 12-18 10- 9-2012 Included 7 12-19 10- 9-2012 Included 7 12-27 10-23-2012 Included 7 12-28 10-23-2012 Included 7 86-49 10-28-1986 Included 8 13-10  3-12-2013 Included 8 13-25  8-13-2013 Included 8 13-30  9-24-2013 Included 8 13-31  9-24-2013 Included 8 14-05  3-10-2014 Included 8 15-04  2-10-2015 Included 9 15-06  4-14-2015 Omitted 9 16-01  1-12-2016 Included 9 16-20 11-22-2016 Included 10 17-02  1-10-2017 Included 10 17-03  3-14-2017 Included 10 18-04  2-27-2018 Included 10 18-12  5-22-2018 Included 10 18-14  7-10-2018 Included 10  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of Brownwood, Texas, as adopted at an election held on April 8, 1955, and amended on April 5, 1980, and in its entirety on January 20, 1996. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Adoption and amendments to a home-rule charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION: FORM OF GOVERNMENT, CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS 

§ 1. - Corporate name. 
    The City of Brownwood, Brown County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said city are herein established, or may hereafter be established, shall be a body politic, incorporated under, and known by, the name and style of "The City of Brownwood," with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop.), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996) 
§ 2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of The City of Brownwood shall be the same as have heretofore been established at the time of adoption of this Charter. The boundaries of The City of Brownwood may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods and in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by state law, or that may be hereafter provided by such law. Any territory annexed shall become a part of the city, and said land and its residents and future residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the city subject to state and local laws and regulations. Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of The City of Brownwood any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, or for the purpose of effectuating common boundary line agreements between The City of Brownwood and adjoining cities, the city council may, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of the city; said ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the city and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained, and when said ordinance has been duly passed the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said city, and from and after the entry of such ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said city, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said city, and the city shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the city as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #2), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
Editor's note- The annexations adopted after November 28, 1995, are on file in the city secretary's office. 
State Law reference- Boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 41 et seq. 
§ 3. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, appoint the city secretary, the city attorney, the judge of the municipal court and the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq. 
§ 4. - Powers of the city. 
    The City of Brownwood shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this Charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The city may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the federal government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety and convenience of the city or its inhabitants; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, welfare and government of the city, and for the performance of the functions thereof. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that The City of Brownwood shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers that now are or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the constitution or the laws of the State of Texas. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, and when not prescribed herein, in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council of The City of Brownwood. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072 et seq. 
§ 5. - Rights reserved. 
    All suits, taxes, penalties, fines, forfeiture[s], and all other rights, claims and demands, of every kind and character, which have accrued under the laws in favor of said city, heretofore in force governing the same, shall belong to and vest in said city and shall not abate by reason of the adoption of this Charter, and shall be prosecuted and collected for the use and benefit of The City of Brownwood and shall not be in any manner affected by the taking effect of this Charter; but as to all of such rights, the laws under which they shall have accrued shall be deemed to be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #2), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996) 
§ 6. - Special provision for damage suits. 
    Before the city shall be liable for damages for personal injuries of any kind, or for injuries to or destruction of property of any kind, the person injured, or the owner of the property injured or destroyed, or someone in his behalf, shall give the city manager notice in writing of such injury or destruction, duly verified, within sixty (60) days after the same has been sustained, stating in such written notice when, where and how the injury or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent thereof, the amount of damage sustained, the amount for which [the] claimant will settle, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number and at the time the claim is presented, and the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such injuries or destruction, and the names and addresses of the witnesses upon whom he relies to establish his claim, and, further, that suit be filed thereon within six (6) months from the date such injuries were received or destruction suffered; and a failure to notify the city manager within the time and manner specified herein and a failure to file thereon within six (6) months from the date such injuries were received or such destruction suffered, either or both, shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever. Further, this section shall not apply to the taking, damaging or destruction of property as guaranteed and covered by Section 17 of Article I of the Constitution of Texas [Tex. Constitution article I, § 17]; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to mean, infer or imply The City of Brownwood waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law or the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #2), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 7. - Extending city limits upon petition. 
    Whenever a majority of the qualified voters who are citizens of the State of Texas and inhabitants of any territory adjoining The City of Brownwood, as said territory may be designated by the council or in case there are no qualified voters in said territory, then when persons owning a majority of the land in area in said territory desires the annexation of such territory to Brownwood, they may present a written petition to that effect to the council and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters, or in case there are no qualified voters said affidavit shall be to the effect that there are no qualified voters in said territory and that the persons signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory, and thereupon the council at regular session held not sooner than twenty days after the presentation of said petition may by ordinance annex such territory to Brownwood and thenceforth the said territory shall be a part of said city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all of the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of said city. 
§ 8. - Extending limits by action of the council. 
    The council shall have the power to provide for the extension of the boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said city in accordance with the terms of applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 84-48, 8-14-1984) 
State Law reference- Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.021 et seq. 
§ 9. - Platting of property. 
    Should any property situated within the city limits, as herein established or as may hereafter be established or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of The City of Brownwood, as herein established or as may hereinafter be established, be hereafter platted into blocks and lots, and the owner or owners of said property shall comply with all of the provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
§ 10. - Eminent domain. 
    The city shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas. In all cases where the city seeks to exercise the power of eminent domain, it may be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of property of railroad corporations in this state, the city taking the position of the railroad corporation in any such case. The city may also exercise the power of eminent domain in any other manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing body of the city. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess this power of condemnation for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
State Law reference- Right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001 et seq. 
§ 11. - Street powers. 
    The City of Brownwood shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places of all obstructions and all fruit stands, show cases and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of said streets and sidewalks. 
§ 12. - Street improvements. 
    The City of Brownwood shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, repaving, raising, draining, or otherwise. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of all utility pipes, lines, wires, or other property. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Street improvements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 313.001 et seq. 
§ 13. - Peace and good order. 
    Said city shall have the power: 
a.  To establish and regulate public pounds and to regulate, restrain and/or prohibit the running at large of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, geese, chickens, pigeons, ducks and all other domestic animals, birds and fowl and to authorize the restraining, impounding and sale of the same for the cost of the proceedings and the penalty incurred, and to order their disposal or destruction when they cannot be sold, and to impose penalties upon the owner thereof for the violation of any ordinances regulating or prohibiting the same, and to tax, regulate, restrain and prohibit the running at large of dogs, and to authorize their disposal or destruction, and impose penalties on the owners or keepers thereof. 
b.  To provide for the issuance of permits for erecting all buildings, for the inspection of the construction of all buildings in respect to safety, proper wiring for electric lights and other electric appliances, as well as piping for gas, flues, chimneys, plumbing and sewer connections, and to make and enforce proper ordinances and regulations in regard thereto. 
c.  To require the construction and determine the efficiency and regulate the safety of all exits and fire escapes on and in all public buildings, office buildings, hotels, department houses, roominghouses, hospitals, theaters, and store buildings within said city and to enact and enforce all ordinances and resolutions necessary to regulate the safety thereof, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction within the city limits, and, to the extent provided by law, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of this city. 
d.  To provide for the enforcement of all ordinances enacted by it, by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount prescribed by the statutes of the State of Texas applicable to home-ruled corporations. 
e.  To provide for a sanitary sewer system and water system and to require, by ordinance, property owners to connect their premises with such sewage and water systems; to provide for fixing a lien against any property owner's premises who fails or refuses to make sanitary sewer and water connections and to charge the cost against such owner and make it a personal liability; and to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections or water connections; and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for sewerage and water service, providing ordinances, rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
f.  The council shall have the right, by ordinance, to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash and rubbish within The City of Brownwood, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for the removal of garbage, trash and rubbish, providing rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
g.  To establish and maintain the city police department, prescribe the qualifications and duties of policemen and regulate their conduct. 
h.  To provide for establishing and maintaining the fire department of the city. 
i.  It may require railway companies owning lines in the city to place and maintain proper lights and electric signals at street crossings and also watchmen when deemed by the council necessary for the public safety. 
j.  To prohibit or regulate the keeping or harboring of livestock, hogs, horses, mules or other domestic livestock, chickens, birds or other type of fowl, reptiles or amphibians, or any wild animal and to prohibit any of the same from running loose within the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 1(Prop. #2), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Power to provide for the good government, peace and order of the city, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 51.001, 51.072. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 

§ 14. - Municipal government. 
    The City of Brownwood shall be divided into five (5) wards. The council shall have power to change the boundaries of the wards from time to time as it shall deem expedient so that there shall be approximately an equal number of electors in each ward. 
    The governing body of the city shall be composed of the mayor and five (5) councilpersons. Each councilperson shall reside in a different ward. All of them shall hold their office for the term of four (4) years and until the election and qualification of their successors. The councilpersons shall be elected in odd-numbered years; two councilpersons and the mayor shall be elected in even-numbered years. The mayor and the councilpersons shall be elected by the direct ballot of the entire city. 
    Upon the adoption of this amended section, councilpersons then elected or serving shall complete the terms for which they were elected. The council shall promptly divide the city into five (5) wards and shall appoint a person to fill the new vacancy who shall serve until the next regular election for such councilperson as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 97-34, 8-12-1997) 
§ 15. - Qualifications of councilpersons and mayor. 
    The mayor and each councilperson shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, a resident of The City of Brownwood, and shall have resided in said city for one (1) year before the time of election at which he or she offers for election, and shall have the qualifications of elector in the city. He or she shall not be indebted to the city for back taxes or otherwise; shall not hold any other office of emolument and shall not be interested in the emoluments of any contract, job, work, or service of or with the city, nor shall he or she be the owner of stock in, or be an officer or director of any public service corporation within the city or without the city, but serving inhabitants in the city, nor shall he or she be the owner or proprietor of any public service utility of the city. Any such officer of the city ceasing to possess any of the qualifications herein required, shall forfeit his or her office or position, and any contract with the city in which any officer or employee of the city shall, or may be, or become interested, may be declared void by the council. Each councilperson shall reside within the ward for which he or she offers for election and if he or she shall cease to reside in that ward, his or her office shall become vacant; provided, however, that any person with the above qualifications, except as to residence, who shall have been a resident for a period of not less than one (1) year immediately preceding his or her election of any of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of said city, but which is annexed under the provisions of this Charter shall be eligible for said office. If the mayor or any councilperson fails to maintain the foregoing qualifications, or shall be absent from three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without valid excuse, the city council must, at its next regular meeting, declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1, 3), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Eligibility requirements for public office, V.T.C.A., Elections Code § 141.001. 
§ 16. - Compensation of mayor and councilpersons. 
    The city council shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation to be received by its members and the mayor for attendance at its meetings, not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting. They shall be entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when approved by the council, but shall not be entitled to any salary or reimbursement for personal staff. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #4), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 17. - Presiding officer: mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as the official head of the city government and shall be recognized by the courts for the purpose of serving civil processes and by the governor for military purposes, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the city council, but shall have no vote, except in case of a tie. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 18. - Duties of mayor pro tem. 
    When the councilpersons have qualified and been sworn in, they shall elect a mayor pro tem from their number, who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and if a vacancy should occur, shall become mayor until the next regular election, at which election a mayor shall be elected to fill the unexpired term. The mayor pro tem shall preside in the absence of the mayor, and shall do and perform all other acts that the mayor could perform if he or she were present. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 19. - Vacancies in the council. 
    A vacancy in the council shall be filled within thirty (30) days by a qualified voter residing in the ward in which the vacancy occurred by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council. Where more than one vacancy shall develop at any one time, within ten days a special election shall be called to be held not less than forty-five days or more than sixty days after the date of calling such election and any vacancy filled in the same manner as herein provided for regular elections, except that the candidate having a plurality shall be declared elected; provided, however, if such vacancies occur within ninety days of a regular election, then no special election shall be called. 
    In the event that there should be so many vacancies in the council that a quorum shall not remain, then the mayor or remaining councilpersons shall have power to call a special election for the purpose of electing councilpersons or a mayor to fill the unexpired terms. In the event that all councilpersons and the mayor shall be disqualified or shall resign, then the city secretary shall have authority to call an election to fill the unexpired terms. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1, 3), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 20. - Powers. 
    All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
a.  It shall make its own rules of procedure; shall enact all ordinances and resolutions and adopt all regulations for the conduct of the affairs of the city. 
b.  Remove from any office or position of employment in the city government, any officer or employee or member of any board or commission directly appointed by the city council under this Charter. 
c.  Establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
d.  Adopt the budget of the city. 
e.  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
f.  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
g.  Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
h.  Adopt and modify the zoning plan and the building code of the city and establish a planning and zoning commission. 
i.  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
j.  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
k.  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
l.  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
m.  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction within said limits. 
n.  Fix the salaries and compensation of the city officers and employees appointed by the city council. 
o.  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system and require property owners to connect their premises with the sewer system and water system, set fees and charges for such connections and provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer and water system connections or pay such fees and charges. 
p.  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. 
q.  Provide for an electrical system and set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for misuses of same. 
r.  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction, including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the city and provide for the improvement of same as provided by state law as now or hereafter amended. 
s.  Compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against The City of Brownwood. 
t.  Appoint the city manager, city attorney, city secretary and a judge of the municipal court. 
u.  Own, operate and appropriate funds for a municipal airport. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #3), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 21. - Licenses. 
    The council shall authorize the granting and issuance of licenses and shall direct the manner of issuing and regulating same, and fix the fees therefor, but no license shall be issued for a longer period than one year, and shall not be assignable, except by order of the council. 
§ 22. - Municipal utility service. 
    The council may, in its discretion, provide by ordinance, that all receipts from the municipally operated utilities shall be used for no other purpose than the extension, improvement, operation, maintenance, repair and betterment of such municipally owned utility systems, and provide for the pledging of any such receipts and revenues for the purpose of making any such improvements, and the payment of the principal, and providing an interest and sinking fund for any bonds issued therefor as provided for by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 23. - Contracts for services. 
    No contract shall ever be made which binds the city to pay for personal services to be rendered for any stated period of time, but all officers and employees of the city, other than the elective officers and civil service employees, shall be appointed and shall be subject to peremptory discharge, as in this Charter provided, and shall be paid compensation only to the date of discharge. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #23), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 24. - Salaries. 
    The council shall fix and determine the salaries and wages of all council appointive officers of the city, and shall provide for the payment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 25. - Removal of elective official. 
    Any elective official of the city may be removed for the same causes and in the same manner as county officers under the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 26. - Nepotism. 
    No person related within the second degree by affinity, or within the third degree by consanguinity to the mayor, the city manager, or any member of the city council shall be appointed to any office, position, or clerkship or other service of the city, except as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #3), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Nepotism prohibited, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 573.001 et seq. 
§ 27. - The city manager: appointment, term, qualifications. 
    The council shall appoint a city manager who shall have the powers and perform the duties as provided in this Charter. Neither the mayor nor any councilperson shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his term. The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term, but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. At the time of his/her appointment, he or she need not be a resident of the city or state, but during his/her tenure of office he/she shall reside within the city. The council shall set the salary and other compensation of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996) 
§ 28. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from office by the city manager or by any of his or her subordinates, nor give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately; provided, however, that the appointment of department heads shall be subject to confirmation by the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 29. - City secretary. 
    The council shall designate an officer of the city who shall be recommended by the city manager to serve as secretary of the council. The city secretary shall give notices of its meetings, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full, in a book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 30. - Meetings of the council. 
    The council shall meet at such times and places as may be provided by ordinance or resolution, but not less frequent than once a month. The council shall meet upon special call of the mayor or mayor pro tem. In the event they shall refuse to call the meeting after having been requested to do so, then any two of the councilpersons may call a meeting. A quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council shall be the mayor and three (3) councilpersons, or the mayor pro tem and three (3) councilpersons; provided, however, that if both the mayor and the mayor pro tem are absent, the four (4) remaining councilpersons must be present to constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 31. - The council to be judge of qualifications of its members. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members, and for such purpose, shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but the decision of the council in any such case shall be subject to review by the courts. 
§ 32. - Ordinances: publication, effective date, codifying. 
    In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the contracting of indebtedness, other than as approved in the budget, shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BROWNWOOD." 
    The caption or title of all ordinances carrying a penalty along with the penalty to be assessed shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in some newspaper published in The City of Brownwood and shall become effective the day following the date of the second aforesaid weekly publication. The city secretary shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the Charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. 
    No ordinance, unless it shall be declared to be an emergency measure and passed by a unanimous vote of the council, shall be passed finally on the day on which it shall be introduced. Any ordinance ordering an election for any purpose, or declaring the result of an election, or passed in pursuance of the result of any election, or putting into effect the result of any election, may be finally passed at the same meeting at which it is introduced, upon one reading. 
    Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
    All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council shall, before they take effect, be submitted to the mayor, and if he approves thereof, he shall sign the same, and such as he shall not approve return to the council with his objection thereon. Upon return unapproved by the mayor of any ordinance or resolution, the vote by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered, and if the same shall pass by a four-fifths vote of all the councilpersons elected it shall be in force. And, if the mayor shall fail to sign or veto same in three days after its passage it shall be in force. In the absence or in the event of the disability of the mayor, the veto power shall be exercised by the mayor pro tem. Every ordinance shall take effect at the time indicated therein, with the exception that no ordinance shall be effective until approved by the mayor, or until three (3) days have passed after the passage of said ordinance in the event the mayor fails to approve or veto said ordinance, or until the council overrides the mayor's veto, or until the day following the date of the second weekly publication in the event the ordinance is required to be published. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #5), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 33. - Recording of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance or resolution, upon its becoming effective, shall be recorded in a permanently bound book, kept for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor or presiding member of the council, and the person exercising the duties of city secretary. 
§ 34. - Emergency measures. 
    An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, or safety, or providing for the usual daily operation of a municipal department in which the emergency shall be stated at the conclusion of the ordinance or resolution. Ordinances or resolutions appropriating money not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars, and resolutions for the payment of wages, salaries and regular bills, may be passed even without an emergency clause, but no order, ordinance or resolution making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise, or other special privileges, or regulating the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. 
§ 35. - Investigation by the council. 
    The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, or officer of the city, elected or appointed, and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by [a] fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #3), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 36. - Audit and examination. 
    The council shall cause an audit of the books of accounts and of all records and transactions of the administration of the affairs of the city; such audit shall be made annually, embracing each fiscal year, and shall be made by a competent public accountant, or certified public accountant, holding a valid permit to practice public accountancy in the State of Texas. Such accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government. 
    The duty of the accountant shall include the certification of all financial statements required in sections 37, 45c., and 126 of this Charter. Such statements shall include a general balance sheet showing summaries of income and expenditures, condition of the treasury and also comparisons in proper classification with the last previous audit. Such summaries shall be published in some newspaper published in Brownwood one time within twenty days after the completion of such audit. 
State Law reference- Audit of city finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq. 
§ 37. - Accounting procedure. 
    The city manager shall devise and maintain for The City of Brownwood an accounting procedure adequate to record in detail all transactions affecting the acquisition, custodianship and disposition of anything of value, including cash receipts, credit transactions and disbursements. He shall present the facts periodically to the council and to the public in such summaries and analytical schedules in detailed support thereof as the council shall deem necessary to show the full effect of such transactions for each fiscal year upon the finances of the city and in relation to each department of the city government, including distinct summaries and schedules for each public utility owned and operated. 
§ 38. - Payment of claims. 
    No warrant for the payment of any claim shall be issued by the city, unless such claim shall be evidenced by an itemized account, approved by the city manager, if affecting any department under his supervision, and audited and allowed by the council at a regular meeting. All warrants shall be signed and countersigned by any two persons authorized by the council. 
§ 39. - Contracts, purchases and sales. 
    All sales of city property, purchases made, and contracts executed by The City of Brownwood shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 40. - Council may require bonds. 
    In addition to any other provisions contained herein, the city council may require any city official, department director, or city employee, before entering upon their duties, to execute a good and sufficient bond with a surety company doing business in the State of Texas and approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 41. - Personal interest; conflict of interest. 
a.  No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or services, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee. Any knowing violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall be subject to removal from such office or position. Any violation of this section shall render the contract voidable at the discretion of the city council. 
b.  No member of the city council, the mayor, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature, shall participate in a vote or decision on a matter involving a business entity in which such officer has a substantial interest if it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on the matter would confer an economic benefit on the business entity. If the officer or a person related to the officer within the second degree of affinity or consanguinity has a substantial interest in the business entity that would be pecuniarily affected by an official action of the city council, the officer, if a member of the city council, shall file an affidavit with the city secretary, stating the nature and extent of the interest, and abstain from further participation in the matter. The terms used in this section shall be as defined in [V.T.C.A.,] Local Government Code ch. 171, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest of city officers and employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
§ 42. - Rearrangement and renumbering. 
    The council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections, and paragraphs of the Charter, or any amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
ARTICLE III. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

§ 43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-09, (Prop. #1), adopted May 13, 2008, repealed § 43, which pertained to chief of police [generally] and derived from Ord. No. 97-34, adopted Aug. 12, 1997. 
§ 44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-09, (Prop. #1), adopted May 13, 2008, repealed § 44, which pertained to qualifications of elected chief of police and derived from Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #9), Nov. 28, 1995/Jan. 20, 1996; and Ord. No. 96-1, adopted Jan. 23, 1996. 
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY MANAGER 

§ 45. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city under his jurisdiction, and to that end, he shall have power and shall be required to: 
a.  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and except as he may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department, provided that in departments not under the supervision of the city manager that the council shall designate who shall make appointments of employees and their removal. 
b.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
c.  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
d.  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable. 
e.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with this Charter, or state or federal laws. 
§ 46. - Absence of city manager. 
    To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the manager may designate, by letter filed with the city secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the city. The council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the city to perform the duties of the manager until he shall return or his disability shall cease, which appointment shall take precedence over the appointment by the city manager. 
§ 47. - Official bond. 
    The manager shall give an official bond in such sum as the council may fix or prescribe, payable to the mayor of Brownwood, and his successors in office, conditioned upon the faithful performance of duty and the correct accounting for all funds and property handled by him, to be approved by the council. Such bond shall be made by some reputable bonding or surety company doing business in the state, and the premiums shall be paid by the city. 
§ 48. - Departments under city manager. 
    All departments of the city government shall be under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 49. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city manager may, at any time with the approval of the council, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of the city manager and within the last three months of the budget year, the council may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. 
§ 50. - Division of purchases. 
    Under the city manager, there shall be established a division of purchases. The division of purchases, pursuant to rules and regulations established by ordinance, shall contract for purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials, and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the city government. The division of purchases shall also have power and shall be required to: 
a.  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials, and equipment required by the city government; 
b.  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, and equipment, and determine their quality, quantity, and conformance with specifications; 
c.  Have charge of such general storerooms and warehouses as the council may provide by ordinance; 
d.  Transfer to or between offices, departments, or agencies, or with the approval of the council, sell surplus, obsolete, or unused supplies, materials and equipment. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 

§ 51. - Municipal court created. 
    There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a municipal court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 52. - Municipal judge and clerk. 
    The judge or judges of said court shall be appointed by the city council, shall hold his or her office at the pleasure of the city council, shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council, shall be under the administrative direction of the city manager and said judge shall not be an elected official. The city secretary or an assistant city secretary shall be ex officio clerk of said court. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.004. 
§ 53. - Clerk of court. 
    The clerk of said court and his or her deputy shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the clerk of courts in issuing process of said courts and conducting the business thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal court clerk, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.010. 
§ 54. - Associate judge. 
    The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the appointment of one (1) or more judges to serve if the regular judge, the presiding judge, or an associate judge is temporarily unable to act. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 55. - Qualifications of judges. 
    Each judge of said court shall be a duly licensed attorney if some such suitable attorney is available. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§§ 56-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 

§ 64. - Appointment of city attorney. 
    There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the city attorney, who shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold his or her office at the pleasure of the city council, shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council, shall be under the administrative direction of the city manager and said city attorney shall not be an elected official. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #6), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 65. - Qualifications of city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall be a qualified attorney-at-law who is licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
§ 66. - Powers and duties of city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall be the chief legal adviser of the council, of all offices, departments and agencies and of all officers and employees in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He or she shall represent the city in all legal proceedings. It shall be his or her duty to perform all services incident to his or her position as may be required by statute, by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 

§ 67. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of The City of Brownwood shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 68. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The city manager, between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget, which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
a.  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
b.  A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds. 
c.  An analysis of property valuation. 
d.  An analysis of the tax rate. 
e.  Tax levies and tax collections, by years, for at least five (5) years. 
f.  General fund resources in detail. 
g.  Special fund resources in detail. 
h.  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity. 
i.  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support [the] summary [in subsection] (h) above. 
j.  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
k.  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
l.  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds. 
m.  The appropriation ordinance. 
n.  The tax levying ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq. 
§ 69. - Anticipated revenues compared with other years in budget. 
    In preparing the budget, the city manager shall place in parallel columns, opposite the several items of revenue, the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount of the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 70. - Proposed expenditures compared with other years. 
    The city manager, in the preparation of the budget, shall place in parallel columns, opposite the various items of expenditures, the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 71. - Budget a public record. 
    Upon completion of the budget and submission thereof to the city council, said budget shall become a public record open for inspection by any interested person. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 72. - Notice of public hearing on budget. 
    The city council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of The City of Brownwood a notice of the hearing, setting forth the time and place thereof, at least five (5) days before the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Notice by publication for budget hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.0065. 
§ 73. - Public hearing on budget. 
    At the time and place set forth in the notice required by section 72, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.006. 
§ 74. - Proceedings on budget after public hearing. 
    After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such proposed expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 75. - Vote required for adoption of budget. 
    The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the voting members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 76. - Date of final adoption of budget. 
    The budget shall be finally adopted no later than the first regularly scheduled city council meeting in September of each year or the beginning of the fiscal year, and should the city council fail to so adopt a budget, the then existing budget, together with necessary tax-levying and rate-setting ordinances and other appropriation ordinances, shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 77. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
    Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the city secretary and deposited with the public library. The final budget shall be printed or otherwise reproduced and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations as provided in the Open Records Act of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
§ 78. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 79. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and constitution of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 80. - Estimated expenditures shall not exceed estimated resources. 
    The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting or some other nationally accepted classification. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 81. - Other necessary appropriations. 
    The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall have been declared by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Emergency expenditure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009. 
§ 82. - Assessment and collection of taxes. 
a.  The appraisal of all property taxed by the city shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of all applicable state statutes, as now or hereafter amended. 
b.  Unless otherwise provided in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the assessment of all property taxes by the city shall be the duty of the tax assessor, who may be appointed by the city manager or contracted for by the city council; and the collection of all taxes due the city shall be the duty of the tax collector, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The tax collector, appointed by the city manager, shall give a surety bond for faithful performance of his or her duties, including compliance with all controlling divisions of the state law bearing on the functions of his or her office, in a sum fixed by the city council, but not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
c.  Provided, however, the city council shall have the authority to enter into a contract with the governing body of another unit or with the board of directors of an appraisal district for the other unit or the district to perform duties relating to the assessment or collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 83. - Power to tax. 
    The city council shall have the power, under the provisions of the state law, to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall also have the power to levy occupation taxes on such occupations as [are] consistent with the general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 84. - Property subject to tax; method of assessment. 
    The responsibility for appraisal of all property and preparation and submission of the appraisal roll shall be accomplished in compliance with the provisions of the property tax code of the State of Texas; provided, however, that all property within The City of Brownwood not expressly exempted by law shall be rendered for taxation in accordance with all applicable state statutes as now or hereafter amended, and such statutes shall control over the provisions of the city Charter in the event of conflict. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 85. - Alternative methods of equalizing or adjusting taxes. 
    The function of equalizing or adjusting the appraised or assessed taxable value of property taxed by the city shall be accomplished in compliance with all applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 86. - Taxes, when due and payable. 
    All taxes due The City of Brownwood shall be payable at the office of the city tax collector or by contractual agreement with the Brown County Appraisal District or other designee, and may be paid at any time after tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved. Except as otherwise provided by state statutes, taxes are due on receipt of the tax bill and are delinquent if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which imposed. Delinquent taxes accrue penalty, interest and collection fees according to a schedule prescribed by state statutes. Except as provided by state statutes, failure to send or receive the tax bill as required does not affect the validity of the tax, penalty, or interest, the due date, the existence of a tax lien, or any procedure instituted to collect a tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Tax bills, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 31.01; delinquency date, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 31.02. 
§ 87. - Tax liens. 
    The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or encumbrance upon the property as of January 1 upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property [upon] which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Tax liens, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 32.01 et seq. 
§ 88. - Issuance of bonds. 
    In accordance with the constitution of the State of Texas, and not contrary thereto, The City of Brownwood shall have the power to borrow money against the credit of the city for any public purpose that is not now nor hereafter prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city shall have the power to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants, and any other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized or may be authorized hereafter to cities by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 1331 et seq. 
§ 89. - Revenue bonds. 
    The City of Brownwood shall have the power to borrow money for such purposes as constructing, purchasing, improving, expansion of, or repair of public utilities, recreational facilities, or other facilities of self-liquidating municipal function not now or hereafter prohibited by the laws of the State of Texas; and to issue revenue bonds as evidence of the obligation so created. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties or interest therein acquired and the income therefrom, and these bonds shall never become a "debt of the city." The council shall have authority to provide for the terms and form of any purchase agreement, contract, mortgage, bond, or document, desired or necessary, for the issuance of revenue bonds, and the acquisition and operation of any such property or interest. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Anticipation notes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 1431.001 et seq. 
§ 90. - Execution and registration. 
    All bonds, warrants, and certificates of indebtedness shall be signed by the mayor, countersigned by the city secretary, and sealed with the official seal of the city, and forwarded to the attorney general of the State of Texas for approval and for registration by the comptroller of public accounts as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 91. - Bond register. 
    There shall be kept as a public record by the finance director a register showing all bonds, warrants, and certificates of indebtedness issued, the date, amount, rate of interest where payable, and the maturity contained thereon. When such indebtedness and/or its interest has been paid, that payment shall be recorded in said register. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 92. - Manner of issuance. 
    All bonds, warrants, or other indebtedness shall be issued in the manner provided by the general laws of the State of Texas. None of the same shall be deemed invalid because they are sold for less than par value and accrued interest. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 93. - Manner of retirement of indebtedness. 
    The council shall levy an annual tax on the real property and personal property in the city sufficient to pay the interest on and to provide the necessary sinking fund required by law on outstanding general obligation bonds of the city and shall deposit those funds in a separate account. These funds shall not be used for any other purpose than to retire such indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

§ 94. - Municipal elections. 
    The general city election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, as prescribed by the Texas Election Code, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., at which time the officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. The city council shall fix the place for holding such election. The city council may, by ordinance, order a special election, fix the place for holding same and provide all means for holding such special election. Notice of the general election shall be given in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Texas Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #8), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001. 
§ 95. - Official ballot. 
    The official ballot shall be drawn up by the city secretary and will contain the names of all candidates for office, except those who may have been withdrawn, deceased, or become ineligible. Names will be placed on the ballot without party designation, and position on the ballot will be determined by drawing. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #8), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 96. - Election of councilpersons. 
    At the regular municipal election, the candidate for any office who shall have received the majority of votes cast in such elections for the office for which he or she is a candidate shall be declared elected. 
    In the event that no candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for any one place at such election, the council shall, upon completion of the official canvass of the ballots, issue a call for a runoff election to be held in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Election Code. At such runoff election, the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes (or three (3) persons in case of a tie for second place) for any one place in the first election shall again be voted for. 
    The official ballot shall be prepared by the city secretary and the name of no person shall appear thereon unless he or she was a candidate for the place designated at said first election. 
    Names of the persons qualifying for such runoff election shall be printed on said official ballot in an order to be determined by the drawing of lots; provided, however, that any qualified runoff candidate may request that his or her name shall not appear on the official ballot at such runoff election, in which case, the candidate for such place standing next highest in the computation of votes shall be placed on the runoff ballot. 
    All runoff elections will be decided by plurality. In the event of a tie between the two (2) candidates for any office at said runoff election, they shall cast lots to determine who shall be elected to such office. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #1), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 97. - Laws governing city elections. 
    The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities who shall also have power to make regulations not inconsistent with this Charter or with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas. 
    All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections, including cancellation of elections in the event of uncontested races. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #8), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 98. - Conducting and canvassing elections. 
    The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council. The election judges shall conduct the election, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of Texas. In accordance with the provisions set forth in the Texas Election Code, the city council, after an election, shall meet, open returns, canvass and officially declare the results of the election as to candidates and questions and issue certificates of election to candidates elected as provided in the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #8), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 99. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of The City of Brownwood shall, before entering upon the duties of such elected or appointed office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #8), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Oath of office, Tex. Const. art. 16, § 1. 
ARTICLE IX. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

§ 100. - Initiative and referendum-Procedure. 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the council for adoption, and any ordinance or resolution passed by the council may be submitted to the people for repeal. In either event, the ordinance or resolution proposed to be adopted or repealed shall be set out in a written or printed instrument, which shall be filed with the person exercising the duties of city secretary, and at the time of filing such written or printed instrument, and attached thereto, there shall be filed a statement signed by not less than five (5) qualified voters of The City of Brownwood, stating that they have proposed such ordinance or resolution for adoption or repeal, as the case may be, before any signatures are procured to the petitions hereinafter provided for. In the event the ordinance or resolution is one proposed to be adopted, such electors shall be regarded as "the initiating committee," and in the event it is desired to repeal an ordinance or resolution already existing, such electors shall be regarded as "the referring committee." 
§ 101. - Initiative and referendum-Petitions. 
    Before any such ordinance or resolution may be submitted to the council for adoption or repeal, it shall be necessary that a petition signed by not less than four hundred (400) qualified voters within The City of Brownwood, stating that they have proposed such ordinance or resolution for adoption or repeal, as the case may be. All such petitions circulated for signatures shall be uniform in character and shall each have attached to the same an exact written or printed copy of the proposed ordinance or resolution sought to be adopted or repealed, and shall be filed with the person discharging the duties of city secretary within sixty (60) days from the filing of the statement hereinabove referred to. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil in his own handwriting, and shall place on the same, following his name, his street number of place of residence within the city. 
    The signatures to any such petition need not all be attached to the same paper, but to each paper there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers to such part of the petition and that each signature is genuine and that of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument. Within twenty (20) days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The city secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid, which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. 
§ 102. - Initiative and referendum-Hearing. 
    When signatures have been obtained in the number above provided for and the petition and statement have been filed with the person exercising the duties of city secretary, such officer shall submit all papers pertaining to such ordinance or resolution and its proposed initiation or reference to the council at its next regular meeting, and such officer shall mail to each of the members of such initiating or referring committee, a notice of the time of the next regular meeting of the council when such ordinance or resolution and its adoption or repeal shall be considered, or a time then set by the council for its consideration, which hearing and consideration shall be open to the public, and the public shall be permitted to present arguments for or against such proposed ordinance or resolution. 
§ 103. - Initiative and referendum-Amendment of petition. 
    An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city secretary shall, within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if the petition be still insufficient, he/she shall file his/her certificate to that effect in his/her office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his/her findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The findings of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
§ 104. - Initiative and referendum-Election. 
    After such presentation of the petition to them and public hearing, the council shall, within thirty days from the date of the submission of such petition, take final action upon the same by either adopting or rejecting the ordinance thus initiated by petition, or by either repealing or refusing to repeal the ordinance or resolution thus sought to be repealed, and in either event, the action of the council shall be noted in its minutes. If the council refuses to pass or to repeal the proposed ordinance or resolution, or passes the same in an amended form from that presented by the petition, or repeals only a part of such ordinance or resolution, instead of repealing the same in the manner set out in such petition or reference, then, in either event, such initiating committee, or such referring committee, or a majority thereof, may require that such ordinance or resolution, either in its original or amended form, be submitted to a vote of the electors for adoption or repeal, as the case may be. 
    When an ordinance or resolution proposed by petition is to be submitted to a vote of the electors for adoption or repeal, after the council has acted upon the same, as provided for in the preceding paragraph, then such initiating or referring committee, as the case may be, upon majority vote of such committees, shall certify their desire to have the same submitted for adoption or repeal not less than thirty (30) or more than sixty (60) days after the council shall have taken action on the same, and shall file such certificates and statement with the person exercising the duties of city secretary. 
    After receipt of such certificate and the certified copy of the proposed ordinance or resolution, the person discharging the duties of the city secretary shall present such certificate and certified copy of the proposed ordinance or resolution to the council at its next regular meeting. If any election is to be held at a date not more than ninety days nor less than thirty (30) days after such meeting of the council, then such ordinance or resolution proposed for adoption or repeal shall be submitted by the council to a vote of the electors at such election to be held, but if no such election is to be held within such time, then the council shall provide for submitting such proposed ordinance or resolution for adoption or rejection to the electors at a special election to be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days thereafter. 
§ 105. - Initiative and referendum-Ballot. 
    The form of ballot for use in any election held for the adoption of any initiated ordinance shall state the title of the ordinance and contain a succinct statement of its nature and purpose and below such statement on separate lines there shall be printed the words: FOR THE ORDINANCE-AGAINST THE ORDINANCE. If a majority of the electors voting in such election shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance of the city when the result of such election shall have been declared. 
    The form of ballot for use in an election held for the repeal of any referred ordinance or resolution shall state the title of the ordinance or resolution and contain a succinct statement of the nature and purpose of the ordinance or resolution sought to be repealed, and below such statement, in separate lines, there shall be printed the words: FOR THE REPEAL OF THE ORDINANCE (OR RESOLUTION). AGAINST THE REPEAL OF THE ORDINANCE (OR RESOLUTION). If a majority of the electors voting in such election shall vote in favor of the repeal of such ordinance or resolution, then the same shall be considered repealed when the result of the election shall have been declared; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall affect the manner of calling elections to determine whether or not franchises shall be granted. 
§ 106. - Recall [in] general. 
    Any elective officer may be removed from office by recall. 
§ 107. - Recall procedure. 
    Any five electors of The City of Brownwood may make and file with the city secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer or officers whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. They shall be known as the "recall committee." The city secretary shall thereupon deliver to the recall committee making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The city secretary shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks, when issued by the city secretary, shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the council, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks, when issued, shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The city secretary shall enter in a record to be kept in his office the names of the recall committee to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said committee. 
§ 108. - Recall petitions. 
    The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city secretary within thirty days after the filing of the affidavit required in section 107, and it must be signed by at least four hundred (400) qualified electors of the city, and shall conform to the provisions of section 107 herein. No petition papers shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the city secretary as required in section 107 herein. 
§ 109. - Recall election. 
    The city secretary shall at once examine the recall petition, and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the Charter, he shall, within five (5) days, submit it to the council with his certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after such notice, the council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the petition has been presented to the council at the same time as any municipal election held within such period; but if no such municipal election be held within such period, the council shall call a special election to be held within the time aforesaid. 
§ 110. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted, "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
b.  Immediately below each such question, there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of  (name of person)  ." 
"Against the recall of  (name of person)  ." 
§ 111. - Results of recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office immediately upon the canvassing of the votes of the election by the council and the vacancy shall be filled by the council as in other vacancies. 
§ 112. - Limitations on recall. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or a councilperson, or any other elective officer, within six months after he or she takes office, nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after such election. 
§ 113. - District judge may order election. 
    Should the council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this article, when all the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this article of the Charter, it shall be the duty of the district judge of the district of which Brown County is a part, to order such election when the petitioning electors shall present evidence to him that they have complied with the provisions of this article and that the council has failed or refused to call such election. 
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

§ 114. - Ownership of public utilities. 
    Said city shall have the power to buy, own or construct, and to maintain and operate, within or without the city limits, complete water system or systems, gas or electric lighting or power plant or plants, telephone or telegraph systems, sewer systems, sewage plants, fertilizing plants, abattoirs, municipal railway terminals, airports, local bus systems, or any other public service utility, and to demand and receive compensation for services furnished by the city for unsafe purposes or otherwise, and to have the power to regulate, by ordinance, the charges and the collection of compensation for such services. Said city shall have the power to acquire by lease, purchase or condemnation, the property of any person, firm or corporation now or hereafter owning or conducting any such business, for the purpose of operating such public utilities, and for the purpose of distributing such services within or without the city, or any portion thereof. In case the city desires to acquire any such public utility and the owner or owners of same and the city cannot agree upon the price to be paid by the city, a commission of three persons to fix the price of the same may be formed in the following manner, to-wit: The city to appoint one such commissioner, the owner or owners of such public utility to appoint one commissioner, and the two to select a third, provided that no member of such commission shall be a property taxpayer of the city or shall own any interest or stock in such public utility or be in the employ of the same. In the event the owner of such public utility shall fail or refuse, within twenty days after being notified by the city to do so, to agree to such mode of arriving at a valuation to be paid by the city or to appoint a commissioner, then upon application by the city to the county judge of Brown County, Texas, he shall appoint three commissioners and proceedings shall be had in all respects as in cases of condemnation of rights-of-way by railway companies in this state, the city standing in the attitude of the railway company, provided appeal may be had to the courts of proper jurisdiction from the decision of the aforesaid commission appointed by the parties at interest themselves, provided that, in estimating the price to be paid for such utility so to be taken over by the city, the value of its physical properties only shall be considered, and the value of its franchise shall not be considered. 
§ 115. - Manufacture or purchase of public utility production. 
    Said city shall have the authority to manufacture electricity, or gas or any other commodity that may be needed or used by it or the public for lighting or heating purposes; to make contracts with any person, firm or corporation for the purchase of gas, water, electricity, or any other commodity or articles of like nature used by it or the public; and to sell the same to the public in such manner as may be determined by the governing authority. 
§ 116. - Right to operate and maintain public utility acquired, exclusive. 
    In the event said city shall build or shall acquire any waterworks system, electric light or power system, gas system, street or public railway system, or any other public service utility to operate and maintain for the purpose of serving the inhabitants of said city the right to operate and maintain such public service utility so acquired shall be exclusive, provided the city shall have the right and authority to grant franchises to any utility company which is serving the citizens of Brownwood at the date of the adoption of this Charter. 
§ 117. - Funds for acquisition of any public utility; security for same, etc. 
    Should the city determine to acquire any public utility by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, as herein provided, said city shall have the power to obtain funds for the purpose of acquiring said utility and paying the compensation therefor, by issuing bonds or notes or other evidence of indebtedness, and may secure the same by fixing a lien upon the property constituting the public utility so acquired, and said security shall apply alone to said property so acquired and the revenues thereof as provided for by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
§ 118. - Franchises for use of streets. 
    Said city shall have the power and authority to grant franchises for the use and occupancy of streets, avenues, alleys, and any and all public grounds belonging to or under the control of the city. No telegraph, telephone, electric light or power plant, street railway, interurban railway, steam railway, gas company, waterworks, water systems, taxicabs, bus companies intercity and intracity or any other character of public utility shall be granted any franchise or permit to the use of any street, avenue, alley, highway or grounds of the city without first making application to, and obtaining the consent of, the governing authority thereto, expressed by ordinance, and upon paying such compensation as may be prescribed and upon such condition as may be provided for such ordinance, and before such ordinance proposing to make any grant or franchise or privilege to any applicant to use or occupy any street, avenue, alley or any public ground belonging to or under control of the city, shall become effective. Publication of said ordinance, as finally proposed to be passed, shall be made in a newspaper published in The City of Brownwood for two days, or once if in a weekly paper; which publication shall be made at the expense of the applicant desiring said grant and said proposed ordinance shall not be thereafter changed unless republished as in the first instance, nor shall any such ordinance take effect or become a law or contract or vest any rights in the applicant therefor until after the expiration of twenty days from the last publication of said ordinance, as aforesaid. Pending the time such ordinance may become effective, it is hereby made the duty of the governing authority of the city to order an election, if requested so to do, by written petition, signed by at least five hundred (500) legally qualified voters, at which election the qualified voters of said city shall vote for or against the proposed grant, as set forth in detail by the ordinance conferring the right and privileges upon the applicant therefor. Such election shall be ordered not less than thirty days nor more than sixty days from the date of filing said petition, and if, at said election, the majority of votes cast shall be for the granting of such franchise or privilege, said ordinance and the making of said proposed grant shall thereupon become effective, but if the majority of the votes cast at said election shall be against the granting of such franchise or privilege, such ordinance shall be ineffective and the making of such proposed grant be null and void. 
    No franchise shall ever be granted by the governing authority, other than for an indeterminate franchise or a franchise for a period of years not exceeding twenty, provided that, if the council thinks it for the best interests of the city that a franchise be granted for more than twenty years, then it may submit such proposed franchise to a vote of the electors at a special election called under the provisions of the Charter. No franchise granted as the result of such an election shall ever be for a period of time exceeding forty years. 
§ 119. - Rental charge or license fee. 
    The city shall have the right and power to make a reasonable charge for the use of its streets, alleys and public ways by any public utility in the conduct of its business, not to exceed the amount permitted by state law. 
§ 120. - May contract for service. 
    The governing body of the city shall have the right to contract with any person, firm or corporation using or occupying the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the city under any franchise or privilege for service to be rendered the city in lieu or in payment of any franchise, rental or license tax, in whole or in part, provided no such contract shall be valid for a longer period of time than one year. 
§ 121. - Right of regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
a.  To repeal the same by ordinance, at any time, for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
b.  To require an adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
c.  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
d.  (1)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility, provided that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, [or] their successor or successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance. 
(2)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
e.  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
f.  To, at any time, require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
§ 122. - Right to regulate charges, etc., of holder of franchises. 
    The city shall have the right and the power to determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares and rates, after reasonable notice, of any person, firm or corporation now exercising, or that may hereafter exercise, any right of franchise or public privilege in the city and serving the public in any capacity, to require efficient service and to change such requirements and regulations from time to time upon reasonable notice, as conditions may require, provided that the council shall not prescribe any rate, charge or compensation for service which will not allow the yielding of a reasonable income on the reasonable value of the physical properties of such utility. For the purpose of ascertaining what would be reasonable rates and charges to the public for service rendered, the city shall have full power to inspect the books and other records and papers of such person, firm or corporation furnishing such service and to compel the production of such books, papers and records and the attendance of witnesses for the purpose of making such investigation. And, provided further, that in adopting such regulations and fixing and changing such rates and charges no stocks or bonds authorized or issued by such person, firm or corporation exercising such right, franchise or privilege shall be considered unless proof be made that the same have been actually issued by such person, firm or corporation for money, or its equivalent, paid and used for the purchase of repairs or development of the property under investigation. 
§ 123. - No officer to accept favors. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall accept any reduced rates, or anything of value, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation serving the city as a public utility, upon terms more favorable than are granted to the public, and any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, such office or employment shall be forfeited. 
State Law reference- Abuse of official capacity, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 39.02. 
§ 124. - Extensions. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 121. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
§ 125. - Other conditions. 
    All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between The City of Brownwood and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of The City of Brownwood to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is, in all things, reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article, whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit, in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
§ 126. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such a manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus, also revenues, operating expenses, including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other city or governmental department. The council shall annually cause to be made by a competent public accountant or certified public accountant and shall publish a report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section of such data as the council shall deem expedient. 
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 127. - Publicity of records. 
    All records of the city shall be open for inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press, at all reasonable times, subject only to the provisions and limitations of the Texas Open Records Act as the same now exists or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
§ 128. - Cemetery. 
    The council shall appropriate a sum of money to be used by the Greenleaf Cemetery Association of Brownwood, Brown County, Texas, a private nonprofit corporation organized under the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, for maintenance of the cemetery. No charge, however, shall be made by said association for burial lots or for sepulcher in that part of the cemetery where the land belongs to the city. For budgetary purposes, the association shall be considered a department of the city and the appropriations therefor shall comply with all budgetary requirements as outlined in this Charter and as may be prescribed from time to time by the council. Annual appropriations for the cemetery will not be continuing, but will revert to the general fund in the same manner as the under spent appropriations of the other departments. The management and control of the city cemetery, known as the Greenleaf Cemetery, shall be, and the same is hereby turned over to the Greenleaf Cemetery Association of Brownwood, Brown County, Texas, a private corporation organized under the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. 
§ 129. - Library. 
    The council shall appropriate a sum of money to be used for the support and maintenance of a public library. For budgetary purposes, the library shall be considered a department of the city and the appropriations therefor shall comply with all the budgetary requirements as outlined in this Charter and as may be prescribed from time to time by the council. Annual appropriations for the library will not be continuing, but will revert to the general fund in the same manner as the under spent appropriations of the other departments. 
§ 130. - Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
§ 131. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which The City of Brownwood is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings the same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law, and said city shall be just as liable as if security of bond had been duly executed. 
§ 132. - Effect of this Charter on existing law. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the city government of Brownwood and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of The City of Brownwood under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to The City of Brownwood. 
§ 133. - Continuing municipal government. 
    From and after the date of the adoption of this Charter, the presently qualified and acting mayor and councilpersons shall continue to hold office until the expiration of the term to which they were elected and shall constitute the council of The City of Brownwood, possessing all of the powers provided by this Charter. 
§ 134. - Amending the Charter. 
    This Charter may be amended and such amendments shall be made in compliance with the provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 95-47, § 7(Prop. #7), 11-28-1995/1-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-1, 1-23-1996) 
State Law reference- Amendment of home-rule charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
§ 135. - Unconstitutionality. 
    Should any provision or portion of this Charter be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the courts of this state, the remainder thereof shall be unimpaired by such holding, and shall be in full force and effect until amended or repealed, as herein provided. 
§ 136. - Submission of Charter to electors. 
    The charter commission, in preparing this Charter, finds and decides that, with one exception, it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that, in order to enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it be adopted in its entirety. The exception is the manner in which the chief of police shall be selected; in this case, we have provided for an alternate on election or appointment of the chief of police, the provision receiving the greater number of votes to be inserted in the Charter as section 43 upon adoption of the Charter. For these reasons, the charter commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole, with the one alternate vote, and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of The City of Brownwood at an election to be held for the purpose on the 5th day of April, A.D., 1955. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall become the Charter of The City of Brownwood, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the city secretary shall file an official copy of the Charter with the records of the city. The city secretary shall furnish the mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by his signature and the seal of the city, shall be forwarded by the mayor to the secretary of State of Texas, and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the qualified voters voting at such election. 
    It is hereby prescribed that the form of the ballot to be used in said election shall be as follows: 
OFFICIAL BALLOT 
DIRECTIONS: Under question No. 1, to vote for the adoption of the proposed Charter, mark out in line (2) under question No. 1 the words "Against the adoption of the proposed Charter"; to vote against the adoption of the proposed Charter, mark out in line (1) under question No. 1 the words "For the adoption of the proposed Charter." 
Under question No. 2, to vote for the alternate provision to the proposed Charter providing for appointment of the chief of police, mark out in line (2) under question No. 2 the words "For election of the chief of police"; to vote for the alternate provision to the proposed Charter providing for election of the chief of police, mark out in line (1) under question No. 2 the words "For appointment of the chief of police." 
Question No. 1. Shall the proposed Charter, framed and completed February 8, 1955, by the charter commission, be adopted?  
For the adoption of the proposed Charter. 
Against the adoption of the proposed Charter. 
Question No. 2. Shall the office of chief of police be filled by appointment or by election, as provided in the alternate provision submitted by the charter commission with the proposed Charter?  
For the appointment of the chief of police. 
For election of the chief of police. 
    In not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the council shall cause the city secretary to mail a copy of this Charter, and the alternate provisions regarding the chief of police, to each qualified voter of The City of Brownwood. 
Editor's note- Section 136 was added to the Charter to read as set out above by an election held April 5, 1980, the results of such election being declared by an ordinance passed April 8, 1980. 
§ 137. - Reference to gender. 
    Any reference or referral throughout the Charter of The City of Brownwood to a specific gender is used for brevity only and shall refer to a person of either sex. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Charter 84-48  8-14-1984 8 95-47 11-28-1995/ 
1-20-1996 1(Prop. #1) 3, 4 9 12 1(Prop. #2) 2 5, 6 13 7(Prop.) 1 7(Prop. #1) 14 17-19 22 24, 25 27-30 48 66 96 7(Prop. #1, 3) 15 7(Prop. #3) 20 26 35 7(Prop. #4) 16 7(Prop. #5) 32 7(Prop. #6) 39-42 51-55 64 7(Prop. #7) 67-93 117 127 134 7(Prop. #8) 94, 95 97-99 7(Prop. #9) 44 7(Prop. #23) 23 96-1  1-23-1996 2-4 6 9 12, 13 15-20 22-26 28-30 32 35 39-42 44 48 51-55 64 66-99 117 127 134 97-34  8-12-1997 14 43 08-09  5-13-2008 (Prop. #1)       Rpld 43, 44  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Brownwood, Texas, shall be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Brownwood, Texas," and may be cited as the "Brownwood Code." 
(Code 1995, § 10.01) 
Charter reference- Authority to codify ordinances, § 32. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    Words and phrases used in this Code shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    And/or. The term "and" may be read as the term "or" and the term "or" may be read as the term "and," if the sense requires it. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Brownwood, Texas, printed in part I of this Code. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Brownwood, Texas. 
    City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of Brownwood, Texas. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Brownwood, Texas. 
    County. The term "county" means Brown County, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a section of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the section specifically provide otherwise. 
    Gender. Terms denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
Charter reference- Gender, § 137. 
    May. The term "may" means that the act referred to is permissive. 
State Law reference- May, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Month, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011. 
    Number. Terms in the singular shall include the plural, and terms in the plural shall include the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, swear, sworn affirm and affirmed. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an "affirmation" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Oath, swear, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005, 312.011. 
    Officer, office, employee, commission and department. The terms "officer, office, employee, commission" and "department" mean an officer, office, employee, commission or department of the city, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
    Official time. The term "official time," as established by applicable state or federal laws, means the official time within the city for the transaction of all city business. 
State Law reference- Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.016. 
    Person. The term "person" extends to and includes persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, trustees, lessees or receivers. Whenever such term is used in any clause in this Code prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, means the officers or agents thereof. 
State Law reference- Person, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Shall. The term "shall" means that the act referred to is mandatory. 
State Law reference- Shall, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State Law reference- Signature, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005, 312.011. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Texas. 
    Tense. The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
    Written. The term "written" means any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Written, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005, 312.011. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
State Law reference- Year, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005, 312.011. 
(Code 1995, §§ 10.05-10.07, 10.09-10.12) 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be any part of the section, nor shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1995, § 10.04) 
State Law reference- Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1995, § 10.18(A)) 
Sec. 1-5. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference- Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027. 
Sec. 1-6. - Editor's notes and references. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections in this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any order or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.007. 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way. 
(6)  The ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory, or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pension or employee benefits, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(16)  Any ordinance regarding elections. 
(17)  Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(18)  Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge. 
(19)  Any ordinance regarding development, zoning or land use. 
(20)  Any ordinance regarding cable television regulations. 
(21)  Any ordinance establishing enterprise zones. 
(22)  Chapter 38 of the 1995 Code regarding communications and technology use. 
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of a repealing statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section of an ordinance in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this chapter and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any provision of this Code, or the application of any provision of this Code, to any person is, to any extent, held invalid or unenforceable by a tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such holding. In case of such event, this Code and all of its remaining provisions shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective. If the law invalidating such a Code provision is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or is otherwise changed so that the provision which had previously been held invalid or unenforceable no longer conflicts with the laws, rules or regulations then in effect, the previously invalid or unenforceable provision shall return to full force and effect. 
(Code 1995, § 10.07; Ord. No. 01-32, § VI, 10-23-2001) 
State Law reference- Presumptions in enactment of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.021; severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.032. 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion of a chapter, section or subsection, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted in a repeal shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(c)  Amendments to any section of this Code shall be made by amending such section by specific reference to the section number of this Code, in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Brownwood, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored, and any provisions which are to be deleted shall be enclosed in brackets. 
(d)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Brownwood, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored. 
(e)  Every section, subsection, division, article or chapter desired to be repealed must be set out in full and specifically repealed by section, subsection, division, article or chapter, as the case may be. 
(Code 1995, § 10.17) 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances as passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be prepared so that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to prepare the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or any ordinance, rule or police regulation of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule or police regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that the violation of any provision of this Code, or any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. Where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. The penalty provided by this subsection, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(b)  Except where otherwise provided in this Code, each day an offense continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalty prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, the city may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive or other equitable relief, administrative adjudication and revocation or suspension of any license, permit or franchise. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed saved from repeal, § 1-8(2); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-8(3); any ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(6); administration and enforcement of sexually oriented businesses, § 10-121 et seq.; administration and enforcement of animals, § 14-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of food and food service establishments, § 18-51 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 22; code enforcement, ch. 26; administration of code enforcement, § 26-41 et seq.; judicial and administrative remedies, § 26-181 et seq.; natural resources, ch. 46; administration and enforcement of oil and gas, § 46-61 et seq.; administration and enforcement of parks and recreation, § 50-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70; administration of industrial waste treatment, § 70-91 et seq.; administration of towing services, § 74-261 et seq.; administration and enforcement of International Plumbing Code, § 78-261 et seq.; administration and enforcement of electrical code, § 78-361 et seq.; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention, § 82-61 et seq.; administration and enforcement of mobile homes, § 86-51 et seq.; administration and enforcement of signs, § 90-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of subdivisions, § 94-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning, § 98-41 et seq.; administration of telecommunications, § 98-701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-31. - Compensation of mayor and councilmembers. 
    The compensation to be received by the councilpersons and the mayor shall be fixed for attendance at its meetings, in an amount not to exceed $50.00 per meeting. 
(Code 1995, § 30.10) 
Secs. 2-32-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the council to establish and appoint boards and commissions, § 20. 
Cross reference- Building and standards commission, § 26-61 et seq.; tow truck committee, § 74-261; electrical review board, § 78-361; zoning board of adjustment, § 98-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the council to establish the planning and zoning commission, § 20. 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 98. 

Sec. 2-81. - Adoption of state laws. 
    All the powers and authority granted to cities by any and all state laws relating to planning and zoning regulations are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1995, § 31.01) 
Charter reference- Power of the council to adopt and modify the zoning plan and zoning map, § 20. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-82. - Established; composition; appointment. 
    A planning and zoning commission is hereby created and established for the city. Such commission shall be composed of seven resident citizens. Such members shall be appointed by the mayor with ratification by the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 31.02; Ord. No. 00-01, § 31.02, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 
Sec. 2-83. - Membership; qualifications. 
    The seven regular members of the planning and zoning commission shall be selected at large. The members shall be real property owners and qualified to vote in the city, and shall hold no other position in the city government. 
(Code 1995, § 31.03; Ord. No. 97-22, § 31.03, 5-14-1997; Ord. No. 11-26, 11-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-84. - Term; vacancies. 
    Appointments shall be to the planning and zoning commission each year for a three-year term. Vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filled within 30 days by the city council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1995, § 31.04) 
Sec. 2-85. - Compensation. 
    Regular members of the planning and zoning commission shall be paid a sum as set forth by ordinance from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 31.05) 
Sec. 2-86. - Internal organization; management. 
    The mayor shall appoint a chairperson, and the planning and zoning commission shall select a vice-chairperson from its membership, and other such officers as it may deem necessary. Such appointment and election shall be for a period of one year. The commission shall adopt rules for the practical and efficient transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1995, § 31.06; Ord. No. 00-01, § 31.06, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-87. - Meetings. 
    At least one meeting of the planning and zoning commission shall be held each month, and additional meetings may be held from time to time upon the call of the chairperson. 
(Code 1995, § 31.07) 
Sec. 2-88. - Master plan. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to assist the city council in the development and implementation of the city's master plan. The recommendations of the commission will be through a planning and zoning master plan committee that will function with the council committee to formulate recommendations. 
(Code 1995, § 31.08) 
Sec. 2-89. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the master plan and planning; 
(2)  Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utilities, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens in relation to the protecting or carrying out of the master plan or special planning reports. 
(b)  Upon request, all public officials shall furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may reasonably require for its work. 
(c)  The commission, its members and employees may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys in the performance of its functions, and shall place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(d)  The commission shall also perform such other duties that relate to municipal planning as the city council shall prescribe from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 31.09) 
Sec. 2-90. - Platting board. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall be the platting board of the city, and as such, shall have the control of the platting or subdivision of land within the city, and shall have such authority outside the corporate limits of the city, as permitted by law. 
(Code 1995, § 31.10) 
Charter reference- Platting, § 9. 
Sec. 2-91. - Subdivision and plat regulations. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall recommend to the city council the adoption of rules and regulations governing the platting and subdividing of land. 
(Code 1995, § 31.11) 
Sec. 2-92. - Zoning plan. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall be designated as the zoning commission, and shall recommend a zoning plan to the city council for adoption, and shall recommend or disapprove proposed changes in the plan, subject to the provisions of any existing ordinance covering zoning. 
(Code 1995, § 31.12) 
Secs. 2-93-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the council to operate a municipal airport, § 20. 

Sec. 2-111. - Responsibility; composition. 
    The responsibility for the operation and supervision of the Brownwood Municipal Airport shall be vested in a seven-member board which shall be known as the "Airport Board of the City of Brownwood." 
(Code 1995, § 31.25) 
Sec. 2-112. - Appointment; terms of members; election of officers; rules and regulations. 
(a)  The seven members of the airport board, one of whom shall be a member of the city council, shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, to serve two-year overlapping terms. The city councilmember of the airport board shall be appointed each year, and all necessary appointments shall be made each January 1. 
(b)  The airport board shall elect a chairperson from its membership and such other officers as it deems necessary. The airport board may make reasonable rules and regulations for its own government in conformity with this division, any amendments thereto, any other applicable city ordinances, the city Charter and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 31.26) 
Sec. 2-113. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The airport board is hereby authorized to manage and operate the Brownwood Municipal Airport facility, but shall be answerable to the city council in all matters of policy and operation, and subject to its control in all things. 
(b)  The airport board is authorized to: 
(1)  Establish reasonable rules for its operation; 
(2)  Adopt operating policies and procedures; and 
(3)  Employ and supervise necessary operating personnel, including a manager. 
(c)  Through the airport manager, the airport board shall solicit and try to obtain such activities as may be profitable to the airport and the city; however, in no case shall the airport board underwrite any use, and no funds may be borrowed or obligations created by the airport board without the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 31.27) 
Sec. 2-114. - Budget. 
(a)  The airport board shall submit a proposed budget for each fiscal year to the city council in accordance with budget guidelines prescribed by the city manager. The budget shall contain an estimate of all proposed expenditures, and shall include an estimate of the revenue to be received from the airport operation. 
(b)  All revenues from the airport operation shall be deposited into the airport fund of the city. All expenditures shall be approved by the airport board in such methods as it shall establish, and shall be made from the airport fund of the city in the manner prescribed by the city manager. In no case shall the airport board approve expenditures that have not been budgeted by the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 31.28) 
Sec. 2-115. - Reports to city council. 
    The airport board shall report to the city council on the operations of the airport when requested or on such occasions as it deems desirable. 
(Code 1995, § 31.29) 
Secs. 2-116-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TECHNOLOGY BOARD 

Sec. 2-141. - Technology plan. 
    The responsibility to refine, implement and perpetuate a technology plan for the city shall be vested in a seven-member board which shall be known as the "Technology Board of the City of Brownwood." 
(Code 1995, § 31.40) 
Sec. 2-142. - Membership; terms of office; election of officers; rules and regulations; administrative support. 
(a)  The seven members of the technology board, one of whom shall be a member of the city council, shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, to serve two-year overlapping terms. The city councilmember of the technology board shall be appointed each year, and all necessary appointments shall be made on or before September 1 of each calendar year. 
(b)  The technology board shall elect a chairperson from its membership and such other officers as it deems necessary. The technology board shall develop reasonable rules and regulations for its internal affairs in government in conformity with this division, any amendments thereto, all other applicable city ordinances, the city Charter and the laws of the state. 
(c)  The city staff shall provide administrative support necessary to record and publicize all agendas and minutes of the meetings of the technology board. 
(Code 1995, § 31.41) 
Sec. 2-143. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The technology board shall be comprised of five members. Four members shall be assigned by the city council and one member shall be assigned by the technology board from its membership. The cable television operator may designate a representative of the company to serve as a nonvoting member of the committee. The committee shall have the continuing oversight authority with regard to the cable television operations in the city, and the obligations of the cable television operator for compliance with the terms and conditions of this franchise. 
(b)  The technology board shall be responsible to the city council in all matters of policy and operation, and shall be subject to its control in all things. The technology board shall have the power to form subcommittees, as it deems necessary. The technology board shall report to the city council on the operations of the technology board and the implementation of the technology plan when requested, or on such other occasions as it deems necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 31.42; Ord. No. 02-15, Pt. 1, 3-26-2002)) 
Secs. 2-144-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Telecommunications, § 98-671 et seq. 

Sec. 2-161. - Membership; meetings; responsibilities. 
(a)  The cable television service committee shall be comprised of the city manager or his designated representative, and three additional members assigned by the city council, and one shall be appointed by the cable operator. The cable television service committee shall have the continuing oversight authority with regard to the cable television operations in the city and the obligations of the cable operator for compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(b)  The cable television service committee shall establish a regular schedule for meetings and shall make recommendations, as may be necessary, to the mayor and city council for any necessary action by the council in carrying out its oversight obligations and the administration of the franchise. 
(c)  The authority and responsibility of the cable television service committee shall extend to such matters as rate regulation, customer service requirements, compliance with technical standards and Federal Communications Commission regulations, as well as consideration of any subscriber complaints that are not resolved promptly by the company. 
(d)  The city may delegate such other functions and duties to the cable television service committee under the franchise, as it may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1995, § 92.20) 
Sec. 2-162. - Participation in technology board. 
    The cable television service committee is hereby authorized to be made a part of the city's technology board, with the charge as outlined in this division, to approve and oversee operations and obligations of the cable television company in the city, according to the terms and conditions of the television cable franchise agreement dated November 22, 1994. In addition, the cable television service committee shall interact with, and report to, the technology board to promote and provide technology opportunities for the citizens of the city, in general, and to assist in the implementation of the various elements of the technology plan for the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-30, 7-8-1997) 
Secs. 2-163-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD 

Sec. 2-171. - Created. 
    Subject to like provisions being made by the City of Early, Texas, and the commissioners court of the county, by proper order, duly promulgated and entered on their minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of the Airport Zoning Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 241.001 et seq., there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the county joint airport zoning board, which board shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 241.014. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 8-23-2005) 
Sec. 2-172. - Membership. 
    The county joint airport zoning board shall be composed of seven members, two members to be appointed by the city council, two members to be appointed by the Early City Council and two members to be appointed by the commissioners court of the county; the seventh member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed, and said seventh member shall serve as chairman of the county joint airport zoning board. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 8-23-2005) 
Secs. 2-173-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-181. - Membership. 
(a)  There is created a six member advisory board which shall assist and advise the park and recreation director, city manager, and the city council on the operation of the city's parks and recreation facilities. The board shall be known as the park and recreation advisory board. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint the six members to the board. The mayor shall designate one of the appointed members to be the chairman of the board. The mayor's appointments shall be subject to ratification by the city council. The members shall hold office for three-year staggered terms. 
The initial appointments shall be as follows: 
Two appointments for a one-year term; 
Two appointments for two-year terms; and 
Two appointments for three-year terms. 
The chairman shall be one of the initial three-year appointments. 
    All members of the board shall be residents of the city and shall be selected at large. If vacancies occur, such vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments; however, such terms shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Terms of office will run from January 1 through December 31. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 1, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-26, 11-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-182. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board is empowered to establish its own parliamentary procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with the Charter or other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 2, 12-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-183. - Meetings. 
    The board shall meet no less than once each month. Meetings shall be opened to the public, as required pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq., and minutes shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be treated as public records. 
    Attendance at meetings. The board may establish its own rules as to the attendance of its members. In furtherance of such, the board may, by a majority vote, request the mayor to remove any member who, in the opinion of the board, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, §§ 3, 4, 12-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-184. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  A quorum at any meeting of the board shall be three voting members of the board, and any vote of the board shall be resolved by a majority vote of the quorum. 
(b)  The chairman shall vote only to break a tie and shall not be considered a voting member of the board. The chairman shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 5, 12-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-185. - Authority to advise. 
    The board is authorized to work with the park and recreation director, city manager and the city council to make recommendations about any matter within their scope of responsibility that it deems beneficial to the city administration, provided that such functions shall not contravene with the Charter or any other law and such shall be considered advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 6, 12-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-186. - Duties; reports. 
    The board shall perform such duties as may be delegated to it by the city council and/or the city manager. They may appoint ad hoc committees to review and recommend changes/improvements within their scope of responsibility. The board shall review the facilities/policies and shall make recommendations in writing to the city manager as to any changes, modifications and other improvements to such facilities/policies. The board shall present a written report to the city council on or before September 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 7, 12-11-2007) 
Secs. 2-187-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MARTIN & FRANCES LEHNIS TRANSPORTATION MUSEUM ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-191. - Membership. 
(a)  The responsibility for the operation and supervision of the Martin & Frances Lehnis Transportation Museum shall be vested in a five member board which shall be called the Martin & Frances Lehnis Transportation Museum Advisory Board. 
(b)  The five members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to ratification by the city council, to serve three-year overlapping terms, running from January 1 to December 31. If vacancies occur, such vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments, for the remainder of the term being vacated. 
(c)  The members shall be residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-192. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board is empowered to establish its own parliamentary procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with the Charter or other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-193. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board shall meet no less than once per quarter. Meetings shall be open to the public, as required pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq., and minutes shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be treated as public records. 
(b)  The board may establish its own rules as to the attendance of its members. In furtherance of such, the board may, by a majority vote, request the mayor to remove any member who, in the opinion of the board, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-194. - Voting. 
(a)  A quorum at any meeting of the board shall be three voting members of the board and any vote of the board shall be resolved by a majority vote of the quorum. 
(b)  The chairman shall be a voting member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-195. - Duties. 
(a)  The boards shall assist and advise the museum curator, city manager and city council on the operation of the museum, especially in the areas of fundraising, grant acquisition, special events and special projects. 
(b)  The board is authorized to work with the museum curator, city manager and the city council to make recommendations about any matter within their scope of responsibility that it deems beneficial to the city administration, provided that such functions shall not contravene with the Charter, or any other law and such shall be considered advisory only. 
(c)  The board shall perform such duties as may be delegated to it by the city council and/or the city manager. They may appoint ad hoc and/or standing committees to review the facilities/policies and shall make recommendations in writing to the city manager as to any changes, modifications and other improvements to such facilities/policies. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-196. - Reports. 
    The board shall present a written report to the city council on or before September 1 of each year on the operations of the museum. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 10-14-2008) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Code administration department, § 26-111 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-197-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE AND FIRE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-211. - Civil service. 
    All provisions of the civil service law (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq.), are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this Code, with respect to city police officers and firefighters, in conjunction with the local civil service commission rules adopted by the city's civil service commission. 
(Code 1995, §§ 32.01, 32.04) 
Sec. 2-212. - Uniforms. 
(a)  Required while on duty. 
(1)  All uniformed police officers and firefighters of the city shall wear a regulation official uniform while on duty. Uniforms shall be of the materials and styles selected by the department and approved by the city manager. 
(2)  The city council may designate one or more members of the police force, and one or more members of the firefighters' force, which may include the chief of each force, who shall not be required to wear the official uniform while on duty. 
(b)  Police officers. The official police officer's uniform shall include a coat, trousers, shirt, duty belt, cap and the necessary badges. 
(c)  Firefighters. The official firefighter's uniform shall include a cap, trousers, shirt, coat and the necessary badges. 
(d)  Shirt as substitute for coat. The city council may designate regulation official shirts for police officers and firefighters. Regulation official shirts may be worn instead of a coat when desired by any police officer or firefighter. 
(e)  Clothing allowance. 
(1)  The plain clothes personnel of the police department, including the chief, juvenile officer and investigative officers, shall be entitled to receive a clothing allowance in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by the city council. Each such officer now serving in a permanent appointed position shall accrue a clothing allowance benefit from September 1, 1991, which shall be payable each March 1 and September 1 thereafter. 
(2)  Should a police officer or firefighter leave the service for any reason after permanent appointment, but before the completion of six months after the receipt of the initial clothing allowance, there shall be withheld from his final earnings an amount equal to the unaccrued portion of the initial clothing allowance. Should a police officer or firefighter leave the service for any reason after the completion of six months after the receipt of the initial clothing allowance, he shall receive a pro rata share payable from his last clothing allowance to his date of termination. 
(f)  Inventory of purchases made. It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police and the fire chief to inventory the initial uniform purchase for each new permanent appointee, and to assure that each member of his department wears the specified uniforms and keeps such uniforms in good repair at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 32.03) 
Secs. 2-213-2-230. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Police Department[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish the city police department, § 13. 
State Law reference- Police force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 341.003, 341.903. 

Sec. 2-231. - Chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be the head of the police department of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper operation of the police department and the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the city and state. He shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Establish such rules and procedures to be followed by the police department as may be necessary for proper law enforcement and criminal apprehension. 
(2)  Recommend the appointment and, when necessary for the good of the service, the removal of all officers and employees within the police department within such limits and bounds as prescribed by the civil service statutes and ordinances of the state and the city. 
(3)  Annually, prepare the police department's recommended budget and submit the budget to the city manager for review and inclusion in the total city budget, and be responsible for its efficient administration after adoption. 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the city council, at the end of each month, a report of the activities of the police department during the month, and such other reports as the city council may request. 
(5)  Keep the city council advised on law enforcement within the city, and make such recommendations as may seem desirable to him. 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council which are not inconsistent with the law of the state, nor with the city Charter. 
(b)  The salary of the chief of police shall be fixed by ordinance passed by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 32.15(B)) 
Charter reference- Chief of police, §§ 43, 44. 
Secs. 2-232-2-245. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Reserve Police Force 

Sec. 2-246. - Qualifications and standards of training. 
(a)  Members of the reserve police force shall: 
(1)  Be of good moral character; 
(2)  Be at least 21 years of age on the date of appointment; 
(3)  Be a resident of the state; 
(4)  Be physically capable of the duties of a law enforcement officer; 
(5)  Furnish three letters of reference; 
(6)  Hold the minimum basic peace officer certification from an accredited state peace officer training academy; 
(7)  Successfully have completed a state peace officer licensing examination administered by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education; 
(8)  Not have been found guilty of any felony criminal offense under the state penal code; 
(9)  Consent to drug testing/screening at any time; and 
(10)  Consent to psychiatric evaluation in the event of a 180-day break in service as a state peace officer. 
(b)  Members of the reserve police force shall have the qualifications of an officer as required by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, and maintain, at their own expense, required educational programs as mandated by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. Instruction programs provided by the city police department shall be made available to the reserve police force membership at no cost, and members of the reserve police force shall demonstrate firearms proficiency on an annual basis, and the results of such proficiency demonstration shall remain in the personnel file of the individual officer. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(A)) 
State Law reference- Police Reserve Force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 
Sec. 2-247. - Membership. 
    The city council may limit the size of the reserve police force, and the reserve police force shall be composed of not more than 12 members. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(B)) 
Sec. 2-248. - Appointments. 
    The chief of police shall appoint members to the reserve police force with the advice and consent of the city council. Such member shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(C)) 
Sec. 2-249. - Call to service. 
    The chief of police may call the reserve police force into service at any time he considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(D)) 
Sec. 2-250. - Designation as peace officer. 
    Members of the reserve police force serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties, under guidelines set forth by the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(E)) 
Sec. 2-251. - Carrying weapons. 
    An appointment to the reserve police force must be approved by the city council before the person appointed may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. After such appointment is approved, the person appointed may carry a weapon only when authorized to do so by the chief of police and only when discharging his duties as a peace officer. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(F)) 
Sec. 2-252. - Action as a supplementary force. 
    Reserve police force officers may act only on a supplementary capacity to the regular police force, and may not assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without complying with the requirements for regular peace officers. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(G)) 
Sec. 2-253. - Oath required. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall subscribe to an oath that he will swear or affirm to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States of America, the state constitution and the ordinances governing the city. He will further swear or affirm that he will carry out the duties of a member of the reserve police force to the best of his ability. Persons taking the oath shall indicate such by signature and/or affirmation. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(H)) 
Sec. 2-254. - Compensation. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall serve without monetary compensation when ordered to active duty by the chief of police or his designee. There shall be no remuneration for the tour of training, nor for service voluntarily performed, unless such compensation is authorized by the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(I)) 
Sec. 2-255. - Badges; uniforms; insignia. 
(a)  The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms, badges and insignia worn by reserve police force personnel, and direct the manner in which they shall be worn or displayed. The city shall furnish reserve police force members with the following: 
(1)  One uniform shirt, with patches and the insignia for the reserve police force; 
(2)  One pair of uniform pants in compliance with departmental standards; 
(3)  One badge bearing the official insignia of the reserve police force; 
(4)  One set of credentials identifying the bearer as a reserve police force officer. 
(b)  Should the reserve police force officer be terminated or otherwise become disassociated with the reserve police force, all assigned equipment, badges, uniforms, insignia and credentials shall be returned to the chief of police within 72 hours of the separation from the department. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(J)) 
Sec. 2-256. - Use of communications systems by officers. 
    Reserve police force officers on duty shall have the same electronic voice (radio) transmission privileges that any full-time officer incorporates in the performance of his duties. Reserve police force officers, at the discretion of the chief of police, may exercise radio privileges while not on duty, if such action assists the department in its obligation to public safety and the preservation of the peace and dignity of the state and city. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(K)) 
Sec. 2-257. - Access to confidential information by officers. 
    Unless otherwise directed by the chief of police, his designee or the police communications supervisor, reserve police force officers shall have access to the Texas Crime Information Computer and National Crime Information Computer (TCIC-NCIC) and the Texas Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (T-LETS) and National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (N-LETS) communications systems, while on duty or at the discretion of the chief of police or police communications supervisor. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(L)) 
Sec. 2-258. - Required number of service hours per calendar month; service schedule; excused absences; training time. 
    Reserve police force officers shall work a minimum of 16 hours per calendar month, and shall maintain a service schedule prepared by the chief of police or his designee. Excused absences shall be at the discretion of the chief of police or his designee. Training time shall be considered on-duty time, and reserve police force officers shall be credited with service time for training time. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(M)) 
Sec. 2-259. - Authority; power of arrest. 
    While on duty, reserve police force officers are state peace officers, empowered with the same authority as any full-time peace officer, and subject to the same rules and regulations. Reserve police force officers may only make arrests while on duty. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(N)) 
State Law reference- Arrest without a warrant, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. arts. 14.01-14.06; what force may be used, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. arts. 15.24, 15.25; use of deadly force, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 9.51. 
Sec. 2-260. - Prescribed duty weapons. 
    No reserve police force officer will carry a handgun larger than a 0.45 caliber, nor smaller than a nine millimeter, while performing the duties of a reserve police force officer. Reserve police force officers shall carry the weapon that the individual officer has successfully demonstrated proficiency with on a prescribed firing range and course of fire, as set forth by the police department's firearms proficiency officer. All weapons used on duty by reserve police force officers will be registered in the officers' personal equipment file, and proof of legal ownership may be required, at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(Q)) 
Sec. 2-261. - Personal equipment. 
    Reserve police force officers shall provide their own duty weapon of an appropriate caliber, ammunition, belts, holsters, handcuffs, associated leather gear and all equipment required that is not supplied by the city. It is the duty of all reserve police force officers to maintain their firearms and equipment in good working order. All equipment is subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(R)) 
Sec. 2-262. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police may suspend any reserve police force officer for any length of time for any reason, for a violation of the regulations concerning duty or conduct or if the reserve police force officer demonstrates an inability to perform the duties of a reserve police force officer. A suspension is an administrative order and may be issued only by the chief of police. An officer may be temporarily or permanently reassigned in lieu of suspension or termination. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(S)) 
Sec. 2-263. - Termination and dismissal. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to terminate or dismiss any member of the reserve police force at any time. The chief of police may take such action at his own discretion, and the chief of police's decision is final. The terminated or dismissed reserve police force officer shall have no recourse available for reinstatement once the chief of police has reached a final, written decision in the matter. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(T)) 
Sec. 2-264. - Resignation. 
    Reserve police force officers who voluntarily resign their position with the reserve police force unit shall do so in writing, with a minimum of two weeks' advance notice, if possible. If the required notice cannot be honored, as much time as possible should be allowed before the departure becomes effective. Deviation from the requirements of this section may result in an unfavorable performance reference from the department, at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 32.16(U)) 
Secs. 2-265-2-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Fire Department[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish the city fire department, § 13. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011 et seq. 

Sec. 2-301. - Fire chief. 
(a)  Appointment. A chief of the fire department shall be appointed. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The chief of the fire department shall have general supervision and control of the fire department. 
(Code 1995, § 32.25) 
Sec. 2-302. - Police power at fire scenes. 
    The chief and all members of the fire department shall have the police powers at all fires as the police officers of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 32.26) 
State Law reference- Interference with firefighters, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.15; following or obstructing fire apparatus, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.407; crossing a fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.408. 
Sec. 2-303. - Riding on fire apparatus. 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than a member of the fire department of the city, to ride, or attempt to ride, on any vehicle belonging to the fire department at any time while the vehicle is being used by the fire department at the time of a fire or at a practice. 
(Code 1995, § 32.28) 
Secs. 2-304-2-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the council to fix the salaries and compensation of city officers and employees, §§ 20, 24. 
Cross reference- Animals control officer; authority, § 14-41; code enforcement officer, § 26-91 et seq.; fire marshal, § 38-61 et seq.; oil and gas inspector, § 46-61; administrator of industrial waste treatment, § 70-91; electrical inspector, § 78-362; administrator for the flood damage prevention, § 82-61. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-331-2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- The city manager, §§ 27, 28, 45-50, 68-70; appointment of the city manager by the council, §§ 3, 20, 27; appointment of the city secretary by the council, §§ 3, 20; duties of city secretary, § 29. 

Sec. 2-351. - Attendance at city council meetings; vote. 
    The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council, and take part in the discussion of matters pertaining to his department, but shall have no vote. 
(Code 1995, § 30.01(A)) 
Sec. 2-352. - Advising city council. 
    The city manager shall from time to time make such suggestions to the city council as he may desire, and he shall keep the city council fully advised as to matters pertaining to his department. 
(Code 1995, § 30.01(B)) 
Sec. 2-353. - Full-time service. 
    The city manager shall give all of his time to the service of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 30.01(C)) 
Secs. 2-354-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY MARSHAL 

Sec. 2-361. - Position created; qualifications. 
    There is hereby created the position of city marshal for the municipal court system. The city marshal shall meet all qualifications necessary to be licensed as a peace officer by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Standards and Education. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § I(30.03(A)), 2-24-2004; Ord. No. 12-28, § I, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 2-362. - Duties. 
    The city marshal shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas and other legal process issuing out of the municipal court; 
(2)  Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas and legal process necessary; 
(3)  Perform the duties of bailiff of the municipal court; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties as assigned. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § II(30.03(B)), 2-24-2004; Ord. No. 12-28, § II, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 2-363. - Authority. 
    The city marshal shall serve as a peace officer and have full police authority in the exercise of his assigned duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § III(30.03(C)), 2-24-2004; Ord. No. 12-28, § III, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 2-364. - Eligibility for pension. 
    The city marshal is not a member of the city police department and shall not be covered under the municipal civil service provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq.; provided, however, that the city marshal is eligible for membership in the state municipal retirement system. The city marshal is a paid law enforcement officer for the purpose of qualifying for survivors' assistance benefits under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 615.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § IV(30.03(D)), 2-24-2004) 
Sec. 2-365. - Oath of office. 
    The city marshal shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his duties. The oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city secretary. The form of oath shall be the same as required for members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 04-06, § V(30.03(E)), 2-24-2004) 
Secs. 2-366-2-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STATE RETIREMENT BENEFITS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-371. - Election to participate. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of the city, including firefighters not covered by the firefighter's relief and retirement fund, but not including the balance of the fire department, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted. 
(Code 1995, § 30.30) 
Sec. 2-372. - Employees included. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement beginning on the date the person becomes an "employee," as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001(8). 
(Code 1995, § 30.31) 
Sec. 2-373. - Addition or discontinuance of participants. 
    The city may, in the future, refuse to add new departments or employees to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue any participants. 
(Code 1995, § 30.32) 
Sec. 2-374. - Remittance and reports to board of trustees. 
    The city secretary or other proper official is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board of trustees under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each person, and to make and execute all prior other reports and certificates which may be required of the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 30.33) 
Sec. 2-375. - Amount of earnings to be considered in calculations. 
    The total earnings which may be paid by the city to any of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be considered in calculating the amount to be withheld and the deposits and contributions to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of current service rendered by such employee to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 30.34) 
Sec. 2-376. - Percent deposit rate. 
(a)  Except employees of the police department, each employee of the city who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits into such system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. 
(b)  Members of the police department who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. Such rate shall not be applied to earnings in excess of the maximum earnings subject to retirement deductions previously adopted by the city council. 
(c)  All employees of the administrative department who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. Such rate shall not be applied to earnings in excess of the maximum earnings subject to retirement deductions as fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  All employees of the tax department and utility accounting department who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. Such rate shall not be applied to earnings in excess of the maximum earnings subject to retirement deductions as fixed by ordinance. 
(e)  All employees of the public works department and the fire marshal who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. 
(Code 1995, § 30.35) 
Sec. 2-377. - Increased municipal contributions to current service annuity reserve at retirement. 
    Effective January 1, 1976, for each month of current service rendered after such date by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is 200 percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment, and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the city's current accumulation fund. 
(Code 1995, § 30.36) 
Sec. 2-378. - Supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)  By the city council, the city hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city, as defined in section 2-372, participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.; and all of the benefits and obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city for such employees. 
(b)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in the fund shall, as a condition of his employment, be covered in the supplemental benefits fund of the system. In the future, the city may refuse to add new departments or employees to the fund, but shall never discontinue any members who are covered in the fund. 
(c)  The director of finance is hereby directed monthly to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of such employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to the fund shall not exceed one-half of one percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under the fund; and the official shall make such reports for the city as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(Code 1995, § 30.37) 
Sec. 2-379. - Elected officials. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 852.107, the city hereby elects to provide that persons who hold and are regularly engaged in the performance of duties of an elective office that normally requires actual performance of services of not less than 1,000 hours a year in a department of the city that participates in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be and are hereby required to become members of such retirement system, provided that such persons are not ineligible for membership in the system under the applicable age restrictions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
(b)  Any person required to become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System under this section becomes a member of such retirement system on the effective date of this section, as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, is derived or the date such person takes office, whichever is later. 
(c)  Any elected official who becomes a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System on the effective date of this section, as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, shall be entitled to prior service credit with such system, as computed under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.302. 
(d)  Subject to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.003, this section shall be effective on February 1, 1982. 
(Code 1995, § 30.38) 
Sec. 2-380. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city unit No. 1 hereby elects to allow and provide for payment of the increases set forth in this section in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and its account in the city's accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1995, § 30.39) 
Sec. 2-381. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401-853.403 (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date, has at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit," as such term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with the city and who has unforfeited credit for prior and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit allowed and provided for in this section shall be 60 percent of the base updated service credit, of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed by this section shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 30.40) 
Sec. 2-382. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 852.105 and 854.202 (referred to in this section as the "TMRS Act"), the city adopts the provisions set forth in this section affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (referred to in this section as the "system"). 
(b)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after the member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if the member has at least ten years of credited service performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(c) or are subject to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.102(e). 
(c)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member is at least 60 years old and has at least ten years of creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this section or are subject to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.102(e). 
(d)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system and who performed service for the city prior to September 1, 1987, for which service the employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not a member of the system at that time due to his age at the date of his employment, is hereby granted service credit with the system for all such service performed after the date of his latest employment by the city that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 852.105. 
(e)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(g). 
(Code 1995, § 30.41; Ord. No. 02-44, § 1(a), 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 02-45, § 1(a), 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 02-46, § 1(a), 9-24-2002) 
State Law reference- Collection of contributions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.401 et seq. 
Sec. 2-383. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code tit. 8, subtit. G (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is or becomes an employee of the city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305, provided that the: 
(1)  Person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for such service; and 
(2)  Service meets the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit granted by this section: 
(1)  May be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility; 
(2)  Shall have no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member; and 
(3)  May not be used in other computations, including the computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305 while still an employee of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 30.42) 
Sec. 2-384. - Resumption of membership previously terminated. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.003, the city unit No. 1 hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who was an employee of the city on February 27, 2001, who has terminated a previous membership in the system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credited service as an employee of the city since resuming membership, to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five percent of such amount for each year from the date of such withdrawal to the date of redeposit, and upon such deposit, such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at the date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of the city, whether such service was rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite, and hereby assumes, the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to the city's account in the city accumulation fund. The five percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in the city accumulation fund, and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his individual account in the employees' savings fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 2-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-385. - Accumulation fund; rate of service contributions. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.407(g), the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 02-47, § 1, 9-24-2002) 
Secs. 2-386-2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OTHER BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-401. - Retiree health benefits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Retiree means the withdrawal from service with a retirement benefit granted by the Texas Municipal Retirement System, under V.T.C.A., Government Code tit. 8, Public Retirement Systems, Statutory Provisions. 
(b)  Elected to provide coverage. The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employees Benefits Pool (or "the pool") under the pool's interlocal agreement. 
(c)  Adoption of benefit plans. The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the pool: 
(1)  The same medical plans offered to active employees for retirees who are: 
a.  Under the age of 65 years; and 
b.  Over the age of 65 years who are not Medicare eligible; 
(2)  Medicare supplement for retirees over the age of 65 years who are Medicare eligible; and 
(3)  Retiree life and retiree optional life. 
(d)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the pool provides that the pool's board of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the pool allow the participating member entity to provide retiree medical coverage at the following contribution levels: 
a.  At a retiree contribution level which is established annually for retirees by the pool; or 
b.  For retirees 65 years or over, except for those retirees who are not Medicare eligible, at the Medicare supplement rate established annually by the pool or its insurance carrier. 
(2)  The city elects to provide retiree medical coverage for the following retirees at the following contribution levels: 
a.  Retirees under 65 years of age have available the same medical plans offered to active employees at the retiree contribution level established annually by the pool; 
b.  Retirees 65 years of age or over have available a Medicare supplement plan at the retiree contribution level established annually by the pool or its insurance carrier, except as otherwise provided in this section; 
c.  Retirees 65 years of age or over who are not eligible for Medicare benefits have available the same medical plans offered to active employees at the retiree contribution level established annually by the pool; and 
d.  Retirees 65 years of age or over who were previously enrolled in the same medical plan as the active employees and who did not elect to purchase the Medicare supplement have available the same medical plans offered to active employees at the retiree contribution level established annually by the pool. 
Other coverages will be as established annually by the pool's board of trustees. 
(e)  Applicability. This section will only apply to individuals retiring after October 28, 2003, or employees retired under a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after this date, in order to qualify, such individuals must enroll for coverage within 30 days of their retirement. 
(f)  Repeal or modification. This section may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect. 
(Code 1995, § 30.43; Ord. No. 03-42, §§ 1-7, 10-28-2003) 
Secs. 2-402-2-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-431-2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; penalty, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 202.008, 202.009. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-451. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department head means the officer who, by ordinance or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city which is necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, the recreation of its legal and financial status or the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Local government record means any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium or other information recording medium, regardless of the physical form or characteristic and whether public access to such medium is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by a local government or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. Such term does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the local government; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the local government for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, or other state law; or 
(7)  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda or documents, other than a final written agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of a state department or institution, local government, special district or other political subdivision of the state participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third party or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule issued by the state library and archives commission is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer, listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-459. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. Such term includes: 
(1)  The development of records control schedules; 
(2)  Management of filing and information retrieval systems; 
(3)  Protection of essential and permanent records; 
(4)  Economical and space-effective storage of inactive records; 
(5)  Control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence; and 
(6)  Management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-455. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-454. 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-456. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Code 1995, § 36.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.003. 
Sec. 2-452. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records, as defined in section 2-451, are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled such records. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 36.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.005. 
Sec. 2-453. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from creation to disposition, consistent with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(Code 1995, § 36.03) 
Sec. 2-454. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The city secretary, and the successive holders of the office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Code 1995, § 36.04; Ord. No. 05-13, 3-22-2005) 
Sec. 2-455. - Records management committee. 
(a)  Established; composition. A records management committee is hereby established, which shall consist of the city manager, city attorney, director of finance, city secretary, director of personnel and chief of police. 
(b)  Duties. The records management committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements, if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Code 1995, § 36.05) 
Sec. 2-456. - Records management plan. 
(a)  The records management officer shall contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, adequately protect the essential records of the city and properly preserve the records of the city that are of historical value. The plan shall enable the records management officer to effectively carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this division. 
(b)  The records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city, except as listed in subsection (d) of this section, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in his care from the application of this division and the records management plan adopted under this division, and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city, disregarding subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Any and all responsibilities for records management of the police department records are hereby transferred from the city records management officer to the police department records manager. 
(Code 1995, § 36.06) 
Sec. 2-457. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in the implementation of such program; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing, storage equipment and recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of the records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report to the city council annually on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and financial data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 36.07) 
State Law reference- Duties of the records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.023. 
Sec. 2-458. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this division, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and the requirements of this division; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department heads and their staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in their care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1995, § 36.08) 
Sec. 2-459. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
    Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that, in the best interests of the records management program, more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department, and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Code 1995, § 36.09) 
Sec. 2-460. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this division, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of records of their departments in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Code 1995, § 36.10) 
Sec. 2-461. - Records control schedules approval; filing with state. 
(a)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended, as needed, by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(b)  A records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission. 
(Code 1995, § 36.11) 
State Law reference- Preparation and filing of records control schedules, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.041. 
Sec. 2-462. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under an approved records control schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-456 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record the retention period of which has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit or the department head requests, in writing, to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Authorization for the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee prior to such destruction. 
(Code 1995, § 36.12) 
Sec. 2-463. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that does not appear on a records control schedule or amended schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Code 1995, § 36.13) 
State Law reference- Destruction of unscheduled records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.045. 
Sec. 2-464. - Micrographics. 
    Unless an optical imaging and electronic filing program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all optical imaging and electronic filing of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the optical imaging and electronic filing of city records, including policies to ensure that all optical imaging and electronic filing is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the optical imaging and electronic filing of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for optical imaging and electronic filing, and protocols for ensuring that an optical imaging and electronic filing program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with state library and archives commission rules. 
(Code 1995, § 36.14) 
State Law reference- Microfilming records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 204.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-465-2-480. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Police Department Records Manager 

Sec. 2-481. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilms, magnetic tapes, electronic media or other information recording media (regardless of physical form or characteristic, and whether public access to such records is open or restricted under the laws of the state) created or received by the police department or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, and are hereby declared to be the records of the police department, and such records shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision or procedures authorized by this subdivision and in accordance with the current subdivision, and subsequent amendments, as adopted by the city council, and in no other manner. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(A)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Local government record, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.003. 
Sec. 2-482. - Records declared property of police department; right to records; unauthorized destruction, removal or use. 
(a)  All records, as defined in section 2-481, are hereby declared to be the property of the police department. 
(b)  No official or employee of the police department has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled such records. 
(c)  The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(B)) 
Sec. 2-483. - Department policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the police department to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all records of the police department through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice of the records management officer of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(C)) 
Sec. 2-484. - Duties. 
    The police department records manager will serve as the records management manager for the police department, as provided by law, and will ensure that the maintenance, destruction, electronic storage or other disposition of the records of such office are carried out in accordance with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and the city records management policies and procedures. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(D)) 
Sec. 2-485. - Records control schedules. 
    Appropriate records control schedules issued by the state library and archives commission shall be adopted by the police department records manager for use in the police department, as provided by law. Any destruction of records of the police department will be in accordance with the schedules, the Local Government Records Act and the city records management policies and procedures. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(E)) 
Sec. 2-486. - Management policies and procedures. 
    All city records management policies and procedures adopted by the city council shall apply to the police department. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(F)) 
Sec. 2-487. - Transfer of responsibilities. 
    Any and all responsibilities of records management of the police department records are hereby transferred from the city records management officer to the police department records manager. 
(Code 1995, § 32.17(G)) 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-488-2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Payment of claims, § 38. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-501-2-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TORT CLAIMS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Tort claims, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101 et seq.; time limit for cause of action, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 16.003. 

Sec. 2-521. - Liability. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or some person on his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within 30 days from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice, in writing, to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury, or any part thereof, and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted, along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage, or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff in such suit shall aver and prove that, previous to the filing of the original petition, the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that the application was refused by vote of the city council. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving such notice upon the city secretary or city manager at: 
City Hall 
501 Center Avenue 
Brownwood, Texas 76801 
and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the city secretary or city manager. 
(d)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by some person authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required in this subsection shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained in such notice. 
(e)  Neither the mayor, a city councilperson, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 37.03) 
Secs. 2-522-2-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ELECTIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, §§ 94-99. 
State Law reference- Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-551. - Governed by state laws; election date. 
(a)  All city elections shall be governed by the election laws of the state. 
(b)  The annual election date shall be as provided in section 94 of the Charter. 
(Code 1995, § 35.01) 
Charter reference- Elections, § 94. 
State Law reference- Election date, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001. 
Secs. 2-552-2-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCIAL MATTERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-581. - Payment by credit card; processing fee; service charge. 
(a)  The city shall accept payment by certain credit cards of fees, fines, court costs, or other charges. 
(b)  The city shall collect a processing fee for processing payment by credit card as follows: 
(1)  Three percent for swiped and keyed transactions; and 
(2)  4.5 percent for Internet or corporate card transactions. 
(c)  The city shall collect a service charge if, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company. Said fee shall be in addition to the original fee, fine, court costs, or other charge, and in the same amount as the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds. 
(Ord. No. 03-51, §§ 1-3, 12-9-2003) 
Secs. 2-582-2-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 

Sec. 2-601. - Service charge for unpaid checks. 
    The city is authorized to impose a service charge on each check returned unpaid from the bank in an amount to be determined by the city council and which is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 37.01) 
Secs. 2-602-2-620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FUNDS 

Sec. 2-621. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Established. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund (hereinafter known as the "fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Amount of fee established; assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected as a cost of court from the defendant, upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected upon conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the director of finance, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use; administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-19, 9-14-1999; Ord. No. 05-22, 8-9-2005) 
Sec. 2-622. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  Established. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (hereinafter known as the "fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Amount of fee established; assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $3.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected as a cost of court from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected upon conviction for an offense committed on or after this section is adopted (September 14, 1999). 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the director of finance, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court building security fund. 
(c)  Designated use; administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the municipal court, including: 
a.  The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
b.  Handheld metal detectors; 
c.  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
d.  Identification cards and systems; 
e.  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
f.  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract security personnel during times when such persons are providing appropriate security services; 
g.  Signage; 
h.  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
i.  Locks, chains or other security hardware; or 
j.  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 37.06) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms and phrases as set forth in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 110.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 6-2-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS OR LICENSES 

Sec. 6-31. - Required; fee. 
    No person within the city shall manufacture, sell, distribute or store any alcoholic beverage, or engage in any other activity in relation thereto, for which a permit or license is required by the state alcoholic beverage code, without first obtaining a license to do so from the city. The fee for such license or permit shall be an amount equal to one-half the permit or license fee charged by the state under the state alcoholic beverage code. 
(Code 1995, § 110.02) 
State Law reference- Local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36. 
Secs. 6-32-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-61. - Location of alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to sell alcoholic beverages where the place of business is within 300 feet of any church, public or private school, or public hospital. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(c)  The city council may allow a variance to the distance regulations provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section if it determines that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates and undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or, for any other reason the city council determines, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(d)  No liquor store shall be permitted in any residential area zoned as R-1, R-2, or R-3 in chapter 98. 
(e)  All structures housing a liquor store having a permit which allows on-premises consumption of alcohol must be located at least 300 feet from any lot in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district. The measurement of the distance between the liquor store and the lot located in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district shall be in a direct line from the property line of the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoned lot to the property line of the liquor store. 
(f)  Should the liquor store which allows on-premises consumption of alcohol be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where the liquor store is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for example, a liquor store in a shopping center or motel), the liquor store structure's measurements shall be taken from the front door of the liquor store to the property line of the shopping center, motel, or other structure in which the liquor store is housed or confined (not the entire shopping center, motel, or structure) and in a direct line to the property line of the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoned lot. 
(g)  Any liquor store now in existence shall be deemed to be abandoned when it has failed to or ceased to remain open for the sale of alcoholic beverages, retail or wholesale, for a period of 18 months or more. 
(Code 1995, § 110.05; Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 5-22-2005) 
State Law reference- Sales near schools, churches or hospitals, variances, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
Sec. 6-62. - City park restrictions; special permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry any alcoholic beverage into any park of the city, or to have any alcoholic beverage in his possession while in or on such public park, except as follows: 
(1)  Private parties at Festival Park, for which the park, or a portion thereof, is reserved and closed to the general public. 
(2)  Riverside Park, when the park, or a portion thereof, has been requested to be closed for general public use in favor of a requested public event, and such approval has been granted by the city manager. 
(b)  An application for an alcoholic beverage permit must be completed and filed with the city manager. A permit may then be issued subject to all conditions and/or requirements of the city relating thereto, including, without limitation: 
(1)  Adequate security personnel shall be provided for the event. The number of security personnel shall be determined by the city manager, depending upon the type of event; and 
(2)  Proof of liability insurance shall be provided at levels commensurate to cover the risks of the event and naming the city as an additional insured. Such insurance and its amounts shall be approved by the city manager. 
(c)  An applicant to close Festival Park or Riverside Park, or any portion thereof, may request a hearing before the city council to appeal a denial of his permit application. 
(Code 1995, § 110.06; Ord. No. 01-19, § 110.06, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 08-13, § I, 6-10-2008) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate location and conduct of public amusements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL TABLES AND BILLIARD TABLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pool or billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, upon which balls are propelled by a stick or cue. 
(Code 1995, § 111.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 10-17-10-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-31. - Required; display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of persons, corporation and organization, except religious, charitable or educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state, and any group qualifying as a private club under the terms of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., to own and operate, for profit, any pool or billiard table, as defined in section 10-16, within the city, without having first obtained an appropriate license from the city, as provided by this division. Such licenses shall, at all times, be displayed in a conspicuous place within the licensed place of business. 
(Code 1995, § 111.02) 
Sec. 10-32. - Fees. 
    The director of finance is authorized to collect the annual license fee for each location on which a pool or billiard table is owned and operated for profit. The city council will prescribe annual fees for each license issued to an establishment, location or hall, and a like sum for each license renewal, and such fees shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 111.03) 
Sec. 10-33. - Term; transferability. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this division shall be for one year, and such license shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1995, § 11.04) 
Sec. 10-34. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or cancel the license of any person licensed to own and operate a pool or billiard table under this division, after giving the licensee ten days' notice of a hearing, and after conducting the hearing for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The power of cancellation or revocation shall be exercised only for the following conditions: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Violation of applicable provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Violation of the prescribed hours of operation provided by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitting on the premises any disorderly conduct or obscene activity, as defined in state law; 
(5)  Knowingly permitting the violation of the laws of the state or this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 111.07) 
Secs. 10-35-10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-61. - Hours of operation. 
    No person may engage in the operation of any pool or billiard table or competitive games and devices for profit within the city on weekdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and the following 7:00 a.m. However, a pool or billiard table may be operated on Sundays, only between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. At the hour specified in this section for closing, the premises licensed for a pool or billiard table, as well as any premises upon which competitive games and devices are operated, shall be vacated by the public. Unfinished games shall be terminated no later than the closing hour. 
(Code 1995, § 111.06) 
Sec. 10-62. - Business location. 
    Places of business governed by this article shall be located on the ground floor or street level only of any building, and shall not be licensed for any floor other than the ground or street level floor. 
(Code 1995, § 111.09) 
Sec. 10-63. - Obstruction of view of premises. 
    It shall be unlawful on a licensed premises to erect or construct any partition which obstructs the view of any part of the building or premises licensed by this article, or cut the building into two or more rooms by constructing partitions in such building in which a pool or billiard table is displayed, owned and operated for profit; provided, however, that toilets or other sanitary facilities shall be enclosed and adequately ventilated in accordance with health, plumbing, sanitary and other applicable provisions of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 111.08) 
Secs. 10-64-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Achromatic means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. Such term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans and light earth tones. Such term does not include white, black or any bold coloration that attracts attention. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrical or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the displayed images are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore and adult video store. 
(1)  The terms "adult bookstore" and "adult video store" mean an establishment which sells or rents adult material, including, but not being limited to: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
(2)  However, any establishment which shows that the following three elements occur shall be exempt from regulation as an adult bookstore and, provided, further, that any adult entertainment activity on the premises, other than the sale or rental of adult material, shall preclude the establishment's qualifying solely as an adult bookstore and shall mandate its classification as an adult entertainment establishment, other than an adult bookstore: 
a.  The adult material is accessible only by employees; 
b.  The individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprise less than 25 percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in the categories of books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, slides, other visual representations, recordings and other audio matter; and 
c.  The establishment does not use the following terms in advertisements or any other promotional activities relating to the adult material: 
1.  "XXX," "XX," "X" or any series of the letter "X," whether or not such letter is interspersed with other letters, figures or characters; 
2.  "Erotic," or deviations of such term; 
3.  "Adult entertainment," or similar terms; 
4.  "Sexual acts," or similar terms; 
5.  "Nude," "nudies," or similar terms; 
which letters, words or terms a reasonable person would believe to be promotional of the purchase or rental of adult material. 
(3)  In recognition of the provisions of state statutes, which protects minors from exposure to obscene material, any adult bookstore or adult video store shall have a sign in place at each entrance to such business, which shall not be greater than one square foot in size, stating "Persons under 18 years of age not permitted"; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to require such business to admit minors into such establishment. 
    Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment that features the offering of live entertainment to customers, which is: 
(1)  Intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers; and 
(2)  Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment, which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration, and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which features persons who appear in a state of nudity, or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
    Child care facility has the same meaning given such term in V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
    Escort means a person who, for a consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment includes any of the following: 
(1)  Opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  Conversion of an existing business to any sexually oriented business, whether or not such business is an existing sexually oriented business; 
(3)  Addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  Relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Historic district means an historic overlay zoning district, as may be established by the city. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for such license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity and state of nudity mean: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or any part of the female breast that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Operate and causes to be operated mean to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business, whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home zoning district, as defined in the zoning provisions of chapter 98. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision and campground use, as defined in the zoning provisions of chapter 98. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Sign means any display, design, pictorial or other representation which is: 
(1)  Constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business; and 
(2)  Used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. 
Such term also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment or any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Any of the following, or any combination thereof, when less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Any human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Any buttock; or 
(2)  Any portion of the female breast that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(3)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activity includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition; 
(5)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(6)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty. 
    Straddle dance means the use by an employee or performer of any part of his body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of a nonemployee while at the establishment, or the touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any employee or performer by a nonemployee while at the establishment. Conduct shall be considered to be a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the employee or performer is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area, or is direct or through a medium. The terms "lap dance," "table dance" and "face dance" are included within the definition of this term. 
    Substantial enlargement means the increase in floor area occupied by the sexually oriented business by more than 25 percent. 
    Transfer of ownership or control means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1995, § 158.502) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-92. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose, nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent, nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that: 
(1)  The locational regulations of section 10-173 are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
(2)  All other provisions of this article are promulgated pursuant to the city Charter and the state local government code insofar as it pertains to home-ruled cities. 
(c)  It is the intent of this article to deter property uses and activities conducted thereon which, directly or indirectly, cause, or would cause, adverse effects on the stability of the immediate neighborhood surrounding the sexually oriented business. 
(d)  Operators of sexually oriented businesses are also hereby generally charged with complying with a policy of "keep it in indoors and under control." All operators bear first line answerability, directly or indirectly, for all uses of the premises and activities conducted thereon. 
(Code 1995, § 158.501) 
Sec. 10-93. - Amendments. 
    Sections 10-173 and 10-174 may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a zoning ordinance as set forth in chapter 98. Other sections of this article may be amended by vote of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 158.527) 
Sec. 10-94. - Classifications. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1995, § 158.503) 
Sec. 10-95. - Violations; penalties; defenses. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 10-173, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved in a violation of section 10-173 is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then such violation shall be punishable as a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this article, other than section 10-173, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 10-141(a), 10-173 or 10-179 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class in order to participate in the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 10-142 or 10-173 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1995, § 158.524) 
State Law reference- Misdemeanor authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.010. 
Sec. 10-96. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 10-173 is subject to a suit for injunction, as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1995, § 158.525) 
Secs. 10-97-10-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 10-121. - Inspections. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire department, department of streets, sanitation and code enforcement services, and the building official to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it such business occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it such business is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1995, § 158.507(A)-(C)) 
State Law reference- Inspection authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.008. 
Secs. 10-122-10-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-141. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases, and submit satisfactory proof that he is at least 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than the name of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name and the county of registration under the assumed name or professional name act statutes of the state. 
(3)  Whether the applicant, or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant, or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, has had a previous license under this division suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant, or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this division has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(5)  Whether the applicant, or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, holds any other licenses under this division and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments. 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a street address. 
(8)  The names of the employees for the proposed establishment, if known, or, if presently unknown, a statement to that effect. 
(9)  A plan, drawn to appropriate scale, of the proposed licensed premises, indicating the areas to be covered by the license, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed structural features of the establishment to which the proposed license pertains. The term "fixed structural features" shall include immovable partitions, counters and similar structures that are intended to be permanent. 
(10)  The applicant's mailing address and, if different, a designated return address where all future correspondence from the county may be sent. 
(11)  Any additional information which the planning and zoning commission deems necessary to effectuate the language and purposes of this article. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this division. 
(d)  The fact that a person possesses a valid dancehall license does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Code 1995, § 158.504) 
Sec. 10-142. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the city secretary to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age; 
(2)  An applicant or his spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or his spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(4)  An applicant or his spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application; 
(5)  Any fee required by this article has not been paid; 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thereby necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, sections 10-121, 10-145, 10-172, 10-173 and 10-178-10-183; or 
(8)  An applicant or his spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
i.  Prostitution; 
ii.  Promotion of prostitution; 
iii.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
iv.  Compelling prostitution; 
v.  Obscenity; 
vi.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
vii.  Sexual performance by a child; or 
viii.  Possession of child pornography. 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
i.  Public lewdness; 
ii.  Indecent exposure; or 
iii.  Indecency with a child. 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection (a)(8)a. 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses, or combination of misdemeanor offenses, occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or his spouse under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  An applicant or his spouse who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8)a. of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b. of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The chief of police, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of such approval, and state where the applicant must pay the license fee and obtain the license. The chief of police's approval of the issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant to operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required by this article and obtained possession of the license. 
(e)  If granted, the license must state on its face the name of the persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1995, § 158.505) 
Sec. 10-143. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  In addition to the fees required by subsection (a) of this section, an applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the location restrictions set forth in section 10-173. 
(c)  If an applicant is required by this Code to also obtain a dancehall license for the business at a single location, payment of the fee for the sexually oriented business license shall not exempt the applicant from payment of the fees for the dancehall license. 
(Code 1995, § 158.506) 
Sec. 10-144. - Expiration. 
    Each sexually oriented business license expires one year from the date of issuance, except that a license issued pursuant to a locational restriction expires on the date the exemption expires. A license may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 10-141. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the application. 
(Code 1995, § 158.508) 
Sec. 10-145. - Transferability. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the license application. 
(Code 1995, § 158.512) 
Sec. 10-146. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 10-121, 10-145, 10-172, 10-173 and 10-178-10-183; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(5)  Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thereby necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1995, § 158.509) 
Sec. 10-147. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 10-146 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee of the licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee of the licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee of the licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 10-142(a)(8)a., for which the time period required in section 10-142(a)(8)b. has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 10-142(a)(8)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offense was committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee of the licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as such term is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as grounds for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date such revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 10-142(a)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(Code 1995, § 158.510) 
Sec. 10-148. - Appeals. 
    If the chief of police denies the issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant or licensee whose application for a license or license renewal has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked has the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Code 1995, § 158.511) 
Secs. 10-149-10-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-171. - Minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether such establishment is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer or allow a person under 18 years of age: 
(1)  Admittance to the establishment. 
(2)  To remain at the establishment. 
(3)  To purchase goods or services at the establishment. 
(4)  To work at the establishment as an employee. 
(Code 1995, § 158.526) 
Sec. 10-172. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 18 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or the portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1995, § 158.523) 
State Law reference- Display of harmful material to a minor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.24. 
Sec. 10-173. - Location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential or historic district, as defined in section 10-91; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, as defined in section 10-91; 
(6)  A hospital; or 
(7)  A licensed child care facility. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building or structure, or portion of a building or structure. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement must be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, hospital or child care facility, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, historic district or residential lot. 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses must be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business fully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, historic district, residential lot, hospital or child care facility within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. Such provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Code 1995, § 158.513) 
Sec. 10-174. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 10-173, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the location restrictions of section 10-173. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the zoning board of adjustment shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  The zoning board of adjustment may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions of section 10-173 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article; 
(3)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  All other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(d)  The zoning board of adjustment shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the zoning board of adjustment is final. 
(e)  If the zoning board of adjustment grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the zoning board of adjustment's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the location restrictions of section 10-173 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(f)  If the zoning board of adjustment denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the zoning board of adjustment's action. 
(g)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article, other than the location restrictions of section 10-173. 
(Code 1995, § 158.514) 
Sec. 10-175. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if he allows the: 
(1)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the establishment; 
(2)  Exterior portions of the establishment to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, except to the extent permitted by this article; or 
(3)  Exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single chromatic color, except that this subsection does not apply to an establishment if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and 
b.  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the establishment, are painted the same color or are painted in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(b)  Nothing in this section requires the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1995, § 158.515) 
Sec. 10-176. - Sign required at entrance. 
    The operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain at each public entrance at least one conspicuous sign of a size of at least 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width, easily visible and legible to all persons prior to entry into the establishment, which contains a statement to the effect that: 
"This is a sexually oriented business establishment which regularly features  (describe activities or merchandise)  . If nudity or activity of a sexual nature offends you, do not come in. No person under 18 years of age is allowed entry" (if alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises)-"No person under 21 years of age is allowed entry." 
(Code 1995, § 158.507(D)) 
Sec. 10-177. - Primary and secondary signs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the state local government code or any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if he erects, constructs or maintains any sign for the establishment other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)  A primary sign may have no more than two display surfaces. Each display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  A secondary sign may have only one display surface. The display surface must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(4)  Not exceed five feet in height or four feet in width; and 
(5)  Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment. 
(d)  A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only: 
(1)  The name of the establishment; and/or 
(2)  One or more of the following phrases: 
a.  "Adult arcade"; 
b.  "Adult bookstore or adult video store"; 
c.  "Adult cabaret"; 
d.  "Adult motel"; 
e.  "Adult motion picture theater"; 
f.  "Adult theater"; 
g.  "Escort agency"; or 
h.  "Nude model studio." 
(e)  A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the phrase "Movie titles posted on premises," in addition to the phrases listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(f)  Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of a solid color, and each letter must be the same print type, size and color. The background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color. 
(Code 1995, § 158.516) 
Sec. 10-178. - Additional escort agency regulations. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts, or agrees to act, as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1995, § 158.517) 
Sec. 10-179. - Additional nude model studio regulations. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears, or knowingly allows another person to appear, in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(e)  An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if he touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(f)  A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(g)  A licensee or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or by a walk through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Code 1995, § 158.518) 
Sec. 10-180. - Additional adult theater and adult motion picture theater regulations. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(Code 1995, § 158.519) 
Sec. 10-181. - Additional adult motel regulations. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as defined in section 10-91. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means an act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1995, § 158.20) 
Sec. 10-182. - Additional adult cabaret regulations. 
(a)  An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if he touches a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(b)  A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee. 
(c)  A licensee or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or by a walk through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. 
(Code 1995, § 158.521) 
Sec. 10-183. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos. 
(a)  A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises, showing a plan thereof, specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram, in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint, shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to a designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the diagram requirement for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since the diagram was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager's stations of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners, operator and any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners, operator and any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1)-(8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill such duty. 
(Code 1995, § 158.522) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate animals, public pounds, § 13. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal control authority means the city animal control officer who has authority over the area where a dog is kept. 
    At large means any animal off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
    Dangerous dog means a dog which: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person which causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and such acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to such person. 
    Dangerous wild animal has the same meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101, a lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote, jackal, baboon, chimpanzee, gorilla or any hybrid of animal listed in this definition. 
    Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
    Domestic animal means an animal which is naturally tame and gentle, or which, by long association with man, has become thoroughly domesticated and is now reduced to such a state of subjection to his will that such animal no longer possesses a disposition or inclination to escape. 
    Kennel means any place where more than four dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, where the total exceeds four animals over the age of ten weeks, and where such animals are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept. 
    Nuisance means any animal or fowl kept, maintained or harbored within the city, which: 
(1)  Has fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities; 
(2)  Has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person, animal or fowl; 
(3)  By loud, unusual or prolonged barking or howling, causes the peace and quiet of any neighbor, neighborhood or occupant of any adjacent premises to be disturbed; or 
(4)  Has repeatedly destroyed or damaged any property. 
    Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of a dog. 
    Restraint means when an animal is: 
(1)  Confined within a fence or enclosure on the premises of the owner; 
(2)  Fastened or picketed by a lead, rope or chain so as to keep the animal on the premises; 
(3)  Under the control of a person by a leash; 
(4)  On or within a vehicle being driven or parked; 
(5)  At heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command. 
    Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure which is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and 
(5)  In conformance with the requirements for enclosure established by the local animal control authority. 
    Vaccination means one injection of rabies vaccine, which has been approved by the U.S. Department of Public Health. 
    Wild animal means an animal of wild nature or disposition so as to require to be reclaimed and made tame by art, industry or education, or which must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate control of the owner. 
(Code 1995, §§ 91.01, 91.40(A); Ord. No. 02-22, § 1, 5-14-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041. 
Sec. 14-2. - Loud noises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or be in control of any animal which causes unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise, or causes material distress or discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1995, § 91.04) 
Sec. 14-3. - Animal traps. 
(a)  Placement and baiting. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to place or place and bait, or to permit the placing or placing and baiting, of any trap designed for trapping animals in any highway, street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Setting and baiting of certain traps prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to set or bait, or permit the setting, baiting or placing, of any trap designed for trapping animals and commonly known as a "steel jawed trap," "bear trap," "wolf trap" or "coyote trap," within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Declaration of abandonment; impoundment. Any traps described in this section which are found upon any public property shall be declared to be abandoned traps, and any police officer is authorized and directed to impound such traps and process them as abandoned property in accordance with section 34-145(c). 
(Code 1995, § 91.06) 
Sec. 14-4. - Wild animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to harbor, possess or maintain the following within the city limits: 
(1)  Bats; 
(2)  Skunks; 
(3)  Poisonous reptiles; 
(4)  Foxes and bobcats; 
(5)  Any wild animal whose normal mature weight exceeds 40 pounds; 
(6)  Any dangerous wild animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell any wild animal within the city limits. 
(c)  The owner shall keep his wild animal under restraint at all times. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to or prohibit the keeping of wild animals by the following: 
(1)  A publicly owned or privately owned zoo, maintained or operated by a nonprofit organization or governmental entity. 
(2)  A publicly maintained or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo, which does not remain in the city for longer than 30 days out of each year. 
(3)  Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals. 
(Code 1995, § 91.05; Ord. No. 02-22, § 2, 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 14-5-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 14-41. - Animal control officer; authority. 
(a)  Appointment. 
(1)  The city manager shall appoint, for a period to be terminated at the city manager's pleasure, a qualified person who shall act in the capacity of animal control officer. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. For his services, the animal control officer shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council. 
(2)  In lieu of the appointment of an animal control officer, the city council may designate such persons as it sees fit to operate the animal shelter or city pound according to the desires of the city council. Such persons shall be directly responsible to the city council. 
(3)  The animal control officer or the persons designated by the city council to run the animal shelter or city pound shall provide, at the expense of the city, sanitary and comfortable quarters and necessary sustenance for animals or fowl impounded pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Authority. Any person employed as an animal control officer shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Issue citations for violations of this chapter; and 
(2)  Enter upon any and all premises within the city limits to enforce any and all provisions of this chapter, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1995, § 91.65) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 
Sec. 14-42. - Duties of animal control department and animal control officer. 
(a)  Records. It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of: 
(1)  Impoundments. The impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into the custody of the animal control department. 
(2)  Bite cases. All bite cases reported to the animal control department and its investigation of such reports. 
(3)  Moneys received. Records shall be kept of all moneys received under this chapter, and such records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by persons responsible for similar records of the city, and shall be audited by the city auditor in the same manner as other city records which are audited. All moneys shall be turned in daily to the municipal court clerk for deposit in the city depository on the next work day. 
(b)  Monthly reports. The animal control officer shall monthly, or at such times as may be required by the city manager, account to the city for all moneys received by him by virtue of his official duties. At the same time, the animal control officer shall render to the city manager a full statement of all animals or fowl received into the animal shelter during the month, showing the name of the owner, if known, the date of sale, all of the animals or fowl destroyed, and all of the moneys expended by the animal control officer during the month for the maintenance of the pound. The animal control officer shall attach a receipt for all the moneys to the statement. The forms for such reports shall be furnished by the finance director of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 91.66) 
Sec. 14-43. - Interference with animal control department. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the animal control department in the performance of any duty of the agent, or seek or release any animal in the custody of the animal control department or its agents. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the interference alleged consisted only of speech. 
(Code 1995, § 91.03) 
Sec. 14-44. - Violations; citations. 
(a)  (1)  When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter and the ownership of such animal is known to the agent of the animal control department, the animal need not be impounded by the agent. If the owner agrees to sign a citation, the agent may issue a citation, which shall require the person to appear in court within ten days to answer a charge of a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The owner signing the citation shall only be a promise to appear and is not an admission of guilt. 
(3)  Upon being issued any citation, it shall be unlawful for any person to give the animal control employee a false name or address. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to fail to appear in municipal court within ten days of the signing of the citation. 
(b)  When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter, and its ownership is known to the agents of the animal control department and the owner cannot be located or refuses to sign a citation, the agent may impound the animal or file a complaint against the owner in municipal court. 
(c)  When an animal is found in violation of a provision of this chapter and its ownership is not known to the agent of the animal control department, the animal shall be impounded. 
(Code 1995, § 91.02) 
Sec. 14-45. - Hearing of nuisance; notice. 
(a)  Authority to hold hearing; order. Upon written complaint wherein any animal or fowl is alleged to be a nuisance, as defined in section 14-1, the municipal court of the city shall have the authority to order and hold a hearing, upon giving notice of such hearing to the owner of any such animal or fowl. A substantial copy of the order for a hearing, detailing the time, date, place and purpose for such hearing, personally delivered or enclosed in a correctly addressed envelope to the owner, postage prepaid and deposited in the United States mail within not less than three days prior to the date of the hearing, shall be deemed sufficient and proper notice. 
(b)  Appearance in court; arrest. 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be arrested upon written complaint. The person shall immediately be taken before the municipal court if he refuses to give his written promise to appear in court. 
(2)  Whenever any such arrested person is not immediately taken before the recorder of the municipal court, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court. The notice shall contain the name and address of the person, the offense charged, the time and place of the offense and when and where the person shall appear in court. The person must give his written promise to appear in court and may do so by signing, in duplicate, the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The appearance shall be at least three days from the date of arrest, unless an earlier hearing is demanded. The original of the notice shall be retained by the arresting officer, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the person, and the officer shall forthwith release the person. 
(3)  Any person willfully violating any part of the written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the original charge. 
(Code 1995, § 91.67) 
Secs. 14-46-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER HOUSEHOLD PETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-81. - Exemptions. 
    Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where such duties are expressly stated. 
(Code 1995, § 91.30) 
Sec. 14-82. - Restraint of dogs. 
    Every person who owns, keeps or is in charge of a dog shall restrain such dog at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 91.39) 
Sec. 14-83. - Number of dogs and cats permitted. 
    No person shall harbor or keep more than four dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, over ten weeks of age, when the total of such animals exceeds four, except in an animal pound, clinic, hospital or kennel as provided by chapter 94. 
(Code 1995, § 91.31) 
Secs. 14-84-14-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 

Sec. 14-101. - State standards adopted. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.013, the state board of health's regulations and standards for rabies control are adopted by reference, and incorporated in this division as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 91.50) 
Sec. 14-102. - Rabies vaccination. 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of four months within the city limits unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian, and licensed by the city. The animal shall be vaccinated periodically at one-year intervals from the initial date of vaccination. 
(Code 1995, § 91.32) 
Sec. 14-103. - Designation of local rabies control authority. 
(a)  The city council designates the chief of police to act as the local rabies control authority for the purposes of this division. 
(b)  Among other duties, the local rabies control authority shall enforce: 
(1)  V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826 and the Texas Board of Health Rules that comprise the minimum standards for rabies control; 
(2)  The ordinances or rules of the City of Brownwood constituting the city's local rabies control program; and 
(3)  The rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health under the area rabies quarantine provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.045. 
(Ord. No. 08-22, § 1, 7-22-2008) 
Secs. 14-104-14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES AND TAGS 

Sec. 14-121. - Furnishing licenses; tag exhibition. 
(a)  The city animal control department will furnish licensed veterinarians who agree to follow the provisions of this article with application forms and license tags for dogs and cats. 
(b)  The metal vaccination tag shall be exhibited on the animal's neck at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 91.33) 
Sec. 14-122. - Licensing requirements. 
(a)  Issuance. Dog and cat license tags shall be issued by the animal control department and authorized licensed veterinarians. 
(b)  Application. A written application for a dog or cat license shall be made upon a printed application form provided by the city, and shall state the name and address of the owner or keeper of the dog or cat, and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the animal being licensed. 
(c)  Fee; conditions. Dog and cat license tags shall be issued after payment to the city council of a license fee, as recommended by the humane society, in an amount established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, for a full year, or any part thereof, and upon meeting of one of the following conditions: 
(1)  Vaccination by a licensed veterinarian with an antirabies vaccine; or 
(2)  Presentation of a written, dated and signed paper certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian showing that such vaccination was given less than three months prior to the date of application for the license. 
(d)  Validity; expiration. The license issued under this division shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued, and shall expire on December 31 of such year. 
(e)  Exemptions. The provisions of this division requiring a license for dogs shall not apply to: 
(1)  Dogs brought into the city by nonresidents, when the dogs are not kept in the city for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Dogs in veterinary hospitals, boarding kennels or licensed breeding kennels; 
(3)  Dogs which are securely confined at all times; or 
(4)  Dogs brought into the city and entered in any dog show or exhibition for the period of time the show or exhibition is held. 
(Code 1995, § 91.34) 
Sec. 14-123. - License expiration notice; annual fee. 
    On or before the expiration date of a license, the proper department of the city may send a notice of expiration to the owner indicated by the records of the city for the annual fee. If the owner has not reported the death of the animal or its removal from the city before the annual fee becomes due, he is liable for the fee currently due. 
(Code 1995, § 91.35) 
Sec. 14-124. - Proof of ownership. 
    The license information shall be kept on permanent file with the city, and a certified copy of the information shall constitute prima facie proof in any court of the ownership of the animal. 
(Code 1995, § 91.36) 
Sec. 14-125. - Citation for failure to pay annual fee. 
    If the owner of a dog or cat has not paid the annual license fee within 30 days of the date such fee is due, the owner of the animal to which the fee applies may be cited in the manner set out in section 14-45. 
(Code 1995, § 91.37) 
Sec. 14-126. - License tag. 
(a)  Provision; placement; identification number; replacements; refunds. 
(1)  Every person who owns, keeps or is in charge or control of a dog or cat within the city shall provide and place a collar or harness on the dog or cat, which shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times when the dog or cat is off the premises of the person, and such person shall attach the metal license tag obtained pursuant to this division to the collar or harness. 
(2)  The dog or cat license tag shall have an identification number stamped on it, which shall be assigned to the animal for the calendar year in which the tag is issued. If the tag is subsequently lost, a replacement tag shall be issued for a fee in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. No refunds shall be made on any license fee because of the death of the animal or the removal of such animal from the city before the expiration of the license period. 
(b)  Removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any metal tag issued under the provisions of this division from any dog or cat without written consent of the owner of the dog or cat. 
(Code 1995, § 91.39) 
Secs. 14-127-14-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.041-822.047. 

Sec. 14-151. - Owner requirements. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he is the owner of a dangerous dog, such person shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority; 
(2)  Restrain the dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure; 
(3)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person, and provide proof to the animal control authority of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility; and 
(4)  Comply with the applicable regulations, requirements or restrictions for dangerous dogs. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a person shall learn that he is the owner of a dangerous dog when the owner: 
(1)  Knows of an attack as described in the definition of "dangerous dog," as set forth in section 14-1; 
(2)  Receives notice that a justice court, county court or municipal court has found the dog is a dangerous dog; or 
(3)  Is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(c)  If a person reports an incident as described in the definition of "dangerous dog," as set forth in section 14-1, the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of such fact. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) of this section shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(e)  Not later than the 30th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by him is a dangerous dog, he may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to a justice or municipal court of competent jurisdiction. An owner may appeal the decision of the justice or municipal court in the same manner as an appeal for other civil cases. 
(Code 1995, § 91.40(B)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.042, 822.0421. 
Sec. 14-152. - Registration. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner: 
(1)  Presents proof of: 
a.  Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 14-151(a)(3); 
b.  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and 
c.  The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept. 
(2)  Pays an annual registration fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, the owner shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which the new address is located. Upon presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, the animal control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. 
(c)  An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. 
(Code 1995, § 91.40(C)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.043. 
Sec. 14-153. - Unprovoked attacks. 
    A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(Code 1995, § 91.40(D)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.044. 
Sec. 14-154. - Defenses to prosecution. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is: 
(1)  A veterinarian, peace officer, person employed by a recognized animal shelter or employed by the state, or political subdivision of the state, to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody or control of the dog in connection with such position. 
(2)  An employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency, and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or correction purposes. 
(3)  A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under the Private Security Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1702.001 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 91.40(E)) 
State Law reference- Defenses, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.046. 
Secs. 14-155-14-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-181. - Authorization. 
    The agents of the animal control department are authorized to take up all: 
(1)  Dogs found not to be restrained by their owners; or 
(2)  Cats which do not have a vaccination tag as provided by sections 14-102 and 14-126(a), or found not to be restrained by their owners. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41(A)) 
Sec. 14-182. - Vaccinated dogs. 
(a)  Period of confinement. A dog impounded as authorized in section 14-181 shall be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five working days. 
(b)  Notice. Upon impounding a dog found with a current vaccination tag, the agents of the animal control department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner that his animal has been impounded and the conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of such animal. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41(B)) 
Sec. 14-183. - Unvaccinated dogs and cats. 
    Dogs or cats without a vaccination tag which are impounded as authorized by section 14-181 shall become the property of the animal control department after the expiration of two working days. If such dogs or cats are unclaimed and unredeemed as provided in section 14-185, they may be disposed of in a humane manner as provided in section 14-187. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41(C)) 
Sec. 14-184. - Redemption. 
(a)  Dogs and cats. The owner shall be entitled to resume the possession of any impounded dog or cat, except as otherwise provided in this section for certain dogs or cats, upon compliance with the provisions of sections 14-102 and 14-126(a) and the payment of the impoundment fees as set forth in section 14-185. 
(b)  Unvaccinated animals over four months of age. Any animal over the age of four months which does not have a current rabies vaccination may not be redeemed until it has been vaccinated. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41(D)) 
Sec. 14-185. - Fees. 
(a)  Any dog or cat impounded under this division may be reclaimed as provided in section 14-184 upon payment of the following fees to the animal control department by the owner, or person taking custody through purchase or adoption: 
(1)  Taking up and impounding each dog, a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(2)  Taking up and impounding each cat, a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(3)  Taking care of each dog and cat, a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  For computation purposes of the charges set forth in subsection (a) of this section, each day shall begin at 12:01 a.m. The full fee shall be charged when the animal is kept for any portion of a day. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41(E)) 
Sec. 14-186. - Removal of animal from animal shelter without permission. 
    It shall be unlawful to remove, or attempt to remove, any impounded animal or fowl from the city animal shelter without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(Code 1995, § 91.70) 
Sec. 14-187. - Donated, unclaimed and impounded animals. 
(a)  Deemed property of animal control. Donated and impounded animals (in the case of an impounded animal, after the requirements of section 14-125 are satisfied and such animal is unclaimed and unredeemed as provided in section 14-184) shall become the property of the animal control department. 
(b)  Powers of department. The animal control department shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Authority to transfer title. The animal control department may transfer title of an animal. In the event of such transfer of title, the person or agency to whom the title is transferred shall pay for such animal's food and care while the animal is in the animal shelter and shall comply with the applicable vaccination provisions. 
(2)  Right to destroy. The animal control department may humanely destroy an animal. 
(3)  Placement in custody of responsible and suitable person. The animal control department may place any animal held at the animal shelter in the custody of a person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Destruction of donated, sick or injured animals. The animal control department may destroy any animal by a humane method if the animal has been donated to the shelter with the request that it be destroyed, or if the animal is so sick or injured that its cure is considered by the animal control department to be impractical, or if death is imminent, in either of such events, the destruction may be done immediately, without notice of any waiting period. 
(5)  Transfer of title to humane society. The animal control department may transfer title of an animal to any legitimate humane society for purposes of adoption. In the event of transfer and subsequent placement of the animal in the custody of a person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, the humane society shall be required to give rabies shots to such animals over the age of four months which are transferred. There shall be no charge for expenses incurred for previous care of an animal, or for the animal and its transfer of title to the humane society. 
(Code 1995, § 91.68) 
Secs. 14-188-14-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK AND FARM ANIMALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 142.001 et seq. 

Sec. 14-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means all livestock, farm animals and domestic animals, other than dogs, cats or other domesticated household pets. 
(Code 1995, § 91.15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-222. - Running at large; herding. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or be in control of any livestock and farm animal which runs at large within the city limits, including, but not limited to, horses, mules, cows, sheep, swine, goats, geese, chickens, ducks, rabbits, fowl or any other animal. 
(b)  The driving of herds of such animals along or upon any street, avenue or alley of the city is hereby prohibited. This subsection shall not apply to or prohibit the herding of animals along or upon any street, avenue or alley of the city by: 
(1)  A publicly maintained or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo, which does not remain in the city for longer than 30 days out of each year. 
(2)  Any officer, agent or employee of the federal, state or local government, or agencies thereof, if such herding is done in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1995, § 91.16) 
Sec. 14-223. - Keeping of swine. 
(a)  No person who is the owner of any swine, or any person who has any swine under his management or control, shall keep the swine or allow it to remain in any pen or other place within the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to or prohibit the keeping of swine by the following: 
(1)  A publicly owned or privately owned zoo, maintained or operated by a nonprofit organization or governmental entity. 
(2)  A publicly maintained or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo, which does not remain in the city longer than 30 days out of each year. 
(3)  Slaughterhouses and livestock auctions. 
(4)  Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals. 
(5)  A publicly owned agricultural farm maintained or operated by a governmental entity for educational purposes only. 
(Code 1995, § 91.19; Ord. No. 10-13, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 14-224. - Temporary confinement. 
    If any animal is found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to temporarily confine such animal until he can notify the animal control department. When notified, it shall be the duty of the animal control department to impound such animal as provided in section 14-225. 
(Code 1995, § 91.18) 
Sec. 14-225. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Animals in violation of article. Any peace officer or agent of the animal control department shall take up and impound any animal found in violation of this article. 
(b)  Sale of impounded animals. After having held an animal impounded under the provisions of this article for at least five days, the animal control department shall sell such animal, at private sale, for cash, to the highest bidder, and after deducting all of the expenses of the sale and taking up and keeping of the animal, the balance of proceeds, if any, shall be returned to the owner of the animal. If the owner is unknown, the balance shall be paid into the city treasury. Any time within 30 days after such sale, the owner may apply to the animal control officer and, upon satisfactory proof of his ownership, he shall be entitled to receive the balance of the proceeds, which shall be the money deposited after deducting all of the expenses of the sale and taking up and keeping of the animal, paid into the city treasury on account of such sale. 
(c)  Disposition of impounded animals. If any impounded animal is found to be affected with rabies or seriously injured, or if the animal control officer has determined the animal is not salable, or if the animal cannot be sold as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall forthwith be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. All decisions as to the condition or salability of the animal shall be made by the animal control officer, after seeking competent advice, if necessary. 
(d)  Redemption before sale. The owner of any animal not affected with a contagious disease and impounded under the provisions of this section may redeem the animal before it is sold by paying the poundage fees as set out in subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Redemption after sale. The owner of any impounded animal which is sold under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section may redeem the animal by paying double the amount paid by the purchaser to him for such animal and his reasonable expenses for keeping the animal, provided that the owner will redeem the animal within 30 days after the date of the sale; otherwise, the animal becomes the absolute property of the purchaser. 
(f)  Records. For at least one year, the animal control department shall keep a record giving the description of all animals impounded, the date of impoundment, date of sale, amount realized for such animal, and name and address of the purchaser. 
(g)  Fees. All fees charged shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(1)  Fees shall be charged on ungulated or hoofed (even-toed and odd-toed) animals, including, but not limited to, horses, cows, sheep, goats, etc., for: 
a.  Taking up and impounding each animal. 
b.  Taking care of each animal after the day of impoundment. 
(2)  For computation purposes of the charges set forth in this subsection (g), each day shall begin at 12:01 a.m. The full fee shall be charged when the animal is kept for any portion of any day. 
(Code 1995, § 91.17) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 30; taxation, ch. 62; coin-operated machines, § 62-181 et seq.; utilities, ch. 70; vehicles for hire, ch. 74; CN neighborhood commercial district, § 98-371 et seq.; C-1 local business district, § 98-391 et seq.; C-2 general business district, § 98-411 et seq.; C-2A downtown business district, § 98-431 et seq.; M-1 restricted industrial district, § 98-451 et seq.; M-2 industrial district, § 98-471 et seq.; telecommunications, § 98-671 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 1-8, adopted March 13, 2007, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 18-1-18-120, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1995 §§ 94.01, 94.10-94.20, 94.30-94.35; and Ord. No. 02-08 §§ I, II, adopted Feb. 12, 2002. 
State Law reference- Food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 431.081-431.084; food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
    The City of Brownwood adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Tex. Admin. Code, ch. 229, §§ 161-171 and 173-175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction, including any future amendments of such rules. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1.A., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-32. - Definitions. 
    Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
    Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
    Municipality of Brownwood in this article shall be understood to refer to the City of Brownwood. 
    Regulatory authority means the Brownwood/Brown County Health Department. 
    State rules means the state rules found at 25 Tex. Admin. Code, ch. 229, §§ 161-171 and 173-175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1.B., 3-13-2007) 
Secs. 18-33-18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-51. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 4.A., B., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-52. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 7.A., B., 3-13-2007) 
Secs. 18-53-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 18-81. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this division. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this division, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2.A., B., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-82. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewal of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for a initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  The following fee schedule applies to permits issued under this division: 
One year permit (January 1-December 31)\$75.00 
Seasonal permits (up to 6 months)\$35.00 
Temporary permits (1 to 5 days)\$20.00 
School cafeterias\$140.00 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 3.A.-C., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-83. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by section 18-83(b) of this article. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 5.A., B., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-84. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 6.A., B., 3-13-2007) 
Sec. 18-85. - Remedies. 
    The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 8., 3-13-2007) 
Secs. 18-86-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-121. - Exercise of police power. 
    This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and its citizens, and all of the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of such purpose. 
(Code 1995, § 112.01) 
State Law reference- Full power of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 
Secs. 18-122-18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ITINERANT MERCHANT, PEDDLER OR VENDOR 

Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant merchant, vendor or peddler means any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association going from house to house or place to place within the city, selling or soliciting orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. 
    Temporary means any business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one month, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(Code 1995, § 112.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-142. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business; 
(2)  Sales made under authority and by order of law; or 
(3)  Vendors of farm or dairy products raised or grown by such vendors. 
(Code 1995, § 112.03) 
Sec. 18-143. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any activity defined in section 18-141 without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Code 1995, § 112.04) 
Sec. 18-144. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to participate in any activity defined in sections 18-141 and 18-171 shall file a written application for a permit prior to the date on which the person intends to sell or solicit in the city. 
(b)  The application shall show the following information: 
(1)  The company that the person represents, including the: 
a.  Company name. 
b.  Field office address, principal official in the field office and such official's telephone number. 
c.  Home office address and telephone number, and the name and title of the principal official in the home office. 
d.  Name, title, mailing address and telephone number of the person in charge of sales in the city or the area, and the city address and telephone number of such person. 
e.  Names of all sales personnel. 
(2)  The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant. 
(3)  Such references as the chief of police shall require. 
(4)  The nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited. 
(5)  Upon any sale or order, whether the applicant shall demand, receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(6)  The period of time which the applicant wishes to peddle, solicit or sell in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 112.05) 
Sec. 18-145. - Term of permit. 
    Each person desiring to participate in any activity defined in sections 18-141 and 18-171 shall obtain a permit annually. 
(Code 1995, § 112.06) 
Sec. 18-146. - Street peddling, solicitation and selling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit or sell from the streets of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 112.07) 
Secs. 18-147-18-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSIENT MERCHANT OR VENDOR 

Sec. 18-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient merchant or transient vendor means all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who are engaged in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting such goods or merchandise for sale or for the purpose of taking orders for sale, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting exhibits of such goods or merchandise, either hires, rents, leases or occupies any room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure in the city in, through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 112.20) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-172. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any transient vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of any goods or merchandise in the city without first obtaining a permit as provided for in this section. 
(b)  The city shall issue a permit to any transient vendor authorizing the transient vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale in the city of his goods or merchandise only after the transient vendor shall have fully complied with all provisions of this division and made payment for the permit as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, and which sum shall be compensation to the city for the services required of the city by this division and to enable the city to partially defray the expenses of enforcing the provisions of this division, provided that: 
(1)  The transient vendor shall make application at least ten days prior to the date of his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city. The application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating: 
a.  The full name and address of the transient vendor; 
b.  The location of the transient vendor's principal office and place of business; 
c.  The names and addresses of the transient vendor's officers, if a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners, if the transient vendor is a firm. 
(2)  Before a permit shall be issued, the application must be accompanied by a: 
a.  Statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited. 
b.  Certified copy of the Charter, if the transient vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state. 
c.  Certified copy of the permit to do business in the state, if the transient vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of a state other than this state. 
d.  Bond in a sum of not less than $2,000.00, which shall be executed by the transient vendor as principal, with two or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the city. The bond shall be payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to a person caused by, arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the transient vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the permit, as provided in this division, and two years thereafter. 
(Code 1995, § 112.21) 
Sec. 18-173. - Permit transferability. 
    The permit provided for by this division shall not be transferable, nor give authority to more than one person to sell or exhibit goods or merchandise as an transient vendor, either by agent or clerk or in any way other than his own proper person, but any person having obtained a permit may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting the sale or exhibit, which persons shall have authority to aid the permittee, but not to act for or without him. 
(Code 1995, § 112.22) 
Sec. 18-174. - Duration of license; display on premises. 
    The permit as provided by this division shall continue so long as the sale or exhibit is continuously held in the city, but in no event shall it continue for more than 40 days from the date of its issuance. Permits shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale or exhibit is being conducted and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are being so sold or exhibited. 
(Code 1995, § 112.23) 
DIVISION 4. - SOLICITATION OF FUNDS PROHIBITED 

Sec. 18-175. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division the following words have the meaning indicated: 
    Parkway means the area between the curbline of the paved street and the adjacent owner's property line that has been dedicated for public use. 
    Solicit funds or solicitation of funds means to ask, beg, solicit, or plead, whether orally or in a written or printed manner, for money or other items or services of value. 
    Street means the portion of a public street, road, or state highway that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, plus all areas dedicated to public use for street purposes, including parkways, sidewalks and traffic islands. 
    Traffic island means a barrier with a street to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or directing streams of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 16-20 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Sec. 18-176. - Solicitation prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit funds while located on the following streets: (a) East and West Commerce Street; (b) Main Street and 377 South; (c) Austin Avenue and West Austin Avenue; and (d) Coggin Avenue. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person located on a street to solicit funds from the occupants of any motor vehicle on a street. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit funds within 150 feet of any intersection controlled by a traffic light. The distance from the intersection shall be measured from the nearest curbline of the street upon which the traffic light is located to the location of the solicitation of funds. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person soliciting funds at any time to enter into or remain in the portion of the street designated for vehicular traffic so that their presence impedes the flow of traffic. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit funds on the private property of another. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the solicitation of funds was being conducted on the private property of another with the consent and permission of the owner, manager, or other person in control of the property. 
(Ord. No. 16-20 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Sec. 18-177. - Exceptions. 
    Section 18-176(1), (2) and (3) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The solicitation of charitable contributions permitted by V.T.C.A. Texas Transportation Code §552.0071 of the provided that (a) the person obtains a written permit from the city's development services department by filing a written application, in a form provided by the city, with the city's development services department not later than the 11 th day before the date the solicitation is to begin; (b) permit applications must be accompanied by a certificate of insurance signed by an agent authorized to bind coverage indicating that the applicant has obtained, at his sole expense, insurance coverage (i) that is written by an insurance company with an A- or better rating by AM Best and that is admitted and licensed to do business in the state; (ii) that is in full force and effect for the duration of the permit period; (iii) that provides $1,000,000.00 of liability coverage per occurrence with no deductible; (iv) that insures the applicant and all persons who will be soliciting; (v) that names the city, its officers, employees, and elected representatives as an additional insured; (vi) that provides that any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it; and (vii) that is written on an occurrence basis. 
(2)  The solicitation of funds for the benefit of local civic organizations, local youth organizations or other local non-profit corporations, provided that they are not located in the portion of the street designated for vehicular traffic or on a traffic island. 
(Ord. No. 16-20 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Secs. 18-178-18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONVENIENCE STORE 

Sec. 18-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Convenience store means any place of business that is engaged in the retail sale of groceries, including the sale of prepared foods, and gasoline and services, and which is regularly open for business at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., and is attended by one employee during such hours. The term "convenience store" does not include a store which is solely or primarily a restaurant. Convenience food stores or grocery stores that are situated within office, condominium, apartment or cooperative buildings shall be exempt from this article, provided the building has a security system providing limited public access or provides a concierge, doorman or security guard at the main public entry during all hours of operation. 
(Code 1995, § 115.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-202. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that small businesses and automobile-related facilities which offer convenience food, gasoline and other services can become targets of opportunity for theft and violent crimes. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by increasing security for patrons and employees of such businesses by the use of surveillance cameras and other security devices. Surveillance cameras and security devices will assist in deterring crime in and adjacent to such businesses and can provide information to assist the police in investigating crimes that do occur. 
(Code 1995, § 115.01) 
Sec. 18-203. - Enforcement. 
    The city code officers, under the provisions of chapter 26, and all city law enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article. 
(Code 1995, § 115.21) 
Sec. 18-204. - Noncompliance. 
    Noncompliance with this article shall subject the owner or principal operator of a convenience store to the enforcement procedures and penalties provided for in sections 26-201-26-208, except if noncompliance with this article is corrected within ten days after receipt of the notice of noncompliance, no noncompliance fee shall be assessed. 
(Code 1995, § 115.10) 
Sec. 18-205. - Civil fine. 
    The city may seek the imposition of a civil fine of up to $1,000.00 for a willful and deliberate violation of this article by the owner or principal operator of a convenience store. Each day in violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1995, § 115.20) 
Sec. 18-206. - Security devices. 
    Every convenience store shall be equipped with, and continuously maintain, all of the following security devices: 
(1)  A security camera system capable of retrieving an image to assist in the identification and apprehension of a robber. Such camera must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record, and can be enlarged through projection or other means, and which shall be maintained and available to police for a period of five days before reuse or destruction. Cameras required by this section shall be either 35-millimeter surveillance cameras or videotaping surveillance cameras. Such cameras shall be maintained in proper working order at all times during all hours of operation of the business, and shall provide coverage of the register and adjacent customer area. 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device that provides minimum access to the convenience store's cash receipts. 
(Code 1995, § 115.03) 
Sec. 18-207. - Register amount sign. 
    Every convenience store shall have posted and continuously maintain a conspicuous sign in the convenience store entrance which states that the cash register contains $100.00 or less, or have a cash management program as set forth in section 18-211. 
(Code 1995, § 115.04) 
Sec. 18-208. - Camera surveillance sign. 
    Every convenience store shall have posted and continuously maintain a conspicuous sign in the convenience store entrance which states that the property is under camera surveillance. 
(Code 1995, § 115.05) 
Sec. 18-209. - Maintenance of window signs. 
    Every convenience store shall maintain its window signs so that there is a clear and unobstructed view of the cash register and transaction area. 
(Code 1995, § 115.06) 
Sec. 18-210. - Window tinting. 
    Window tinting on the windows of a convenience store is prohibited if such tinting reduces exterior or interior viewing of the convenience store during the hours of operation to which this article is applicable. 
(Code 1995, § 115.07) 
Sec. 18-211. - Cash management policy. 
    Every convenience store which does not have a drop safe shall institute and continuously maintain a cash management policy, approved by the chief of police, to limit the amount of cash on hand between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1995, § 115.08) 
Sec. 18-212. - Robbery deterrence and safety training programs. 
    Every convenience store shall provide robbery deterrence and safety training to its employees who work between the hours of 9:00 p.m and 6:00 a.m. Such training programs shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 115.09) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-31. - Director; coordinator; organization. 
(a)  There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the directory. 
(d)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 4-22-2003) 
Charter reference- Mayor as official head of city government, § 17. 
Sec. 22-32. - Powers and duties of director. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and recommending for adoption by city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the city or county emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other city, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within the county for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the state Disaster Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 2, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-33. - Comprehensive plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employee to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-34. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program of the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 4, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-35. - Applicability of regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 5, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-36. - Liability. 
    This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 6, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-37. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, and no person shall have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 7, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-38. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 8, 4-22-2003) 
Sec. 22-39. - Limitations. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 10, 4-22-2003) 
Chapter 26 - CODE ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abatement means any action the city may take on public or private property and any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a nuisance, including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding and securing or replacement of property. 
    Abatement notice means a notice issued by a code enforcement officer which requires a responsible person to abate a public nuisance. 
    Administrative enforcement order means an order issued by the building and standards commission, after a hearing, requiring a responsible person to correct a violation, abate a public nuisance, pay civil penalties and administrative costs or take any other action as authorized or required by this Code and applicable state codes. Such term may also include an order authorizing the city to abate a public nuisance or assess a code enforcement lien. 
    Cash deposit includes certificates of deposit and assigned securities in the form of savings accounts whenever a cash deposit is required as a condition of an application for activity related to a construction project under this Code. 
    City means the area within the territorial city limits and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provisions, or any law. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Brownwood, Texas, or his designee. 
    Code enforcement lien means a lien recorded to collect outstanding civil penalties and administrative costs imposed as part of a cost recovery, administrative or judicial code enforcement action. 
    Code enforcement officer means any person authorized to enforce violations of this Code or applicable state codes. 
    Code enforcement performance bond means a bond posted by a responsible person to ensure compliance with this Code, applicable state codes, a judicial action or administrative enforcement order. 
    Financial institution means any person that holds a recorded mortgage, deed of trust, claim or security interest on a property. 
    Imminent life safety hazard means any condition which creates a present, extreme and immediate danger to life, property, health or public safety. 
    Legal interest means any interest that is represented by a document, such as a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, security interest, mechanic's lien or other similar instrument which is recorded with the county clerk. 
    Notice of compliance means a document issued by the city manager representing that a property complies with the criteria set forth in section 26-236. 
    Notice of satisfaction means a document or form, approved by the city manager, which indicates that all outstanding civil penalties and costs have either been paid in full, or the city has negotiated an agreed amount, or a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has resolved the outstanding debt. 
    Notice of violation means a written notice used in abatement and civil penalties actions, prepared by an enforcement official, which informs a responsible person of code violations and of the consequences of the code violations, requires compliance, and contains specific information as required by this Code. 
    Owner means any person who shall have legal or equitable title, and shall include the executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of such persons, or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
    Property owner means the record owner of real property, based on the county clerk's and/or county appraisal district's records. 
    Public nuisance means any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist which constitutes a threat to the public's health, safety and welfare or which significantly obstructs, injures or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property in a neighborhood, community or to any considerable number of persons. 
    Responsible person means a person whom a code enforcement officer determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of this Code or applicable state codes. Such term includes, but is not limited to, a property owner, tenant or person with a legal interest in or possession of real property. 
    Substandard building means any building, or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guestroom, hotel, motel or suite of rooms, or the premises on which such building is located, in which any of the following conditions exist to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public, or the occupants thereof: 
(1)  A "condemned building," under the International Building Code, as defined in such code. 
(2)  Lack of, or not properly operative water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Lack of, or not properly operative water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers in a motel. 
(4)  Lack of, or not properly operative kitchen sink. 
(5)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a motel. 
(6)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit. 
(7)  Lack of, or improper operation of adequate heating facilities. 
(8)  Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment. 
(9)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this Code. 
(10)  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
(11)  Dampness of habitable rooms because of faulty weather protection. 
(12)  General dilapidation or inadequate maintenance. 
(13)  Lack of a connection to the required sewage disposal system. 
(14)  Infestation of insects, vermin, bats, birds or rodents. 
(15)  Lack of an adequate roof. 
(16)  Evidence of structural failure. 
    Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, printout by computer, facsimile and items listed in Texas Rules of Evidence, Rule 1001(1). 
(Code 1995, §§ 131.003, 131.602) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council finds that the enforcement of this Code and applicable state codes throughout the city and, to the extent permitted by law, within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, is an important public service. Code enforcement and state code enforcement is vital and necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with adopting applicable state statutes and codes and the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with code regulations. The city council further finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for administrative enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this Code and state statutes and codes. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any and all persons who are directly affected by any administrative action. Due process of law includes adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing and an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. Such procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative enforcement action. The procedures established by these administrative remedies are in addition to any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address code and applicable state code violations. Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action may require the city attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance. 
(Code 1995, § 131.001) 
Sec. 26-3. - Criminal violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code. A violation of any of the provisions or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by the maximum fine allowed by law and authorized by state statutes or other provisions of this Code. Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1995, § 131.007) 
Sec. 26-4. - Civil violations. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by this Code, any provision of this Code or applicable state law may be enforced by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a suit brought by the city. As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this Code, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty as allowed by law per violation of this Code or state law for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this Code or state law. 
(Code 1995, § 131.008) 
Sec. 26-5. - Recovery of civil penalties. 
    The city manager may collect all civil penalties and related administrative costs by the use of all appropriate legal means, including referral to the city attorney, the recordation of a code enforcement lien pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and state law, and the filing of a court action to recover such penalties and costs. 
(Code 1995, § 131.501) 
Secs. 26-6-26-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-41. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The city manager or any of the city's designated code enforcement officials, including staff members of the code administration department ("code enforcement officials") shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this Code, any and all other codes or ordinances of the city and applicable state codes. Such powers include the power to issue notices of violation, issue citations as provided in subparagraph (b), inspect public and private property and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code or applicable state laws. 
(b)  Any code enforcement official shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this Code and any and all other codes or ordinances of the city. If the person being cited is not present, the code enforcement official may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified mail, return receipt requested. If a person who receives a citation by personal service or as provided under this subsection fails to appear on the return date of the citation, the court may issue a warrant for the person's arrest for the violation described in the citation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a code enforcement official in the performance of his or her duties and enforcement under this section. 
(Code 1995, § 131.002(A); Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 4-10-2012) 
Secs. 26-42-26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 26-61. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that the enforcement throughout the city of this Code and applicable state codes is an important public service and its purpose in adopting V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, "Quasi-judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances", is to create and establish a building and standards commission and establish a procedure to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of ordinances and to seek quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 1995, § 131.201) 
State Law reference- Quasi-judicial enforcement of health and safety ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.031-54.044. 
Sec. 26-62. - Created. 
    In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, the city hereby creates a building and standards commission consisting of one, five-member panel to be appointed by the city council for a term of two years. The city council may appoint four alternate members to the commission to serve in the absence of one or more regular members as provided by state law. The building and standards commission shall conduct its activities and enforce this Code, ordinances and the state code and statutes in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54. The procedures established in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54 are in addition to any and all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable state codes. 
(Code 1995, § 131.202; Ord. No. 10-06, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 10-31, 11-23-2010) 
State Law reference- Building and standards commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033. 
Sec. 26-63. - Powers and duties. 
    The building and standards commission shall have the powers and duties to: 
(1)  Require the reduction in occupancy load of an overcrowded structure or vacation of a structure that is hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants; 
(2)  Permit the repair of a substandard structure as an alternative to demolition of the structure; 
(3)  Require the demolition of structures found to be substandard; 
(4)  Require the removal of personalty from a structure ordered vacated or demolished. Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a private transfer company if the owner of the personalty is not known, the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained or the owner fails to remove the personalty. The building and standards commission may cause any personalty removed to be stored in the care and custody of a bonded warehouse facility. Cost of removal and storage is the responsibility of the owner of the personalty; 
(5)  Require that a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure constituting a hazard be securely closed and made safe; 
(6)  Grant a variance when, in the opinion of the building and standards commission, a literal interpretation of the city's housing standards regulations would result in an imposition of an unnecessary or unreasonable hardship; and 
(7)  Interpret the provisions of the city's housing standards regulations in a way so as to carry out their intent and purpose and, from time to time, as it deems advisable, make suggestions and recommendations to the city council for improvement of the city's housing standards regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 131.205) 
Sec. 26-64. - Applicability of division. 
    This division applies only to ordinances: 
(1)  For the preservation of public safety relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits; 
(2)  Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design or width of entrances or exits; 
(3)  Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements; or 
(4)  Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents. 
(Code 1995, § 131.203) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.032. 
Sec. 26-65. - Municipal court proceeding not affected. 
    This division does not affect the ability of a municipality to proceed under the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Code 1995, § 131.204) 
Secs. 26-66-26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 

Sec. 26-91. - Authority to inspect. 
    The city manager and any code enforcement officer are authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this Code or applicable state codes and statutes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. Such duties may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter or inspect, a code enforcement officer, first authorized by the city manager, may seek an administrative inspection warrant or search warrant as provided for by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 
(Code 1995, § 131.005) 
Secs. 26-92-26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CODE ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-191 et seq. 

Sec. 26-111. - Findings. 
    The city council finds that the enforcement of this Code and applicable state codes throughout the city, and, to the extent permitted by law, within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, is an important public service. Enforcement of this Code and the state code is vital and necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The city council has adopted applicable state statutes and codes and drafted precise regulations for effectively applying administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds that a need exists to create a code administration department to implement judicial and administrative remedies critical to gain compliance with code regulations set out in Ordinance No. 97-18, adopted by the city council on May 3, 1997. 
(Code 1995, § 131.701) 
Sec. 26-112. - Code administrator. 
    The city council finds that the code administration department should be managed by the creation of a code administrator position, who shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this Code, any and all other codes or ordinances of the city and all applicable state codes. In addition to the power to issue notices of violation, to issue citations as provided in section 26-41, inspect public and private property and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code, any other codes or ordinances of the city or applicable state codes, the code administrator shall have supervisory status over positions within the code administration department. 
(Code 1995, § 131.702; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 4-10-2012) 
Sec. 26-113. - Staff implementation. 
    The code administration department shall consist of the code administrator, one code official II position and two code official I positions. 
(Code 1995, § 131.703) 
Sec. 26-114. - Procedure. 
    Using provisions established in this chapter, the code administration department shall implement a conscientious, balanced approach to code enforcement in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 131.704) 
Secs. 26-115-26-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-181. - Performance bond. 
    As part of any court action, the city has the authority to require a responsible person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with this Code, applicable state codes and statutes or any judicial action taken under this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 131.009) 
Sec. 26-182. - Judicial abatement. 
    The city has the authority to judicially abate public nuisances by the filing of criminal or civil actions. The city also has the authority to make the expense of the abatement of the nuisance a special assessment or a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, if permitted by law. 
(Code 1995, § 131.010) 
Sec. 26-183. - Service of notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever a notice of violation is required to be given under this Code for enforcement purposes, the notice shall be served by any of the following methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply: 
(1)  Personal service; 
(2)  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided that the notice sent by regular mail is not returned; or 
(3)  Conspicuously posting the notice on or in front of the property. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Service of notice by certified or regular mail in the manner described in subsection (a) of this section shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(c)  The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Code. 
(d)  The notice requirements in this section do not apply to initial notices of violation which may be sent by regular mail. Service of a notice of violation by regular mail is effective on the date of mailing. 
(Code 1995, § 131.011) 
State Law reference- Notice of proceedings before the Building and Standards Commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033. 
Sec. 26-184. - Proof of service of notice of violation. 
    Proof of service of a notice of violation may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years. The proof of service shall show that service was done in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Code 1995, § 131.012) 
Sec. 26-185. - Constructive notice of recorded documents. 
    Whenever a document is recorded with the county clerk as authorized or required by this Code or applicable state laws, recordation shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents. 
(Code 1995, § 131.013) 
Sec. 26-186. - Furnishing false or incomplete information. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the city council that every applicant for city licenses, permits, certificates, employment or other city actions under the provisions of this Code should be required to furnish true and complete information. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall willfully make a false statement or fail to report any material fact in any application for a city license, permit, certificate, employment or other city action under the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 131.014) 
Sec. 26-187. - Acts include causing, aiding and abetting. 
    Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this Code, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission. 
(Code 1995, § 131.015) 
Sec. 26-188. - Notice of pending administrative enforcement action. 
    The city manager or, at his direction, a code enforcement officer may record with the county clerk a notice against a property which is the subject of an administrative enforcement action pending with the city. Such notice shall be on a form approved by the city attorney, shall describe the property both by street address and legal description, and shall describe the nature of the administrative action and refer to the section of this Code governing the pending administrative action. The cost of recording such notice shall be a charge against the property and the person responsible. 
(Code 1995, § 131.016) 
Secs. 26-189-26-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINOR VIOLATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Alternative procedure for administrative hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.044. 

Sec. 26-201. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of this Code and applicable state law. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for these violations is a notice of violation program. 
(b)  The procedures established in this division shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable state laws. 
(Code 1995, § 131.401) 
Sec. 26-202. - Notice of violation-Authority; civil penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this Code or applicable state law may be issued a notice of violation by a code enforcement officer, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of this Code or applicable state law exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of a notice of violation issued by the code enforcement officer at a daily rate determined by the city manager or the building and standards commission, pursuant to the criteria listed in section 26-273, and shall be payable directly to the city. 
(d)  Penalties assessed by means of a notice of violation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 131.402) 
Sec. 26-203. - Same-Procedures. 
(a)  Upon discovering any violation of this Code or applicable state law, a code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to a responsible person in the manner prescribed in this division. The notice of violation shall be issued on a form approved by the city manager. 
(b)  If the responsible person is a business, the code enforcement officer shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue the business owner a notice of violation. If the code enforcement officer can only locate the manager of the business, the notice of violation may be given to the manager of the business. A copy of the notice of violation shall also be mailed to the business owner or responsible person in the manner prescribed by section 26-183. 
(c)  If the code enforcement officer is unable to locate the person responsible for the violation, then the notice of violation shall be mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed in section 26-183. 
(d)  If no person can be located at the property, then the notice of violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property, and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by section 26-183. 
(e)  The notice of violation shall be mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by section 26-183. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this division. 
(Code 1995, § 131.403) 
Sec. 26-204. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  Whenever a code enforcement officer determines that a violation of this Code or applicable state codes or laws exists, the city manager and/or code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to a responsible person. The notice of violation shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the property's record owner; 
(2)  Street address; 
(3)  Code sections violated or how the sections are violated; 
(4)  A description of the property's condition which violates the applicable codes; 
(5)  A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance; 
(6)  A deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of violation; 
(7)  A description of the civil penalties assessed for the violations; and 
(8)  Reference to the potential consequences if the property should remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline, including, but not limited to, criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation and withholding of future municipal permits. 
(Code 1995, § 131.404) 
Sec. 26-205. - Appeals. 
    An appeal of a notice of violation shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 131.405) 
Sec. 26-206. - Administrative enforcement order. 
(a)  An appeal hearing shall follow the enforcement hearing procedures set forth in section 26-235. 
(b)  As part of the administrative enforcement order, the building and standards commission may reduce, waive or conditionally reduce the penalties or late fees assessed by the notice of violation. 
(c)  The building and standards commission may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violations or require payment of any outstanding penalties. 
(d)  The building and standards commission may assess reasonable administrative costs. 
(Code 1995, § 131.406) 
Sec. 26-207. - Penalties. 
(a)  The city manager shall establish policies to assist in the assessment of civil penalties for notices of violation. 
(b)  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation, nor shall such payment bar further enforcement action by the city. 
(c)  All penalties assessed shall be payable to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 131.407) 
Sec. 26-208. - Failure to pay penalties. 
    The failure of any person to pay the civil penalties assessed by a notice of violation within the time specified on the notice may result in the city manager referring the matter to the city attorney to file a claim in a court having jurisdiction over the amount in controversy. Alternatively, the city manager may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 131.408) 
Sec. 26-209. - Allocation of administrative penalties. 
    Administrative civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the code enforcement civil penalties fund established pursuant to this chapter (set forth in section 26-311). 
(Code 1995, § 131.409) 
Secs. 26-210-26-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REAL PROPERTY VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 26-231. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcement for violations of this Code and applicable state codes and laws which are found to exist on real property. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for such types of violations is the issuance and recordation of notices of violation. 
(b)  The procedures established in this division shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable state codes and statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 131.420) 
Sec. 26-232. - Notice of violation-Recordation procedure. 
(a)  Once a code enforcement officer has issued a notice of violation to a responsible person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, the city manager may record the notice of violation with the county clerk. 
(b)  Before recordation, the city manager shall provide to the responsible person a letter stating that a notice of violation will be recorded unless a written request is filed to appeal, pursuant to the procedures outlined in this division. The letter shall be served pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section 26-183. The city manager may also send a courtesy copy of the letter to any applicable financial institution. 
(c)  If the city manager does not receive the written request to appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in this division, he may record the notice of violation if the violation remains. 
(d)  The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner's assessor's parcel number, the parcel's legal description and a copy of the latest notice of violation. 
(Code 1995, § 131.421) 
Sec. 26-233. - Same-Service. 
    A copy of the recorded notice of violation shall be served on the responsible person and property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section 26-183. 
(Code 1995, § 131.422) 
Sec. 26-234. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  An appeal of the city manager's letter to record a notice of violation shall follow the procedures set forth in section 26-235. 
(b)  Upon receiving a written appeal, the city manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing before the building and standards commission. The purpose of the hearing is for the responsible person or property owner to state any reasons why a notice of violation should not be recorded. 
(c)  The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation. 
(Code 1995, § 131.423) 
Sec. 26-235. - Appeal hearing. 
(a)  An appeal hearing shall follow the hearing procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  At the appeal hearing, the building and standards commission shall only consider evidence that is consistent with the city manager's rules and procedures for administrative enforcement hearings and that is relevant to the following issues: 
(1)  Whether the conditions listed in the notice of violation violate this Code or applicable state codes; and 
(2)  Whether the city afforded the responsible person with due process by adhering to the notification procedures specified in this division. 
(c)  If the building and standards commission affirms the city manager's decision, the city manager may proceed to record the notice of violation. 
(d)  If the building and standards commission determines that recordation is improper, the building and standards commission shall invalidate the city manager's decision to record the notice of violation. 
(Code 1995, § 131.424) 
Sec. 26-236. - Notice of compliance. 
(a)  When the violations listed on the notice of violation have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may file with the city manager a written request for a notice of compliance on a form provided by the city. 
(b)  Once the city manager receives the request, the city manager or his designee shall reinspect the property within 30 calendar days to determine whether the violations listed on the notice of violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed. 
(c)  The city manager shall serve a notice of compliance to the responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in section 26-184, if the city manager determines that: 
(1)  All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected; 
(2)  All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; 
(3)  All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid; and 
(4)  The party requesting the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the city for all administrative costs. 
(d)  Administrative costs may include costs incurred in the investigation, inspection, reinspection, title search, appeal hearing and any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the notice of violation. 
(e)  If the city manager denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, he shall serve the responsible person or property owner with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in section 26-183. 
(f)  The city manager's decision to deny a request to issue a notice of compliance constitutes the final decision in the matter and is not appealable. 
(Code 1995, § 131.425) 
Sec. 26-237. - Withholding permits. 
    The city may withhold permits for any alteration, repair or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure, if a request to appeal has not been timely filed, or after the building and standards commission affirms the city manager's decision to record a notice of violation. The city may withhold permits until a notice of compliance has been issued by the city manager. The city may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Code 1995, § 131.426) 
Sec. 26-238. - Recordation of notice of compliance; cancellation of recorded notice of violation. 
    The city manager, property owner or responsible person shall record the notice of compliance with the county clerk's office. The recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. 
(Code 1995, § 131.427) 
Secs. 26-239-26-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-271. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcement of this Code and applicable state codes and statutes. The city council further finds that the assessment of civil penalties through an administrative hearing procedure for code violations is a necessary alternative method of code enforcement. 
(b)  The administrative assessment of civil penalties established in this article is in addition to any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable state codes and statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 131.440) 
Sec. 26-272. - Authority; applicability. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this Code or applicable state codes or statutes may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties pursuant to the administrative procedures provided in sections 26-273-26-278. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of any provision of this Code or applicable state codes or statutes exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
(c)  Civil penalties may be directly assessed by a notice of violation issued by a code enforcement officer or affirmed by the building and standards commission. Civil penalties may be recovered by assessment of a code enforcement lien or subsequent legal action brought by the city attorney. 
(d)  Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this Code or applicable state codes and statutes shall be assessed at a daily rate determined by the city manager or the building and standards commission pursuant to the criteria listed in section 26-273. The maximum rate shall be the amount specified in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017. 
(Code 1995, § 131.441) 
State Law reference- Civil penalty, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017. 
Sec. 26-273. - Determinations; penalty schedule. 
(a)  In determining the date when civil penalties started to accrue, the city manager may consider the date when the city first discovered the violations as evidenced by the issuance of a notice of violation or any other written correspondence. 
(b)  The assessment of civil penalties shall end when all action required by the notice of violation has been completed. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed on a daily rate, the city manager may consider some or all of the following factors: 
(1)  Duration of the violation. 
(2)  Frequency or recurrence of the violation. 
(3)  Seriousness of the violation. 
(4)  History of the violation. 
(5)  Responsible person's conduct after issuance of the notice of violation. 
(6)  Good faith effort by the responsible person to comply. 
(7)  Economic impact of the penalty on the responsible person. 
(8)  Impact of the violation upon the city. 
(9)  Hardship on the responsible party. 
(10)  Any other factors that justice may require. 
(d)  The city manager has the authority to establish a penalty schedule to use as a guideline in determining the amount of civil penalties in appropriate cases. The city manager shall also establish procedures for the use of the penalty schedule. 
(Code 1995, § 131.443) 
Sec. 26-274. - Administrative costs. 
    The city manager and/or the building and standards commission are authorized to assess any reasonable administrative costs. Administrative costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions. 
(Code 1995, § 131.444) 
Sec. 26-275. - Failure to comply with notice of violation. 
    The city manager shall request the building and standards commission to establish a date, time and place for the civil penalties hearing when the responsible person fails to comply with the terms of the notice of violation. Failure to comply includes failure to: 
(1)  Pay the assessed civil penalties; 
(2)  Commence and complete corrections by the established deadlines; or 
(3)  Refrain from continuing violations of this Code or applicable state codes. 
(Code 1995, § 131.445) 
Sec. 26-276. - Consideration of evidence. 
    The building and standards commission shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the following issues: 
(1)  Whether the responsible person has caused or maintained a violation of this Code or applicable state codes or statutes that existed on the dates specified in the notice of violation; and 
(2)  Whether the amount of civil penalties assessed by the city manager pursuant to the procedures and criteria outlined in section 26-273 was reasonable. 
(Code 1995, § 131.446) 
Sec. 26-277. - Administrative enforcement order. 
(a)  Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the building and standards commission shall issue an administrative enforcement order which affirms or rejects the notice of violation or modifies the daily rate or duration of the civil penalties, depending upon the review of the evidence. The building and standards commission may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs that are assessed by the notice of violation. 
(b)  The building and standards commission may issue an administrative enforcement order that requires the responsible person to cease from violating this Code or applicable state codes and statutes and to make necessary corrections. 
(c)  As part of the administrative enforcement order, the building and standards commission may establish specific deadlines for the payment of penalties and costs and condition the total or partial assessment of civil penalties on the responsible person's ability to complete compliance by specified deadlines. 
(d)  The building and standards commission may issue an administrative enforcement order which imposes additional civil penalties that will continue to be assessed until the responsible person complies with the building and standards commission's decision and corrects the violation. 
(e)  To ensure compliance with the administrative enforcement order, the building and standards commission may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 131.447) 
Sec. 26-278. - Failure to comply with administrative enforcement order. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in the administrative enforcement order, the city manager may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties, administrative costs and obtain compliance with the administrative enforcement order. 
(b)  After the building and standards commission issues an administrative enforcement order, the city manager shall monitor the violations and determine compliance. 
(Code 1995, § 131.448) 
Secs. 26-279-26-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECOVERY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES AND COSTS 

Sec. 26-311. - Code enforcement civil penalties fund. 
    Civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the code enforcement civil penalties fund as established by the city manager for the enhancement of the city's code enforcement efforts and to reimburse city departments for investigative costs and costs associated with the hearing process that are not paid by the responsible person. Civil penalties deposited in such fund shall be appropriated and allocated in a manner determined by the city manager. The city finance officer shall establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit and collection. 
(Code 1995, § 131.502) 
Sec. 26-312. - Notice of satisfaction. 
    Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the city manager shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner or financial institution with the notice of satisfaction so they can record the notice with the county clerk's office. The notice of satisfaction shall include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement lien, and shall cancel the code enforcement lien. 
(Code 1995, § 131.503) 
Sec. 26-313. - Recoupment of expenses. 
    It is the intent of this section that, over a minimum three-year period commencing October 1, 1997, the city shall recover 100 percent of the full cost, including indirect charges, of code enforcement activities from fees derived from code enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the city manager or his designee to review the code enforcement income at yearly intervals and recommend to the city council the need to increase or decrease code enforcement fees according to the result of such review. 
(Code 1995, § 131.504) 
Secs. 26-314-26-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VOLUNTARY CODE COMPLIANCE PROGRAM 

Sec. 26-341. - Purpose; created. 
    Believing that city fear of present code enforcement programs is based in part on the unreasonable fear that people will be forced to meet standards beyond the standards required for health and safety; and believing that the citizens of the city have displayed an earnest desire to preserve the livability of their city and deserve the opportunity to voluntarily meet basic minimum standards for health and safety, there is hereby created a voluntary code compliance program. 
(Code 1995, § 131.601) 
Sec. 26-342. - Certificate of code compliance authorized. 
    The owner of any building within the city, other than an accessory building, may obtain a certificate of code compliance relating to such building by submitting an application to the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 131.602) 
Sec. 26-343. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a certificate of code compliance shall be made on the form provided by the city manager or his designee and must be duly signed by the owner. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The street address of such building; 
(2)  The height and number of stories contained in the building; 
(3)  The type of construction used in the building; and 
(4)  The nature of the occupancies of the building. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may, if needed, request any plans or surveys for multiple dwellings or other additional information or assistance from the owner of any building. 
(Code 1995, § 131.603) 
Sec. 26-344. - Code compliance inspection. 
    Upon proper application for a certificate of code compliance and the payment of the required fees, the city manager or his designee shall cause the general construction, plumbing, electrical and other mechanical installations of the building to be inspected for safety and sanitation. The standards for the code compliance inspection shall be the minimum requirements of the code which are applicable to existing buildings and the inspection will not pertain to nonrequired items or building features, such as, but not limited to, fireplaces, pools, saunas, air conditioners, carpeting and humidifiers. In making the inspection, it shall be assumed that any concealed facilities and installations that are not viewed are adequate, based on the functional operations of the facilities and installations and the condition of the equipment that is viewed. 
(Code 1995, § 131.604) 
Sec. 26-345. - Issuance of certificate of code compliance. 
    Whenever the inspection, made pursuant to a request for a certificate of code compliance, shows the building to be in compliance with the requirements of the code with respect to housing, zoning, general construction, plumbing, electrical and other mechanical installations, based on the present occupancy of the building, the city manager or his designee shall issue a certificate of code compliance, setting forth the result of the inspection, containing the date of the inspection or the date the inspection was concluded, and a statement to the effect that such building complies with the provisions of the code as of the date of the inspection. The certificate shall clearly indicate it is not a guarantee. Such certificate of code compliance shall not be in lieu of or replace the requirement of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1995, § 131.605) 
Sec. 26-346. - Building noncompliance. 
    When the results of the code compliance inspection shall show that the building fails, in any respect, to comply with the provisions of the code, the city manager or his designee shall notify the owner of such failure to comply, and specify where such building fails to comply with the requirements of the provisions of the code. The city manager or his designee shall take the necessary action to secure compliance with the provisions of the code, so that no immediate hazard to health or safety of the occupants is allowed to continue. 
(Code 1995, § 131.606) 
Sec. 26-347. - Fee. 
    The fee for the inspection of the building and issuance of the certificate of code compliance shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 131.607) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Burglar alarm systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.191-214.197; fire alarm systems, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the police or fire department, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion or fire. 
    Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system that is under the control of one owner. 
    Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal acts or unauthorized entries by warning persons of a crime, unauthorized entry or fire through the emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message. Such term does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site. 
    Automatic alarm notification means an alarm notification sent over telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message, synthesized voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Central station means an office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and/or guards are continuously maintained to investigate signals. 
    Chief means the chief of police or fire chief of the city or his authorized representative. 
    False alarm notification means an alarm notification to the police or fire department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, attempt to take a person hostage or a fire. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site which is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure. 
    Permit holder means the person designated in the application, as required in section 30-61, who is responsible for responding to alarms, giving access to the site, proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
(Code 1995, § 90.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Monitoring. 
(a)  The police department of the city will house, monitor and respond to alarm systems for the following types of establishments within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Chartered financial institutions. 
(2)  Drugstores. 
(3)  Health care facilities. 
(4)  Industrial plants with nonannexation contracts. 
(5)  Jewelry stores. 
(6)  Schools. 
(b)  The fire department of the city will house, monitor and respond to alarm systems for the following types of establishments: 
(1)  Chartered financial institutions. 
(2)  Commercial establishments. 
(3)  Health care facilities. 
(4)  Industries. 
(5)  Schools. 
(Code 1995, § 90.02) 
Sec. 30-33. - Applicability; exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any person who operates, or causes to be operated, an alarm system at any alarm site. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state or federal governmental entities and private alarm systems which do not summon the police or fire department by direct connection via an electrical device. 
(Code 1995, § 90.03) 
Sec. 30-34. - Liability; city to be held harmless. 
    The application to the city or its designated agent shall contain a provision that the city shall not be liable for any failure of service or damages, including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, which might result from the installation or operation of any receiving station alarm, automatic dialing device or local alarm. All applicants must agree to indemnify the city for all claims, demands, judgments or other liability in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(Code 1995, § 90.04) 
Sec. 30-35. - Violations; penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article, and any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1995, § 90.05) 
Secs. 30-36-30-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 30-61. - Required; application; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, an alarm system without an alarm permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm system. 
(b)  An initial fee, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be charged for the issuance of each permit. The renewal fee shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required fee, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant, unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 30-100 or has had an alarm permit for the alarm system revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
(d)  Each permit application must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the permit holder who will be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, such as burglary, robbery, personal hostage or fire; 
(3)  Other information required by the chief which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(f)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another alarm system, except by authorization of the chief. A permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within two business days. No fee will be assessed for any such changes. 
(g)  A permit holder shall cancel a permit for any alarm system which is removed from an alarm site or otherwise ceases to come under the permitting requirements of this division. Cancellation may be accomplished by returning the permit to the chief. 
(h)  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(Code 1995, § 90.15) 
Sec. 30-62. - Duration and renewal. 
    An alarm permit is issued for one year and must be renewed every year upon submission of an updated application. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. The chief shall determine the first expiration date of a permit. 
(Code 1995, § 90.16) 
Sec. 30-63. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated any part of this article; 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make payment of a service fee assessed under section 30-100 within 30 days of receiving notice to do so. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Code 1995, § 90.17) 
Sec. 30-64. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. Within ten days after receipt of the notice from the chief, the applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city secretary by written request for a hearing, setting forth the reason for the appeal. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city secretary stays an action of the chief in revoking a permit until the city secretary or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief is final. 
(b)  The city secretary shall set a time and place for the hearing, which shall be served upon the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city secretary or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence and of cross examination. Within 15 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed, the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The time for hearing an appeal may be extended by agreement of the parties. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Code 1995, § 90.18) 
Secs. 30-65-30-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 30-91. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications; 
(3)  Respond within 30 minutes, or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time, when requested by the chief, to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, provide access to the premises or provide security for the premises; 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason, other than occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(5)  Notify the police department or fire department prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance purposes. 
(b)  A permit holder shall adjust, or cause to be adjusted, the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 30 minutes after being activated. 
(Code 1995, § 90.30) 
Sec. 30-92. - Yearly inspection; certification. 
    Prior to January 10 of each year, establishments shall make arrangements with their alarm system company to inspect and provide written certification to the city that their alarm system is in proper working order. Failure to provide certification will result in charging for all alarm responses at the rate, per response, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 90.38) 
Sec. 30-93. - Reset required. 
    A permit holder of an alarm system that utilizes a local alarm shall adjust, or cause to be adjusted, the mechanism so that, upon activation, the local alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without first being reset. 
(Code 1995, § 90.31) 
Sec. 30-94. - Indirect reporting. 
    A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief. 
(2)  Comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief. 
(Code 1995, § 90.32) 
Sec. 30-95. - Automatic telephone dialing notification. 
    Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived (12-11-1990), no permit will be issued for the use of alarm systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm condition directly to the police department by means of a recorded message. 
(Code 1995, § 90.33) 
Sec. 30-96. - Operating instructions. 
    A permit holder shall maintain a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site. Special codes, combinations or passwords must not be included in the instructions. 
(Code 1995, § 90.34) 
Sec. 30-97. - Dispatch records. 
(a)  The police or fire dispatcher receiving an alarm notification and/or the officer responding to a dispatch resulting from a burglary, robbery, personal hostage or fire alarm notification shall cause to be recorded in the police or fire information systems such information, as necessary, to permit the chief to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Identification of the permit holder; 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(3)  Dispatcher-received time, dispatch time and officer-arrived-at-scene time; 
(4)  Date of occurrence; 
(5)  Name of permit holder's representative on the premises, if any. 
(b)  The responding police officer or firefighter shall prepare and submit the appropriate reports in regard to any criminal offense, attempt, fire or other incident which contributed to the alarm notification, as determined by the investigation. 
(Code 1995, § 90.35) 
Sec. 30-98. - Performance reviews and consultations. 
(a)  The chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder to review circumstances of each false alarm if there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms. 
(b)  The permit holder or his representative may request a conference with the chief if there is a belief that an alarm is the result of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the permit holder. 
(Code 1995, § 90.36) 
Sec. 30-99. - Service fee for false burglar alarm notifications. 
    Except as provided in sections 30-101 and 30-102, the holder of an alarm permit or alarm site, responded to upon call, shall pay a fee for each false burglar alarm notification emitted from an alarm system, as follows: 
(1)  Beginning January 1 of each year, five false alarms will be answered free of charge. 
(2)  Each false burglar alarm in a 12-month period will be billed at the rate, per response, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 90.37(A)) 
State Law reference- False burglar alarm fee, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.197. 
Sec. 30-100. - Service fee for false fire alarm notifications. 
    Except as provided in sections 30-101 and 30-102, the holder of an alarm permit or alarm site, responded to upon call, shall pay a fee for each false fire alarm notification emitted from an alarm system, as follows: 
(1)  Beginning January 1 of each year, three false fire alarms will be answered free of charge. 
(2)  The next three false fire alarms in such 12-month period will be billed at the rate, per response, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(3)  The next three false fire alarms will be billed at the rate, per response, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(4)  Each false fire alarm thereafter will be billed at the rate, per response, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 90.37(A)) 
Sec. 30-101. - Service fee exemption when permit applied for prior to installation. 
    If a person notifies the chief and applies for an alarm permit before a new alarm system is put into service, no service fee will be assessed during the first 60 days after the system is put into service, and alarm notifications during such period will not be counted in determining when a service fee shall be assessed. 
(Code 1995, § 90.37(B)) 
Sec. 30-102. - Service fee exemption for alarm notifications. 
(a)  If the responding police officer or firefighter determines that an alarm notification was caused by unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, attempt to take a person hostage or fire, including smoke, the notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed. 
(b)  An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the permittee can prove that the alarm notification was the result of a severe weather condition, such as a tornado, hurricane, earthquake or other weather condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of a malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals. Proof of the malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals shall be documented in the form of telephone company work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company showing the periods of interrupted service. 
(Code 1995, § 90.37(C), (D)) 
Sec. 30-103. - Late payment of service fee. 
    If a permit holder or alarm site which is responded to by the fire or police department does not timely pay a service fee charge required in this division, the chief shall file a complaint in the proper court to force collection. 
(Code 1995, § 90.37(E)) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; rabies control, § 14-101 et seq.; dangerous dogs, § 14-151 et seq.; combustible materials and flammable liquids, § 38-131 et seq.; natural resources, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; hazardous waste discharge notification, § 70-102(j); buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; International Property Maintenance Code, § 78-71 et seq.; moving buildings, § 78-481 et seq.; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 94; storage of inflammable and explosive materials; open burning prohibited; fire zone, § 94-256; zoning, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSECURED, VACANT STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to condemn dangerous buildings, § 13. 

Sec. 34-31. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  Structures that are vacant and unsecured or boarded attract vagrants, gang members and other criminals as prime locations to conduct illegal criminal activities. 
(2)  Structures that are vacant and not properly secured are extremely vulnerable to being set on fire by unauthorized persons. 
(3)  Structures that are vacant and unsecured or boarded are a blight and cause deterioration and instability in neighborhoods. 
(4)  Structures that are vacant and unsecured or boarded pose serious threats to the public's health and safety and, therefore, are declared to be public nuisances. 
(b)  Immediate abatement and rehabilitation of the structures set forth in subsection (a) of this section is necessary and can be accomplished by using the judicial or administrative procedures found in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 97.01) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Responsible person means a person whom a code enforcement officer determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of this Code or applicable state codes. Such term includes, but is not limited to, a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real property or person in possession of real property. 
    Statement of intent means a form filled out by the owner of a boarded structure by a code enforcement officer which contains specific information from the property owner regarding the structure and the owner's plan for its rehabilitation and maintenance. 
    Vacant structure means any structure or building that is: 
(1)  Unoccupied or occupied by unauthorized persons; and 
(2)  Unsecured or boarded. 
(Code 1995, § 97.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-33. - Enforcement authority. 
    Any code enforcement officer authorized by the city manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 97.03) 
Sec. 34-34. - Enforcement remedies. 
    Violations of this article may be prosecuted as misdemeanors and shall be subject to the fines and administrative penalties as provided in this article. The city manager may also seek injunctive relief and civil penalties in the district court or pursue any administrative remedy provided in articles III and IV of chapter 26. 
(Code 1995, § 97.04) 
Sec. 34-35. - Duty to remove waste, rubbish and debris from interior of structure. 
    It is unlawful for any responsible person in charge or control of any structure to fail to remove any waste, rubbish or debris from the interior of the structure. 
(Code 1995, § 97.06(A); Ord. No. 02-03, pt. 1, 1-8-2002) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54. 
Sec. 34-36. - Duty to remove waste, etc., from yards. 
    It is unlawful for any responsible person in charge or control of any structure to fail to remove any waste, rubbish, debris or excessive vegetation from the yards surrounding the structure to the edge of a paved street or alley or to the centerline of any undeveloped or unpaved street or alley. 
(Code 1995, § 97.06(B); Ord. No. 02-03, pt. 1, 1-8-2002) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 54. 
Sec. 34-37. - Duty to lock, barricade or secure doors, windows and openings. 
    It is unlawful for any responsible person in charge or control of any vacant structure to fail to lock, barricade or secure all doors, windows and other openings. 
(Code 1995, § 97.06(C)) 
Sec. 34-38. - Administrative abatement procedures. 
(a)  Whenever a code enforcement officer or the city manager determines that a vacant and unsecured structure exists within the city, an abatement notice and order may be sent to the responsible person, directing abatement by cleaning and securing or boarding. Boarding shall be done pursuant to the standards established in section 34-39. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall follow the administrative abatement procedures provided in articles III and IV of chapter 26. 
(c)  If the responsible person does not comply with the abatement notice and order, and no appeal is filed, the city may: 
(1)  Clean and board the unsecured, vacant structure; and 
(2)  Recover all costs pursuant to the procedures set forth in articles III and IV of chapter 26. 
(d)  If the city boards the structure, all barricade materials supplied by the city shall become the property of the responsible person, upon payment of all costs to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 97.07) 
Sec. 34-39. - Boarding standards. 
    Except as provided in subsection (8) of this section, the responsible person or the city shall board a vacant structure in accordance with the following specifications and requirements: 
(1)  Remove all waste, rubbish or debris from the interior of the structure; 
(2)  Remove all waste, rubbish, debris or excessive vegetation from the yards surrounding the vacant structure; 
(3)  Boarding shall be as specified in the city property maintenance code listed in chapter 78 of this Code; 
(4)  Post the premises. One or more signs shall be posted at or near each entrance to the structure and on fences or walls, as appropriate. The signs shall remain posted until the structure is either lawfully occupied or demolished. Signs shall contain the following information: 
DO NOT ENTER 
It is unlawful to enter or occupy this building or premises or to remove or deface this notice. 
(Brownwood Municipal Code) 
City of Brownwood, Texas 
Trespassers will be prosecuted 
(5)  In lieu of requiring the responsible person to board a structure as set forth above, the city manager may allow the responsible person to board the vacant structure in a manner which the city manager determines adequately prevents unauthorized entry or vandalism, or deterioration from the elements. In any event, a responsible person shall post the premises as set forth in subsection (7) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 97.08; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.B, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 34-40. - Unlawful entry or occupancy; interference with notice. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or occupy any structure or premises which has been posted pursuant to section 34-39(7), except to repair or demolish the structure under a proper permit or for a purpose authorized by the owner. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to remove or deface any notice posted pursuant to section 34-39(7) until the required repairs or demolition have been completed or a certificate of occupancy has been issued in accordance with appropriate provisions of the building code as adopted in section 78-31. 
(Code 1995, § 97.09) 
Sec. 34-41. - Continuous abatement authority. 
(a)  If a vacant structure previously abated by the responsible person or the city pursuant to a notice and order again becomes unsecured and open to unauthorized entry, the city may, without further notice to the responsible person, proceed to abate the nuisance and recover costs as provided for in this article. 
(b)  If the yards surrounding a vacant structure again contain debris, rubbish, waste or excessive vegetation, the city may, without further notice to the responsible person, proceed to abate the nuisance and recover costs as provided for in this article. 
(c)  The building and standards commission may issue an administrative enforcement order that would give the city continuous abatement authority to: 
(1)  Abate a vacant structure which again becomes unsecured and open to unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Abate the yards surrounding a vacant structure if the yards again contain debris, rubbish, waste or excessive vegetation. 
The building and standards commission may establish notice requirements, as may be reasonable. 
(Code 1995, § 97.10) 
Sec. 34-42. - Abatement costs. 
(a)  Abatement costs shall include the cost to perform the actual work and the city's cost to administer any abatement. 
(b)  Once the abatement is complete, the city shall recover all abatement costs by all remedies allowed by this Code or state codes and statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 97.11) 
Sec. 34-43. - Continuous public nuisances. 
    Any vacant structure that was originally secured by the responsible person's voluntary actions or pursuant to judicial or administrative order may be declared a permanent public nuisance by the city if the structure continues to remain open and unsecured on a periodic basis, thereby requiring additional reinspections and resecuring of the structure. The city may seek demolition of the continuous public nuisance by seeking a court order or follow any of the administrative abatement procedures found in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 97.12) 
Sec. 34-44. - Statement of intent. 
(a)  The city shall create and make available a form entitled "Statement of Intent," to be completed by the owner of a vacant structure. 
(b)  The owner of a vacant structure shall complete the information required on the standard statement of intent and submit the statement of intent to the city manager within 30 days of the date the city manager determines that the structure became boarded. 
(c)  The city manager shall determine whether a submitted statement of intent is complete, and may require an owner to provide more complete information. 
(d)  The statement of intent shall include: 
(1)  Information as to the expected period of vacancy; 
(2)  A plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy; and 
(3)  A plan and timeline for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or demolition of the vacant structure. 
(e)  It is unlawful to: 
(1)  Fail to file a statement of intent within the time period specified in subsection (b) of this section; or 
(2)  File a statement of intent which does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 97.13) 
Secs. 34-45-34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS AND EXCESSIVE GROWTH OF VEGETATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power over weeds or other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004; additional authority to abate dangerous weeds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.008. 

Sec. 34-81. - Maximum growth. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, within the corporate limits of the city, to the edge of a paved street or alley or the centerline of any undeveloped or unpaved street or alley, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, to suffer or permit grass, weeds or brush that is uncultivated to grow to a height greater than 12 inches on such lot, tract, or parcel of land, five acres or less in size, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  On tracts of land more than five acres, it shall be unlawful to suffer or permit grass, weeds and brush in excess of 12 inches in height to grow uncultivated within 100 feet of the edge of a paved street or alley or the centerline of any undeveloped or unpaved street or alley within the corporate limits of the city or within 100 feet on either side of any lot that is occupied by a residence or business. 
(Code 1995, § 99.01; Ord. No. 02-03, pt. 2, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 34-82. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When any violation of this article is found to exist, a notice by letter will be sent to the owner of the property in question. The notice may be given as follows: 
(1)  Personally to the owner, in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained, by: 
a.  Publication of the notice at least once; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(b)  If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice is considered to have been delivered. 
(c)  In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, without further notice, the city may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed, in writing, by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, and assess the expenses as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
(d)  Upon the giving of the annual notice, no further notice shall be required pursuant to this article. 
(e)  The notice of violation shall contain the following statements: 
(1)  "You are required to maintain your property so as to keep grass, brush and weeds at a height of less than 12 inches; 
(2)  "If you fail to do so, the city will enter upon your property and mow, or have it mowed, at 30-day intervals, during such annual growing season; 
(3)  "You have seven days from the date of this notice to correct the violation; and 
(4)  "Tall weeds are a breeding ground for rats and mice, and are a source of fuel for many fires. Please help us clean up Brownwood." 
(Code 1995, § 99.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006. 
Sec. 34-83. - Action upon failure of owner to mow. 
    In addition to court action, the city may enter upon the property found in violation of this article and mow, or have the property mowed, at 30-day intervals, during such annual growing season if the owner fails to mow the property. 
(Code 1995, § 99.03) 
Sec. 34-84. - Assessment of city's expenses; billing. 
    Expenses incidental to the action taken by the city to correct any condition coming under the provisions of this article, which includes a service charge to cover administration costs, plus a penalty charge as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be assessed against the owners of all outstanding interests in the lot or parcel of land involved. An itemized bill of such costs shall be mailed by the city to each such owner if the owner's address is known. 
(Code 1995, § 99.04) 
Sec. 34-85. - Action upon nonpayment of bill. 
    If the bill for the city's expenses in correcting any condition coming under the provisions of this article, including the administrative and penalty charges, shall remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after the date of the mailing of the bill, the city shall file a statement of the bill as provided in section 34-86. 
(Code 1995, § 99.05) 
Sec. 34-86. - Statement of expenses; lien. 
(a)  The mayor, city health authority or city official designated by the mayor shall file with the county clerk a statement of expenses in correcting any condition coming under the provisions of this article. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. 
(b)  The lien obtained by the city council is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. 
(c)  The lien is inferior only to: 
(1)  Tax liens; and 
(2)  Liens for street improvements. 
(d)  The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. 
(e)  The statement of expenses, or a certified copy thereof, is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(f)  The remedy provided by this section is in addition to the remedy provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.005. 
(g)  The city council may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a proceeding relating to the property brought under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 33, subch. E (V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.91 et seq). 
(Code 1995, § 99.05) 
State Law reference- Assessment of expenses, lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
Sec. 34-87. - Administrative citation. 
    In addition, this article may be enforced pursuant to the notice of violation in section 26-201. 
Secs. 34-88-34-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.; seizure and auction of abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-121-34-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Unclaimed property, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.17. 

Sec. 34-141. - Public nuisance declared; impoundment authorized; exemptions. 
(a)  Any personal property, other than a motor vehicle, which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance, the city Charter or any state law, or which is left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, public property or public place in the city, or which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in or on any public street, alley or sidewalk in such a manner as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or constitute a barrier to vehicular or pedestrian traffic is declared a public nuisance. When any such property is found by a police officer or city code enforcement officer, it shall be removed, or caused to be removed, summarily to the police pound or any other place of impoundment designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Trash receptacles and newspaper and magazine vending machines on public sidewalks shall not be deemed obstructions under this section. 
(Code 1995, § 95.01) 
Sec. 34-142. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Within ten days after any personal property is impounded under this division, the impounder shall notify the owner of such property and all lienholders, if their names and addresses are known, that such property has been impounded. 
(Code 1995, § 95.02) 
Sec. 34-143. - Lien on impounded property. 
    A lien for all costs incurred in the impounding, storing and advertising for sale of personal property pursuant to this division shall exist and inure to the benefit of the person actually impounding such property. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the impounder may retain possession of such property until all costs are paid and may sell the property as provided in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 95.03) 
Sec. 34-144. - Redemption of impounded property. 
    The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any impounded personal property, as provided for in this division, may redeem the property by: 
(1)  Paying to the impounder, before sale, the applicable fees set out in section 34-143; 
(2)  Paying to the buyer at the sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property, and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping the property, provided that the property shall be redeemed from the buyer within 30 days after the date of the sale, excluding the date of sale, otherwise title to the property shall become absolute in the buyer. 
(Code 1995, § 95.04) 
Sec. 34-145. - Sale of unredeemed property. 
(a)  When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within 30 days after being impounded, the property may be sold in the manner designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Before selling any personal property as provided for in this section, the impounder shall post two notices thereof, one at the county courthouse door and one at the city hall, and shall cause a copy of such notice to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a daily newspaper published in the city, and the date of the first publication shall be at least 14 days prior to the day of the sale. The notice of sale shall: 
(1)  Describe the impounded property; 
(2)  State that the property is unredeemed; 
(3)  State that the property will be sold; 
(4)  Designate the place, manner and time and date of the sale, which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of the first posting of such notice. 
(c)  When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the impounder shall sell such property in the manner designated by the city manager, and execute a bill of sale of such property to the purchaser thereof, provided that the impounder shall execute or deliver only a conditional bill of sale until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of a period of 30 days, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(Code 1995, § 95.05) 
Sec. 34-146. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
    After deducting the fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to section 34-147, the impounder shall hold the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to pay to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds within 30 days, the proceeds shall belong to the impounder. 
(Code 1995, § 95.06) 
Sec. 34-147. - Impoundment fees and charges. 
    The fees established by this article shall be charged and shall be paid to an impounder pursuant to the provisions of this article (see section 34-143). 
(Code 1995, § 95.07) 
Secs. 34-148-34-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. 

Sec. 34-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is inoperative and over five years of age, and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has illegally remained on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property for more than 48 hours without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property; 
(4)  Has been left unattended for more than 48 hours on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the state turnpike authority or a controlled access highway. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.002. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police, his designee or any duly commissioned police officer. 
    Code enforcement officer means any person authorized to enforce violations of this Code or applicable state codes. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501, that does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate, or a motor vehicle that cannot be started, driven, operated, steered and stopped, under its own power and without causing damage to the vehicle, because of mechanical failure, breakdown or disrepair or because it has been wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled. 
(Code 1995, § 95.10) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-172. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683 are hereby adopted by reference to establish a comprehensive and uniform procedure for the impounding, storage and sale of abandoned motor vehicles within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 95.12) 
State Law reference- Notice, seizure, auction or disposal, storage fees, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.011 et seq. 
Sec. 34-173. - Leaving inoperable motor vehicle unattended. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or allow an inoperable motor vehicle to remain on any public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or public property within the city for a period of more than 48 continuous hours, and the presence of such inoperable motor vehicle upon any such public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or public property after the expiration of such 48-hour period is hereby declared unlawful and to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 95.11) 
Sec. 34-174. - Authority to impound; administrative procedures established. 
    The city manager is authorized to provide, by contract or otherwise, for the impounding, storage and disposition of abandoned motor vehicles and shall establish such administrative procedures as he deems necessary for the securing of proof of abandonment, collection of fees, distribution of proceeds of sale or redemption, giving of notices and impounding and sale of abandoned and junked motor vehicles, consistent with this article and the Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 
(Code 1995, § 95.13) 
Sec. 34-175. - Interference with impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any junked or abandoned motor vehicle by the chief of police or any code enforcement officer pursuant to this article or the Texas Litter Abatement Act. 
(Code 1995, § 95.14) 
Sec. 34-176. - Notice required prior to impoundment. 
    At least 48 hours prior to impounding any abandoned motor vehicle, whether such vehicle is on public or private property, a code enforcement officer or police officer of the city shall securely affix a visible, dated, brightly colored notice of abandonment to such vehicle, and a record of the date and time such notice was affixed shall be maintained by the chief of police or the code enforcement officer, as the case may be. If the motor vehicle is subsequently impounded as abandoned, proof that the motor vehicle was not removed from the public or private property after the visible notice of abandonment was attached to the vehicle shall be prima facie proof in any court that the: 
(1)  Vehicle was left unattended and abandoned for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle; and 
(2)  Owner of such vehicle caused, allowed, suffered and permitted the motor vehicle to remain at the place where such motor vehicle was impounded for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 95.15) 
Sec. 34-177. - Impoundment, storage and other fees. 
(a)  The fees established by this section shall be charged by, and paid to, the director of finance, his designee or the person engaged by the city to impound and store abandoned motor vehicles, if upon, upon redemption of an abandoned motor vehicle, or out of the proceeds of the sale of such motor vehicle, if the motor vehicle is not redeemed. 
(b)  The fees established for service rendered under the provisions of this article shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 95.16) 
Sec. 34-178. - Notice of sale at public auction. 
    Any motor vehicle not redeemed as provided by law shall be sold at public auction in the manner provided by the city manager. Before selling any such motor vehicle, a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall post two notices of the sale, one at the county courthouse and one at city hall, and shall cause a copy of such notice to be published in a daily newspaper in the city at least ten days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall describe the year, make and model of the impounded motor vehicle to be sold, state that the motor vehicle is unredeemed and is being sold at public auction under reserve pursuant to the Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq., and state the time, date, place and manner of the sale. The notice shall further state that the failure of the owner and the lienholder to exercise their rights to reclaim any vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholder of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. The notice shall also state that the Texas Litter Abatement Act provides that the purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. Such notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Failure to give notice required by this section, in whole or in part, shall not affect the sale of such motor vehicle, it being the intention of the city council that the procedures set forth in this section for giving notice of the sale shall not be a precondition of the sale, but merely a means of advertising the sale to potential bidders. The impounder may establish a minimum bid for the sale of any motor vehicle offered for sale pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 95.17) 
Sec. 34-179. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
    A code enforcement officer, the chief of police or his designee shall maintain records containing: 
(1)  A description of each motor vehicle impounded, by the year, make and model of each vehicle; 
(2)  The date and time of such impoundment; 
(3)  The date notices of impoundment are advertised or mailed to holders and owners of record and the return receipts from such mailings; 
(4)  The date the motor vehicles are redeemed or sold; 
(5)  The amount realized for each motor vehicle at such sale; 
(6)  The amount of fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to this division; 
(7)  The names and addresses of the owners and holders, if known; 
(8)  The names and addresses of the buyers; 
(9)  The names and addresses of the garage keepers, if any, entitled to recover charges for servicing, storing or repair of the motor vehicles, upon redemption or sale, and the amount of such charges; and 
(10)  Any further information the city manager may deem necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 95.18) 
Secs. 34-180-34-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JUNKED VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 

Sec. 34-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071. 
(Code 1995, § 95.10) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-202. - Public nuisance declared. 
    Junked vehicles are detrimental to the welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city and state by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement as provided in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 95.30) 
Sec. 34-203. - Responsibility of owners and occupants of real property. 
    The owner or occupant of any real property within the city shall keep such property free of, and shall not permit or suffer the presence of, any junked vehicles on such property. 
(Code 1995, § 95.31) 
Sec. 34-204. - Notice to abate nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever any junked vehicle is located on any private property in violation of this division, a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall order the owner or the occupant of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, the last known registered owner of the nuisance and each lienholder of record of the nuisance to abate or remove the nuisance. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days after service of notice; 
(3)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle must be made to the municipal court clerk, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, before expiration of the ten-day period; and 
(4)  State that if no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of the ten-day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the vehicle is a junked vehicle. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served in accordance with section 26-183, to the owner or the occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists, the last known registered owner of the nuisance and each lienholder of record of the nuisance. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, the notice may be personally delivered. 
(d)  If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return of the notice. 
(Code 1995, § 95.32(A)) 
Sec. 34-205. - Order to abate or remove. 
(a)  Whenever any junked vehicle is located on public property or a public right-of-way within the city in violation of this division, a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall order the owner or occupant of the public premises or of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists, the last known registered owner of the nuisance and each lienholder of record to abate or remove the nuisance. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days after service of the notice; 
(3)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle, as defined in section 34-201, must be made to the municipal court clerk, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of the ten-day period; and 
(4)  State that if no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of the ten-day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the vehicle is a junked vehicle. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served in accordance with section 26-183, to the owner or the occupant of the private premises or occupant of the private premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such nuisance exists, the last known registered owner of the nuisance and each lienholder of record of the nuisance. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, the notice may be personally delivered. 
(d)  If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return of the notice. 
(Code 1995, § 95.32(B)) 
State Law reference- Notice, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.075. 
Sec. 34-206. - Visible notice to be placed on junked vehicles. 
(a)  At the time a junked vehicle is located by a code enforcement officer or the chief of police on either occupied or unoccupied private or public property or a public right-of-way, in addition to any other notices required in this division, a visible notice, brightly colored, but of a color different from the color used for notices of abandonment, shall be securely affixed to such vehicle. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State that the vehicle is a public nuisance and it must be removed and abated within ten days from the date on such notice; 
(2)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle, as defined in section 34-201, must be made to the municipal court clerk, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of the ten-day waiting period; 
(3)  State that if no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of the ten-day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and city ordinance; and 
(4)  State the date the notice was affixed. 
(b)  Affixing the notice as set out in this section shall not be a condition of requirement precedent to any proceeding or official action to abate such public nuisance, and such proceeding or action shall not be rendered void or voidable, nor in any way affected by failure to affix the visible notice prescribed in this section. 
(c)  If the ten-day period set out on the visible notice is different from the period of time prescribed in any other notice served as provided for in this division, then official action or proceedings to abate such public nuisance shall not be commenced until after the expiration of both periods of time. 
(Code 1995, § 95.33) 
Sec. 34-207. - Right to hearing. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which a junked vehicle is located may, within ten days after service of a notice to abate the nuisance, request the municipal court clerk of the city, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of a bond, that a date and a time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before the court, as set out in this section, and shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle and in violation of this division. Such hearing shall not be criminal in nature, and shall be as summary as due process and orderly procedure allows. Upon finding that such motor vehicle is in violation of this division, the judge of the municipal court shall order such defendant to remove and abate such nuisance within ten days, which period of time is reasonable. If the defendant shall fail and refuse to abate or remove the nuisance within ten days, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order directing a code enforcement officer or the chief of police to have the nuisance removed, and a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall take possession of such junked vehicle. The order shall include the vehicle's description, the current vehicle identification number and license plate number of the vehicle, if available at the time. 
(c)  Notice of any hearing set under this section shall be delivered to a code enforcement officer or the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 95.34) 
State Law reference- Hearing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.076. 
Sec. 34-208. - Authority to abate when vehicle owner cannot be found. 
    If there is a junked motor vehicle, as defined in section 34-201, on a premises that is occupied or unoccupied, and: 
(1)  Neither the owner nor the occupant of the premises can be found and notified to remove the junked vehicle; or 
(2)  The notice required by section 34-207(c) is returned undelivered by the U.S. Post Office and ten days after the return of such notice the nuisance has not been abated; 
then, upon a showing of such facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order directing a code enforcement officer or the chief of police to have the junked vehicle removed and a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall take possession of such junked vehicle and remove it from the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 95.35) 
Sec. 34-209. - Abatement upon noncompliance by owner with notice to abate. 
    If a person served with an order, pursuant to the provisions of this division, does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the municipal court within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided in this division, a code enforcement officer or the chief of police shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 95.36) 
Sec. 34-210. - Notice of impoundment to state. 
    Notice shall be given to the state department of public safety that a junked vehicle has been impounded within five days after the removal of the junked motor vehicle, as provided in this division, identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, impounded. 
(Code 1995, § 95.37) 
State Law reference- Notice to state, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(b)(3). 
Sec. 34-211. - Disposition of impounded vehicles. 
    The chief of police or a code enforcement officer shall dispose of all impounded junked vehicles in a manner as the city manager may designate, consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrapyard or demolisher. 
(Code 1995, § 95.38) 
State Law reference- Junked vehicle disposal, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.078. 
Sec. 34-212. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years of age. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle, or part thereof, for personal use to restore and preserve such vehicle for historic interest. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(b)  Nonapplicability. The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building, in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked, in a lawful manner, on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or 
(3)  Unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Code 1995, § 95.39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077. 
Sec. 34-213. - Filing of complaint. 
    A complaint shall be filed in the municipal court if a person maintains a public nuisance, as defined under the provisions of this division, and the nuisance is not removed and abated, and a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period provided in this division. If a person is found guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 95.40) 
State Law reference- Misdemeanor authorized, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.073. 
Secs. 34-214-34-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[8] 

Footnotes: 

Sec. 34-241. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
    The city finds and declares that: 
(1)  Inadequately controlled noise presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  The making and creating of disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises within the jurisdictional limits of the city is a condition which has persisted, and the level and frequency of occurrences of such noises continue to rise; 
(3)  The making, creation, or continuance of such excessive noises, which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place, and use, affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the city; 
(4)  Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his life, health, or enjoyment of property; and 
(5)  The necessity, in the public interest, for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared to be a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace, and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1995, § 96.01) 
Sec. 34-242. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, and definitions of technical terms not defined as follows shall be obtained from the American National Standard Acoustical Terminology, SI 1-1960 (ANSI S1.1-1960) (R-1976): 
    Average sound level means a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, as set forth in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters, SI 4-1971 (ANSI S1.4-1971). The term "average sound level" is also called "equivalent continuous sound level." 
    Community noise equivalent level means an average sound level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of five decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., and after addition of ten decibels to sound levels in the night before 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. 
    Construction equipment means any tools, machinery, or equipment used in connection wih construction operations, including all types of "special construction" equipment, as defined in pertinent sections of the state transportation code, when used in the construction process of any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site is located on-highway or off-highway. 
    Decibel means a unit measure of sound (noise) level. 
    Disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise means any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria or levels set forth in this chapter. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger of damage, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service. 
    Motor vehicles means any and all self-propelled vehicles, as defined in the state transportation code, specifically including, but not limited to, minibikes and go-carts. 
    Noise level or sound level means, in decibels, the quantity measured with a sound level meter, as defined herein, by use of the "A" frequency weighting and "fast" time averaging unless some other time averaging is specified. 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. The term "sound amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios, when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument for the measurement of sound, including a microphone, an amplifier, an attenuator, networks at least for the standardized frequency weighting "A," and an indicated instrument having at least the standardized dynamic characteristic "fast," as specified in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters, SI 4-1971 (ANSI S1.4-1971), or its successor. 
    Sound truck means any motor vehicle or other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1995, § 96.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-243. - Regulations for use of sound trucks. 
    Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted are music and human speech. 
(2)  Operations are permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. at and during public events and affairs of interest to the general public. 
(3)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour, provided that whenever said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic, where stopped by traffic, such sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, nursing homes, churches, or courthouses. 
(5)  No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be operated within the central business district of the city. 
(6)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be obscene, lewd, indecent, or slanderous. 
(7)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility and so that the volume of sound shall not exceed an "A" weighted sound level of 65 decibels on the "slow" scale at a distance of 50 feet from the sound amplifying equipment, as measured by a sound level meter which meets American National Standard ANSI S1.4-1983, or its successor. 
(8)  No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated unless the axis of the center of any sound reproducing equipment used shall be parallel to the direction of travel of the sound truck; provided, however, that any sound reproducing equipment may be so placed upon said sound truck as to not vary more than 15 degrees either side of the axis of the center of the direction of travel. 
(9)  No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to operate a noncommercial sound truck in violation of these regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 96.03) 
Sec. 34-244. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city to operate any sound amplifier which is part of or connected to any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle in such a manner that, when operation, it is audible at a distance of 30 feet, or such that, when operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 30 feet from the source. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued within the limits of the city any disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area. 
(c)  The characteristics and conditions which should be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists should include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The level of the noise; 
(2)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(3)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(4)  The level of the ambient noise; 
(5)  The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities; 
(6)  The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and the area where it is received; 
(7)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
(8)  The duration of the noise; and 
(9)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(Code 1995, § 96.04) 
Sec. 34-245. - Disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises. 
    The following activities, among others, are declared to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises in violation of this section and are unlawful: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. Unnecessary use or operation of horns, signaling devices, or other similar devices on automobiles, motorcycles, or any other vehicle. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, phonographs, loudspeaker amplifiers, and similar devices. 
a.  Uses restricted. The use or operation of any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and amplifier, or other similar machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any are of the city is prohibited. This shall not apply to any participant in a licensed parade or to any person who has been otherwise duly authorized by the city to engage in such conduct. 
b.  Prima facie violations. Any of the following shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section: 
1.  The operation of any such sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drum, phonograph, television set, machine, loudspeaker and sound amplifier, or similar machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located. 
2.  The operation of any sound amplifier which is a part of or connected to any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device, when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet and when operated in such a manner as to cause a person to be aware of vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 30 feet from the source. 
c.  Enforcement of prima facie violations. 
1.  Any peace officer who encounters evidence of a prima facie violation of this section is empowered to confiscate and impound as evidence any or all of the components amplifying or transmitting the sound. 
2.  Any peace officer who encounters evidence of a prima facie violation of this section, when the components amplifying or transmitting the sound are attached to a vehicle, may impound the vehicle as containing evidence of a criminal offense, when the amplifying and/or transmitting components cannot be readily removed from the vehicle without damaging the components or vehicle. 
(3)  Animals. 
a.  The keeping, maintenance, or permitting to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person, of any animal which, by any frequent or long-continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in the vicinity. 
b.  The noise from any such animal that disturbs two or more residents residing in separate residences adjacent to any part of the property on which the subject animal is kept or maintained, or three or more residents residing in 
Sec. 34-246. - Burglar alarms. 
Sec. 34-247. - Violations; additional remedies; injunctions. 
Sec. 34-248. - Manner of enforcement. 
Sec. 34-249. - Interference with enforcement. 
Sec. 34-250. - Penalty. 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 2-301 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention for oil and gas; identification signs, § 46-131; use of fire hydrants, § 70-282; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; fire suppression systems, § 78-291; fire hydrants, § 78-292; storage of inflammable and explosive materials; open burning prohibited; fire zone, § 94-256. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Arson reward. 
    The city hereby offers a standing or continuous reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person who shall, at any time, commit or attempt to commit the offense of arson within the city limits. 
(Code 1995, § 93.02) 
State Law reference- Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02. 
Sec. 38-2. - False fire alarm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely give an alarm of fire. 
(Code 1995, § 93.04) 
State Law reference- False alarm or report, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06. 
Sec. 38-3. - Burning of trash and the like. 
(a)  Within fire limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or attempt to burn paper, combustible material, or trash of any kind, character, or description within the fire limits of this city in any manner or by any means whatsoever, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Outside fire limits. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building, premises, vacant lot, or enclosure in the city and outside of the fire limits to burn or attempt to burn leaves, papers, or trash of any kind, character, or description at the building, premises, vacant lot, or enclosure in any manner other than in an iron, brick, stone, or metal receptacle, or incinerator. If, in the opinion of the fire marshal, dangerous conditions exist, he may order the discontinuance of burning provisions until such dangerous conditions have been eliminated. 
(Code 1995, § 93.05; Ord. No. 97-20, 5-14-1997) 
Secs. 38-4-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD FIRE CODE 

Sec. 38-31. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices except appendix A as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, material and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fire Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, if any prescribed in section 38-32. 
(Code 1995, § 93.01(A); Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(E), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.E., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.I., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-32. - Local amendments to the International Fire Code. 
    The following sections of the International Fire Code adopted by reference in section 38-31 are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 109.3. Insert: "misdemeanor"; "$500.00"; "N/A" 
(3)  Section 111.2. Insert: "$50.00"; "$500.00" 
(4)  The following shall hereby be adopted as an amendment and supplement to appendix D, "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," of the International Fire Code: 
a.  The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be designated by the fire marshal and chief of police with a list of designated fire lanes on file in the office of the city secretary. 
b.  No fire lane shall be designated unless it is constructed of concrete, asphalt or other hard surface material. 
c.  Fire lanes must be marked with conspicuous signs which state "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING" in four-inch letters painted at 20-foot intervals on a contrasting background stripe, continuous or broken, along the perimeter of the entire fire lane. 
d.  The expense and responsibility of marking fire lanes shall be borne by the property owner. 
e.  No person may mark a private drive in a way which gives it the appearance of being a fire lane unless the fire marshal has, in writing, designated that drive a fire lane as described in this section. 
f.  Fire lanes may not be closed or abandoned without written permission of the fire marshall. 
g.  A person may not park, place, allow, permit, or suffer to be parked or placed or to remain unattended an unauthorized vehicle or similar obstruction in a fire lane. 
h.  If an unauthorized vehicle or similar obstruction is found parked or unoccupied in a fire lane, it is hereby declared a public nuisance, and the fact that it is parked, unattended, or unoccupied in a way which obstructs a fire lane is proof that the registered owner violated this subsection. 
i.  The records of the Texas Department of Transportation, Motor Vehicle Division, showing the name of the person to whom a vehicle license is issued is sufficient proof of ownership for the purpose of this Code. 
j.  If any obstruction is found in a fire lane, the fire marshal or any other police officer may issue a citation for the violation, and he may have the obstruction removed or towed to any suitable site. The property may be redeemed by payment of the towage and storage charges in the same manner as any vehicle impounded. 
k.  A citation may not be voided by the redemption of the property from the suitable site, nor may the violator be relieved of any penalty assessed by a judge of the municipal court for a violation of any provision of this subsection. 
To the extent that the terms of this amendment may conflict with the terms of the International Fire Code, the amendments shall supersede and control over the terms of the International Fire Code. 
(Code 1995, § 93.01(D); Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(E), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 2, 2-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.E., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.I., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 38-33-38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.009. 

Sec. 38-61. - Office created. 
    The office of city fire marshal is hereby created. The fire marshal shall report directly to the city manager. Such office shall be filled by the appointment of the city manager, with the approval of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of such office. The fire marshal's salary shall be set by the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 93.20) 
Sec. 38-62. - Investigation of fires; records. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the caused intentionally, carelessly or accidentally. Such investigation shall begin within 24 hours of the occurrence of such fire, not including Sunday. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the losses, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. 
(Code 1995, § 93.21) 
State Law reference- Investigation of fires, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007. 
Sec. 38-63. - Testimony; power of arrest; furnishing information to prosecuting attorney. 
    Where further investigation is necessary in the opinion of the fire marshal, he shall take, or cause to be taken, the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the testimony to be reduced to writing. If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, the attempt to commit the crime of arson, conspiracy to defraud, another offense related to the matter under investigation or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, such officer shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by such officer, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1995, § 93.22) 
State Law reference- Powers of the fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007. 
Sec. 38-64. - Summoning witnesses; administering oaths. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent to such inquiry and investigation. 
(b)  The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing before him as a witness. 
(Code 1995, § 93.53) 
State Law reference- Powers of the fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007. 
Sec. 38-65. - Failure of witness to appear, testify, etc. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of an investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1995, § 93.54) 
Sec. 38-66. - Privacy of investigations; separation of witnesses. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in the fire marshal's discretion, be private, and persons other than the persons required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1995, § 93.55) 
Sec. 38-67. - Right of entry. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority, at any time, to enter a building or premises at which a fire is in progress or has occurred and is under the control of law enforcement or fire service officials to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of the fire. If control of the building or premises has been relinquished, such entry must be in compliance with search and seizure law and applicable federal law. 
(Code 1995, § 93.56) 
State Law reference- Right of entry, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 417.007, 417.008. 
Sec. 38-68. - Removal of violating conditions; appeals; reports to state fire marshal. 
(a)  Upon the complaint of any person having an interest in any building or adjacent property, and without any complaint, the fire marshal shall have a right, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. The fire marshal shall enter and is entitled, at any time, to enter any mercantile, manufacturing or public building, place of amusement or place where public gatherings are held, or any premises belonging to such building or place, and make a thorough examination. It shall be the fire marshal's duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, places of amusement or places where public gatherings are held, together with the premises belonging to such buildings and places. Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is situated so as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property in such building or other structure, and whenever the fire marshal shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which such appliances may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, flammable refuse and materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, the fire marshal shall order such dangerous conditions to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. However, if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may appeal to the building and standards commission within five days, and the building and standards commission shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless, by the authority of the building and standards commission, the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by such owner or occupant. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall report all existing hazardous conditions to the state fire marshal, as may be required, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1995, § 93.57) 
State Law reference- Examination and correction of dangerous conditions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.008. 
Secs. 38-69-38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq. 

Sec. 38-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means any article, device, substance or combination of substances designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, regardless of its name or form of construction. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, the items known as firecrackers, cherry bombs, Roman candles, torpedoes, skyrockets and any other substance or thing of whatever form of construction that contains any explosive or flammable compound or substance which explodes, rises into the air, travels laterally or fires projectiles into the air, and which are commonly known as fireworks. For the purposes of this article, the term "fireworks" shall not include sparklers, Pharaoh's serpents, toy pistols, toy guns or other devices that use paper or plastic caps, model rockets and model rocket motors which are designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models and novelties and trick noisemakers; however, the discharge of any item expressly excluded from the applicability of this article shall not be subject to noise abatement and control regulations chapter of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 93.03; Ord. No. 00-28, pt. 1(A), 9-12-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-102. - Sales. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or exhibit for sale any fireworks of any character within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 93.03; Ord. No. 00-28, pt. 1(B), 9-12-2000) 
Sec. 38-103. - Discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city; however, a professional fireworks exhibition performed by a licensed and insured pyrotechnic operator who has obtained a public display permit from the state fire marshal may be permissible, if the display and display site are approved by the city fire marshal. 
(Code 1995, § 93.03; Ord. No. 00-28, pt. 1(C), 9-12-2000) 
Secs. 38-104-38-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq. 

Sec. 38-131. - Storage of combustible materials; burn permits. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, store or stack on any premises within the corporate limits of the city more than 500 square bales or 20 round bales of hay to the stack, and if more than one stack is created, each stack shall be located not less than 50 feet from any other stack. It shall also be unlawful to accumulate, store or stack, or permit to be accumulated, stored or stacked, on any premises within the corporate limits of the city more than 100 cubic yards of grass, loose cotton, cotton burrs, paper, shavings or any other bulky combustible matter or material. 
(b)  Combustible materials in excess of the limits established in subsection (a) of this section shall be stored in a fireproof building, the roof of which shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or destroy the combustible matter mentioned in subsection (a) of this section within the corporate limits of the city, except in an incinerator, the specifications of which shall meet the approval of the city council. If the city council shall approve the specifications of the incinerator, it will then cause the proper permit to be issued. 
(Code 1995, § 93.06) 
Sec. 38-132. - Self-service gasoline stations. 
    Self-service gasoline stations shall comply with all rules and regulations of the state commission on fire protection issued pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq., and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1995, § 93.07) 
Sec. 38-133. - Mobile service units. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile service unit means a vehicle, tank truck or other mobile device from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle parked on an off-street parking facility or public property; that is, a mobile gasoline filling station which either parks or roams around on the parking lot of a shopping center, or public property, and from which the driver or operator makes sales of gasoline to shoppers whose vehicles are parked. 
(b)  Operation prohibited. From and after the date of final passage and publication of this section (8-3-1971), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile service unit within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 93.08) 
State Law reference- Mobile service units, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.002. 
Chapter 42 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  The term "firearms," for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as provided in the state penal law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm of any description within the city. 
(c)  A person may discharge a shotgun loaded with birdshot only (no larger than four-shot loads) under the following circumstances: 
(1)  On a tract of land comprised of 50 contiguous acres or larger, located in an A-1 agricultural district; 
(2)  Provided that the person shall not discharge the shotgun within 300 feet of a residence located on an adjacent tract of land; and 
(3)  Provided that the person shall not discharge the shotgun so that its shot travels on, over, or across an adjacent tract of land. 
(Code 1995, § 130.02; Ord. No. 02-55, §§ I, II, 11-12-2000) 
Sec. 42-2. - Variance permitting discharge of firearms within city limits. 
    From and after the date of final passage of Ordinance No. 97-49 (12-9-1997), the county 4-H youth members shall be allowed to use the county youth barns as an area to practice shooting skills under a controlled and supervised atmosphere, and such variance shall be a legally existing variance permitting discharge of firearms in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 131.002(B)) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms within city limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001. 
Sec. 42-3. - Defacing and destroying property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful to deface or destroy the property of another. 
(Code 1995, § 130.03) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03; damaging or destroying property of another, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.04; graffiti, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.08. 
Sec. 42-4. - Regulation of smoking in city facilities. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City facilities means any enclosed or indoor facility owned, operated or managed by the city and shall expressly exclude any open air nonenclosed facility such as pavilions at city parks. 
Notice means the posting of a sign at the entrance way of city facilities or other conspicuous locations therein so as to be readily observable by a reasonably observant person. 
Smoke or smoking means the possession of burning tobacco, weeds, or other plant product. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in city facilities. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution hereunder that the city facility in which the offense takes place does not have prominently displayed therein a reasonably sized notice that smoking is prohibited in the facility and that an offense is punishable by fine not to exceed the maximum established by this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who shall do any act or thing prohibited by the terms of this section or in any way violate the provisions thereof shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, §§ I-IV, 8-7-2003) 
Secs. 42-5-42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 43, §§ 43-1-43-7. For purposes of classification and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 42, art. II, §§ 42-41-42-47. 

Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
    Illegal smoking material shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetra-hydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: "K-2", "K-2 Summit", "K-2 Sex", "Genie", "Dascents", "Zohai", "Sage", "Spice", "Ko Knock-Out 2", "Spice Gold", "Spice Diamond", "Yucatan Fire", "Solar Flare", "Pep Spice", "Fire N' Ice", "Blaze" "Red X Dawn" and "Salvia Divinorum". 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
    Illegal smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
    Person shall mean an individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, association or other legal entity, or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-42. - Illegal smoking materials and illegal smoking material paraphernalia: Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit the purchase, sale, offer for sale, delivery, or gift of illegal smoking materials as defined herein within the city limits of the City of Brownwood, and to prohibit the possession or use of illegal smoking materials and illegal smoking material paraphernalia within the city limits of the City of Brownwood. Any form of delivery, including, without limitation, a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-43. - Purchase, sale, delivery, offer or gift. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, offer for sale, deliver or to give any illegal smoking material to any person. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-44. - Possession or use of illegal smoking materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body illegal smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of Brownwood. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-45. - Possession or use of illegal smoking material paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any illegal smoking material paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume or introduce into the human body illegal smoking material. It is a violation of this article, if a person is found in possession of illegal smoking material paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of illegal smoking material present on the paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-46. - Affirmative defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the illegal smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under the terms of this article if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long-standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 42-47. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Every act in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, an allegation and/or evidence of culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense of this article. 
(d)  The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the City of Brownwood from filing suit to enjoin the violation of this article. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 10-29, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 42-48-42-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; floods, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 52.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Oil and Gas Ordinance of the City of Brownwood, Texas," and may be cited as such. 
(Code 1995, § 114.01) 
Sec. 46-32. - Rules of interpretation; definitions. 
(a)  Technical words. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used in this article and not specifically defined shall have the meaning customarily attributable to such words or phrases by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(b)  Titles of officials. When the title of any city official is used in this article, it shall include any duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curbline means the line established by the city for a particular street. 
    Gathering lines means all pipelines operated as an incident to the development and operation of oil and/or gas fields and secondary recovery projects. 
    Lease means any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases, but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or a person holding under them, but which, due to the free royalty ownership is developed and operated as a separate tract, but such term shall not mean any tract of land conveyed or used for pipeline right-of-way purposes. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a permit is issued for the drilling, completion and operation of a well and/or the construction, installation and operation of any pipeline facility under this article, and his heirs, legal representatives, successors and assigns. 
    Person means an individual, firm, company or corporation. 
    Pipeline means trunkline pipelines, gathering lines and discharge lines, as defined in this subsection, but not when used as part of the terms "gathering lines" and "trunkline pipelines." 
    Right-of-way means all public rights-of-way or streets or other public property within the city. 
    Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
    Trunkline pipeline means common carrier pipelines and other main pipelines not included in the definition of "gathering lines," expressly including their rights-of-way, as defined and established by instruments of record in the office of the county clerk. 
    Well means any hole or bore to any sand, formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing any oil, gas or liquid hydrocarbon or used as an injection well for secondary recovery, or any of them. 
(Code 1995, § 114.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Work done in new developments of the city by utility and street contractors, under and in conformity with chapter 94, is exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Work done by the city or under city contract and under directions of the city is exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Work done by public utility companies which operate under a current franchise from the city is exempt from the bond and insurance provisions of this article when such work is done with their own personnel, but such exemption does not apply to contractors doing work for the public utility company. 
(d)  Work done by plumbers who are qualified and bonded with a valid permit from the city inspection department is exempt from the bond and insurance provisions of this article, but must comply with the balance of this article. 
(e)  No permit for construction within a public right-of-way shall be issued unless the written application is accompanied by the necessary plans and descriptions, and submitted to the oil and gas inspector and approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 114.04) 
Sec. 46-34. - Federal and state laws applicable. 
    Any violation of state law or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, installing, maintaining or abandoning any oil and/or gas well, pipeline or related appurtenance, equipment or facility, or in reference to firewalls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection or convenience of persons or property shall also be a violation of this article and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 114.19) 
Sec. 46-35. - Codes, tests and standards of performance references. 
    All references in this article to ASA or USAS codes, tests or standards of performance are hereby eliminated, and ANSI codes, tests and standards of performance are hereby substituted for all such references. 
(Code 1995, § 114.26) 
Sec. 46-36. - Violations; penalties; fines; forfeitures; revocation of permit; application for reissuance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section of this article contains the specific language that such violation or failure to comply is unlawful and is an offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any provision of a permit issued pursuant to this article, or who shall fail to comply with the terms of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum as provided for in section 1-14. 
(c)  The violation of each separate provision of this article and such permit shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. 
(d)  In addition to such penalties, it is further provided that the city council, at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may, provided ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article and under which operations are being conducted, if the permittee has violated any provision of such permit or this article. 
(e)  If the permit is revoked, the permittee may make application to the city council for reissuance of such permit. 
(Code 1995, § 114.99) 
Secs. 46-37-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 46-61. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  Appointment; duties. The director of public works shall be the oil and gas inspector, and it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Appeal of enforcement decision. Any person who may be aggrieved by any ruling, order and/or decision of the oil and gas inspector shall have the right of appeal to the city council from such ruling, order or decision; provided, however, that any such appeal must be taken, if at all, within ten days immediately following the filing of such rule, order or decision in the records of the office of the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1995, § 114.03) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 
Sec. 46-62. - Equipment inspections. 
    All equipment necessarily incidental to the production of oil or gas within the city limits shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the appropriate qualified oil and gas inspector, building inspector, electrical inspector, fire and safety inspector, etc. 
(Code 1995, § 114.22) 
Sec. 46-63. - Annual inspections of wells required; inspection fees. 
    Each producing well, pumping unit, water flood pump and injection well, together with their associated equipment (tankage, separators, structures, fencing, landscaping, etc.), regulated by this article, shall be inspected annually by the oil and gas inspector for the purpose of conformance to the various regulations. If any nonconformance is found, the permittee will be immediately notified of the violation, in writing, and the permittee shall begin to institute proceedings to come into full compliance with this article. The annual inspection fee for each site upon which a facility covered by this article is located shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, and such fee shall be paid by the permittee. 
(Code 1995, § 114.20) 
Sec. 46-64. - Loss of well control; duty of operator; authority of oil and gas inspector; lien for city expenditures. 
    In the event of loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control of such well, regardless of any other provision of this article, and shall notify the oil and gas inspector, as soon as practicable, after receipt of notice by his employees of the occurrence of such loss of well control endangering persons or property. If and when the oil and gas inspector certifies, in writing, to the city secretary that, in his opinion, danger to persons or property exists because of such loss of well control (briefly describing the danger) and the operator is not taking, or is unable to take, all reasonable necessary steps to regain control of such well, the oil and gas inspector may employ any well control expert or other contractor or supplier of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor or material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners who have voluntarily joined in the drilling of such well, to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1995, § 114.23) 
Sec. 46-65. - Geophysical work employing underground explosives, thumper, vibroseis and other techniques. 
(a)  No geophysical work employing underground explosives will be permitted any place within the city limits at any time. Other geophysical systems employing the thumper, vibroseis or other techniques not employing explosives will be permitted upon proper application and payment of an application fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Such application shall include the following: 
(1)  The date of the application. 
(2)  The name of the applicant. 
(3)  The address of the applicant. 
(4)  A statement of the proposed commencement and completion dates. 
(5)  A map or plat outlining the areas proposed to be covered by the survey. 
(6)  Compliance with section 46-94 concerning an indemnification bond and public liability insurance coverage. 
(Code 1995, § 114.25) 
Secs. 46-66-46-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 46-91. - Required; issuance; authority to drill and install. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, acting either for himself or as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant for any other person, to drill any well or install any trunkline pipeline, or water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility within the city limits without a permit having first been issued by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this division. 
(b)  When a permit has been issued for the drilling of a well, the permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production, gathering of production, maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and the construction and use of all facilities reasonably necessary or convenient in connection therewith, including gathering lines and discharge lines, by the permittee and its employees, agents and contractors, provided that any such authorized activities shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and shall not be in conflict with any of the conditions and provisions contained in the permit. However, a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well may be deepened below the geological formation in which it was originally completed and before it may be used for repressurizing or injecting water or gas. 
(c)  When a permit has been issued for the installation of any trunkline pipeline or water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility, the permit shall constitute sufficient authority for the construction, operation, maintenance, conversion of existing wells to injection wells (in the case of a water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility), repair and abandonment of such facility and for all facilities reasonably necessary or convenient in connection therewith (including gathering lines), by the permittee and its employees, agents and contractors, provided that the authorized activities are in compliance with all of the provisions of this article and are not in conflict with any of the conditions and provisions contained in the permit. 
(d)  No permit or filing fee will be required for any well, pipeline and water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility, and such other facilities as may be covered by this article existing within the city limits at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived (8-4-1982), or which are in existence at the time the land upon which such facilities are situated is annexed to the city, but the oil and gas inspector shall inspect such facilities, and if he is satisfied that such facilities can be operated in a manner that will ensure public safety, he shall issue a certificate, in writing, that such facilities conform to such public safety requirement; provided, however, that the operator of any such facilities coming within the provisions of this subsection shall, within four years of January 1, 1983, or the date that the premises upon which the facilities are located is annexed into the city limits, take all necessary steps required for such facilities to comply with this article. If any such facilities do not conform with the provisions of this article within such period of time, the operator of such facilities shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, which shall be punishable by a fine as described in section 46-36. It is further provided that if any such existing facilities coming within the provisions of this subsection are abandoned or relocated for any reason, any new facilities constructed or established to replace such facilities must comply with all provisions of this article. 
(e)  No permit shall authorize the drilling of more than one well, or the installation of more than one trunkline pipeline or more than one water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility. 
(Code 1995, § 114.40) 
Sec. 46-92. - Application; filing fee. 
(a)  Every application for a permit to drill a well or install a water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility or trunkline pipeline shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by a person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary. In case the permit is requested for the purpose of drilling a well or reentering and drilling to a deeper formation, the application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, which shall be payable to the city by cash, cashier's check or certified check. 
(b)  A separate application shall be required for each well, trunkline pipeline and water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility. The application shall include full information, including the following: 
(1)  The date of the application. 
(2)  The name of the applicant. 
(3)  The address of the applicant. 
(4)  The proposed site of the well (including proposed location of gathering lines), trunkline pipeline or water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facility, including: 
a.  Name of the lease owner, where applicable. 
b.  Accurate description of the land. 
c.  Location with respect to property lines, right-of-way boundaries and grades, where applicable. 
(5)  The type of derrick to be used, if any. 
(6)  The proposed depth of the well, when applicable. 
(7)  The detailed explanation of operating pressures of all pipelines and facilities. 
(8)  The location of compressor, pressure control or safety devices, with an explanation of operating characteristics of each. 
(9)  The name of the persons to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The application to install any pipeline with pressures in excess of 250 pounds per square inch (psi) should include details and specifications of the safety provisions and equipment. 
(Code 1995, § 114.41) 
Sec. 46-93. - Issuance and denial. 
(a)  Within 60 days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill a well or install a trunkline pipeline or a water flooding, gas injection or any primary or secondary recovery system for the production of oil, gas and condensate, the city council shall determine whether or not the application complies, in all respects, with the provisions of this article, and if it is in compliance, the city council shall then fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance provided for in this division, and issue a permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities applied for. Each permit shall: 
(1)  Have incorporated in the permit, by reference, all of the provisions of this article, with the same force and effect as if this article were copied verbatim in the permit. 
(2)  Specify the location of the proposed well, injection facility and all pipelines, with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, section line or other available correct legal description. 
(3)  Contain and specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one year from the date of the permit and until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of the well or facility for which the permit was issued. 
(4)  Contain and specify such other terms and provisions as may be necessary in a particular case to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(5)  Specify the total depth to which the well (if any) may be drilled, not exceeding the proposed depth. 
(6)  Contain and specify that no actual operation shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as determined by the city council, or has complied with this article. 
(b)  Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the inspector, and prior to delivery to the permittee, shall be signed by the permittee, with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee, and, when signed, shall constitute the permittee's drilling and installation license, as well as the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, bond and this article. 
(c)  If the permit is refused, or the applicant notifies the city council, in writing, that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or the bond of the applicant is not approved, or the applicant notifies the city council, in writing, that he wishes to withdraw his application, then, upon the happening of such an event, the cash deposit filed with the application to drill a well shall be returned to the applicant, except that an amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office shall retained by the city from such deposit as a processing fee. 
(d)  (1)  In determining whether to grant or deny any application for a permit required by this article and in determining the conditions and provisions to be contained in any such permit, the city council shall include the following factors in its consideration: 
a.  Whether the proposed facility will comply with all provisions of this article. 
b.  Whether the proposed facility will conflict with the comprehensive plan for physical development of the city. 
c.  Whether specific sites have been designated on plats of the property in the area concerned for such oil and gas facilities as are the subject of the application. 
d.  Whether, for any reason, the proposed facility will constitute a hazard to property or persons. 
(2)  In acting on any such application, the city council shall determine whether the application complies, or is consistent, with the criteria set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section as of the time of the granting or denying of the permit and not as of the time of the making of the application for such permit. 
(3)  Once a permit has been granted by the city council, any subsequent change of conditions not under the control of the permittee shall not require any action on the part of the permittee to improve or change his existing facilities to comply with the provisions of this article before the change of conditions; however, this does not apply to facilities which are actually abandoned or relocated for whatever reason, in which case, such relocated facilities must comply with all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 114.42) 
Sec. 46-94. - Bond and insurance required; amounts; exceptions. 
(a)  Filing. If a permit or certificate of compliance is issued by the city council or the oil and gas inspector, under the terms of this article for the drilling of a well, installation of a trunkline pipeline, water flooding project or gas injection project, no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file a bond and certificate of insurance with the city secretary, as follows: 
(1)  Bond. 
a.  A bond in the principal sum as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, but not to be less than $25,000.00. The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and the applicant as principal, running in the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling and operation of the well, water flooding project, gas injection or operation of any pipeline. 
b.  Such bond shall become effective on or before the date such bond is filed with the city secretary, and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued. In addition, the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will: 
1.  Promptly pay all legally imposed fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon him by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this article; 
2.  Promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations to their former condition; 
3.  Promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the operations; 
4.  After abandonment or completion, grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions, as nearly as possible, as existed when operations were first commenced; 
5.  Indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. 
If, at any time, the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, the city council may require the permittee to file a new bond. 
c.  If, after completion of a producing well, gas injection well, water injection well or any facility or pipeline for which a bond is required by this article, the permittee has complied with all provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, clearing the premises, erecting fences, etc., he may apply to the city council to have the bond reduced to a sum of not less than $10,000.00 on each well or facility for the remainder of the time the well produces or the facility is operated without reworking. During a major well workover or in-hole remedial operations requiring the use of a rotary rig and/or high pressure injection equipment (deepening, cementing, bracing, reperforating, etc.), the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. A trunkline pipeline installation shall not be considered to be completed until the lines have been tested and in operation for a period of 30 days. 
(2)  Insurance. 
a.  In addition to the bond required in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, with an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. Such policy, in the aggregate, shall provide for the following minimum coverages: 
1.  Bodily injuries, $200,000.00 per person, and $500,000.00 per accident. 
2.  Property damage, $300,000.00. 
b.  The permittee shall file certificates of insurance with the city secretary, as required in subsection (a)(2)a. of this section, and shall obtain the written approval of such certificates of insurance by the inspector, who shall act thereon within ten days from the date of such filing. The insurance policy shall not be canceled without written notice to the city secretary at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. If such insurance policy is canceled, the permit granted shall terminate, and the permittee's right to operate under such permit shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance, as provided in this section. If, after completion of a well, water flooding project, gas injection project or pipeline, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, completion of the pipelines, clearing the premises, etc., he may apply to the inspector to have such insurance policy reduced, as follows: 
1.  Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 per person, and $300,000.00 per accident. 
2.  Property damage, $100,000.00 for the remainder of the time such well produced without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of the insurance policy shall be increased to the original amount. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city council may elect to make an exception to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section when, in its opinion, the intent and purpose for the requirements of the bond and insurance can be assured by any of the following: 
(1)  Acceptance of a guaranty of indemnity to the city in lieu of a bond, and a plan of self-insurance in the case of financially responsible operators. 
(2)  Acceptance of a blanket bond and a single policy of insurance to cover all operations of the permittee within the city limits. 
(3)  Application of bond and insurance requirements acceptable to the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 114.05) 
Sec. 46-95. - Final report. 
    Within 30 days after completion of any well, the permittee shall file a final report in the office of the oil and gas inspector, which shall include the casing program actually utilized in the well. The final report shall specify any changes in the location or depth of the well and any other variation from the terms of the permit. The final report shall specify the perforated interval, and include information pertaining to other perforations, if any. 
(Code 1995, § 114.24) 
Sec. 46-96. - Suspension and cancellation. 
    If the permittee fails to comply with any provision of this article, the oil and gas inspector shall issue a written notice to the permittee of the nature of the noncompliance, stating such reasonable time necessary to gain compliance. After the lapse of such reasonable time, the city council may suspend the permit for a period of time or cancel the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 114.43) 
Sec. 46-97. - Supplemental permit for deep drilling. 
(a)  Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill the well to a deeper geological formation than that reached in the prior drilling operations without the permittee obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental application with the city secretary, specifying the: 
(1)  Condition of the well and the casing. 
(2)  Proposed depth to which the well will be deepened. 
(3)  Proposed casing program to be used in the connection with the proposed deepening operations. 
(b)  If the inspector is satisfied that such well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existing in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued to the permittee, without an additional filing fee, authorizing the deepening and operation of the well for such specified depth as applied for, provided that the derrick and drilling equipment have not been removed from the drill site. In any deeper drilling or any deeper completion of any deeper production operations, the permittee shall comply with all provisions contained in this article and applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well. 
(c)  If the operator has removed the derrick and drilling equipment from the location, the supplemental permit shall comply with the requirements specified in this division for a permit. 
(Code 1995, § 114.44) 
Secs. 46-98-46-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-121. - Proximity of facilities to streets, roads, highways and alleys. 
    No oil or gas well, permanent compressor station, water flood station, separator or tank battery covered by this article shall be located closer than 150 feet to any street, road, highway or alley, whether such street, road, highway or alley is existing, platted or dedicated, without the written permission of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 114.06) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
Sec. 46-122. - Proximity of facilities to structures, buildings and grounds. 
(a)  No well shall be drilled, no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled, nor shall a storage tank be located closer than 150 feet to any residence or commercial building without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the city council. 
(b)  No high pressure gas injection well, or compressor used in conjunction with a gas injection well, shall be located closer than 150 feet to any residential, commercial or industrial structure, school or other public building or public grounds, except by permission of the city council. In exceptional cases, for reasons of safety, the city council may require that any such facility shall be located at a greater distance than 150 feet to any such structure, building or grounds. 
(c)  No residential, commercial or industrial structure, other than structures necessary to operate the pipeline, shall be erected or moved to a location closer than 30 feet to any pipeline transporting gas when the pipeline operating pressure is greater than 250 pounds per square inch (psi) unless a greater or lesser distance is recommended by the then applicable ANSI code. 
(d)  The area of the city limits defined as Brownwood Regional Airport, which property is owned by the city, is exempt from all provisions of this section. Any compliance provisions required will be implemented with a city council approved contract, on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1995, § 114.07) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 78. 
Sec. 46-123. - Derrick and rig; watchman. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate, in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city limits, any wooden derrick or steam powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. No person shall permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 60 days after completion or abandonment of the well. From the start of erection of a derrick, mast or ginpole, until the well is abandoned and plugged, or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as provided in this division, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises, at all times, when other workmen of the permittee are not on such premises. 
(Code 1995, § 114.08) 
Sec. 46-124. - Slush pits. 
    Steel slush pits shall be used in connection with all drilling and reworking operations. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and drilling site within 30 days after completion of the well. No earthen slush pits shall be used. 
(Code 1995, § 114.09) 
Sec. 46-125. - Operations and equipment; practices; standards. 
(a)  All drilling and operations performed by a permittee under this article at any well shall be conducted in accordance with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator. All casings, valves, blowout preventers, drilling fluids, tubing, bradenheads, Christmas trees and wellhead connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the practice of a reasonable and prudent operator. Each permittee under this article shall observe and follow the regulations of the state railroad commission. 
(b)  All operations relative to the design, installation, maintenance and operation of pipelines shall conform to the requirements of this article, applicable ANSI codes and standards of performance of the reasonable and prudent operators of the trades involved. 
(c)  All pipelines constructed shall be of all new pipe and shall comply with ANSI specifications. 
(d)  Valves shall be installed on all pipelines at such locations and spacing to safely and adequately control the operation of the line and to minimize the quantity of gas, oil or water that would be released from the line in case of the failure or rupture of the line. The types and locations of all valves shall be indicated on a plan layout and approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(e)  Electric motors shall be used to drive all gas compressors, pumping units and/or water flood pumps in the oil and gas operations, and all electrical installations and equipment shall conform to city ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(f)  The type and location of pipeline location markers shall be approved by the oil and gas inspector and the removal of any pipeline marker without the express permission of the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(g)  The pipelines crossing certain thoroughfares, designated by the oil and gas inspector, shall be cased and vented in accordance with the accepted practice of the pipeline industry. 
(h)  The delivery to or removal of equipment or material from the drill site shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in cases of emergency. No pipe racking outside the derrick will be permitted during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in cases of emergency. All lighting shall be shielded and directed to confine the direct rays to the drill site. 
(Code 1995, § 114.10) 
Sec. 46-126. - Cleanliness and sanitation. 
    The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition which is satisfactory to the health officer and the oil and gas inspector of the city. The permittee shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any mud, wastewater, oil, slush or other waste matter from flowing into the alleys, streets, lots or leases within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 114.11) 
Sec. 46-127. - Motive power for operations. 
    Electric motors shall be used to drive all pumping units, gas compressors and transfer operations. No electric power shall be generated on the location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to city ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(Code 1995, § 114.12) 
Sec. 46-128. - Storage tanks and separators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct or operate any crude oil storage tanks in connection with any producing well within the city limits, except for two low type tanks for oil storage, not exceeding 500 barrels' capacity for each well connected to such tanks, and constructed and maintained so as to be vaportight and properly vented. A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator, and such other approved tank and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil with each of such facilities, which shall be constructed and maintained so as to be vaportight. Each oil or gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. All such tanks shall be placed aboveground upon a suitable earth or concrete pad. 
(b)  The use of a central tank battery is permitted as long as not more than two tanks, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, are used for each well connected to the battery. 
(c)  The tanks shall be enclosed within a conventional type fire wall, constructed of compacted earth. Sufficient water shall be used during the firewall construction to assure adequate compaction. 
(d)  The firewall enclosing the tanks shall have a minimum capacity equal to two times the volume of the enclosed tanks. 
(e)  The top or crown of the firewall shall have a normal height of three feet above normal ground elevation. The location of the tank site shall be approved by the city oil and gas inspector. 
(f)  The tanks shall be recessed within the firewall and enclosed to a depth that will assure the tanks of being practically sight clear, when viewed from outside of the fenced enclosure. 
(g)  The separators shall be installed in a manner that will assure they are practically sight clear, when viewed from outside the fenced enclosure. 
(Code 1995, § 114.13) 
Sec. 46-129. - Fences. 
(a)  Any person who completes any producing well shall have the obligation to enclose such well, together with its surface facilities, by a substantial fence, six feet high and properly built to ordinarily keep persons and/or animals out of the enclosure. All gates and exitways shall be kept locked, at all times, except when the permittee or his employees are inside the enclosure. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be obligated to landscape and maintain the appearance of the site to conform to the surrounding residential area. In noncongested residential areas, the oil and gas inspector may designate the type of fencing to be erected. However, if the surrounding area subsequently develops into a residential neighborhood, the permittee will be obligated to conform to the residential landscaping, fencing and appearance. 
(b)  The compressor unit, water flood pump unit and/or injection well location shall be enclosed on all sides by a minimum six-foot chainlink fence, with two strands of barbed wire along the top, and properly built to keep persons and/or animals out of the enclosure. The fence shall have a minimum of two gates or exitways located on opposite sides of the enclosure. The gates or exitways shall be kept locked, at all times, except when the permittee or his employees are inside the enclosure. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be obligated to landscape, solar screen and maintain the appearance of the site to conform to the surrounding area. 
(c)  In addition to the fence requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the compressor unit or water flood pump unit shall be enclosed by a noncombustible structure which is constructed in a manner to reduce the noise of operation and minimize the hazards to the surrounding area. The design of the structure shall be approved by the oil and gas inspector prior to erection. 
(d)  Except where the site is located in an industrial or manufacturing zone, the well site, tank site, tank battery site, pump station site or compressor site shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment or materials, except during the drilling or servicing of the well, pipeline, tank, pump station or compressor station. 
(Code 1995, § 114.14) 
Sec. 46-130. - Operations to be conducted in manner to eliminate nuisances. 
    All oil, and drilling and production operations shall be conducted in a manner to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the reasonable and prudent practices incidental to exploration for, drilling for, and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. 
(Code 1995, § 114.15) 
Sec. 46-131. - Fire prevention; identification signs. 
(a)  Any permittee engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil and/or gas well or the operation of any facility used in conjunction with the production of oil and/or gas within the corporate limits of the city shall take reasonable precautions to prevent gas from escaping into the air, and shall not flare or burn gas or oil from any pipe stack, pit or any similar means within the corporate limits of the city, provided that gas may be burned for a limited time, when necessary, to complete any oil and/or gas well upon the original completion or recompletion of workover jobs upon oil and/or gas wells, as long as such burning does not constitute a fire hazard to the property of others within the vicinity of such oil and/or gas well. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a well for oil and/or gas without a four-inch header being laid over the top of the tank and a 21/2-inch line extending from the tank battery to a point designated by the oil and gas inspector. The manner and method provided for connection at such point shall be determined by the fire department of the city so that foamite or other chemicals may be pumped through such line and the header of the tanks into such tanks to extinguish fires in the tanks. 
(c)  Emergency firefighting apparatus and supplies, subject to approval by the fire department of the city, shall be maintained on the drilling site, at all times, during the drilling operations and on the site of each compressor used for gas injection operations. 
(d)  The permittee shall place a sign at each well location or site to identify the well. 
(Code 1995, § 114.16) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 46-132. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to comply with the regulations of the state railroad commission in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well. A copy of the plugging and abandonment form shall be furnished to the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1995, § 114.17) 
Sec. 46-133. - Saltwater. 
    The permittee shall take reasonable precautions for the disposal of all saltwater and other impurities which he may bring to the surface so as not to contaminate the potable water supply, present or prospective, or injure surface vegetation. 
(Code 1995, § 114.18) 
Sec. 46-134. - Landscaping. 
    The land surrounding any well or surface facility, which is required to be landscaped by any of the provisions of this article, shall be planted and maintained with grass, plants or shrubs during such drilling and production operations, but only to the extent reasonably compatible with the general status of the surfaces in the vicinity. The entire controlled drill site shall be adequately landscaped, except for the portions occupied by any required structure, appurtenance or driveway, and all such landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition, at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 114.21) 
Sec. 46-135. - Operations in residential areas. 
    All operations will be maintained in a manner that will minimize dust, noxious odors, vibrations and other offensive conditions to the surrounding residential area. Any aboveground facility which is located within or immediately adjoining any subdivided area where ten percent of the lots or subdivided tracts within a one-half-mile radius are improved with residential structures or located within one-half mile of any school or public building shall be considered to be within a developed residential area. 
(Code 1995, § 114.22) 
Sec. 46-136. - Excavations; operating gauge pressure for gathering and flow lines; pipeline testing; as-built plot plans; cover and backfill; construction in rights-of-way; emergency repairs. 
(a)  Permission required. No permittee shall make any excavation for any purpose or construct any lines for conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under or through the streets and alleys of the city without the express written permission of the oil and gas inspector, and then only in strict compliance with ordinances of the city; provided, however, that emergency repairs may be made without such permission when, in the good faith opinion of the permittee, the delay required to obtain written permission would involve a hazard to persons or property. 
(b)  Maximum operating gauge pressure and location of gathering and flow lines. The gathering and flow lines installed in the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of transporting oil, gas or water in conjunction with the operation of any well, tank, tank battery, or injection or gathering system are hereby limited to a maximum operating gauge pressure of 250 pounds per square inch (psi) unless otherwise specifically approved by the oil and gas inspector. The location of any such gathering and flow lines, if not specified in the permit, must be specifically approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(c)  Testing. Pipelines shall be tested prior to being placed in service. 
(d)  As-built plot plans required. The companies responsible for any and all pipelines installed within the corporate limits of the city are hereby required to furnish to the city, for a permanent record with the city, an as-built plot plan showing the location of all of the companies' facilities. 
(e)  Cover and backfill. 
(1)  All pipelines within the corporate limits of the city, other than the utility lines of the city and the franchised distribution system of Lone Star Gas Company, designed or utilized to transport oil, gas or water in connection with the production and transportation of oil and/or gas or for repressurizing operations shall be installed with the minimum of cover or backfill specified by the then applicable ANSI code for such pipelines. 
(2)  The oil and gas inspector is authorized to approve a lesser cover or specify a greater cover or backfill in special cases when, in the opinion of the oil and gas inspector, such variation is advisable and/or will not increase the degree of hazard. 
(f)  Construction in right-of-way. The requirements for construction in public rights-of-way must conform to such ordinances of the city regulating such construction. 
(g)  Effects on existing streets. The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up, damaging of any street as defined in section 46-31, or leaving any earth, other material or obstruction upon any street shall not be permitted unless such person shall first have obtained written permission from the city engineer; provided, however, that emergency repairs may be made without such permission when, in the good faith opinion of the permittee, the delay required to obtain the written permission would involve a hazard to persons or property. 
(Code 1995, § 114.45) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Maintenance and improvement of parks and squares, § 11. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Municipal parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 306.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area parks and facilities means parks and facilities located away from neighborhoods, and mainly used for reunions, meetings and large gatherings. Such parks and facilities have the same rules and applicable ordinances, but they also have exceptions with proper permits being filed. The following are considered area parks and facilities in the city: 
(1)  Fabis Park. 
(2)  Festival Park. 
(3)  Riverside Park. 
    Motorized sport vehicle means any such vehicle propelled by a motor that can be ridden or driven, including three-wheelers, four-wheelers, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts and dune buggies. This definition does not prohibit motorized conveyances for city maintenance vehicles or handicapped persons, such as motorized wheelchairs. 
    Neighborhood parks and facilities means parks and facilities close to neighboring residences or premises. The following are considered neighborhood parks and facilities in the city: 
(1)  Allcorn Park. 
(2)  Bunin Park. 
(3)  Camp Bowie Sport Complex. 
(4)  Cecil Holman Park. 
(5)  Center Park. 
(6)  Coggin Park. 
(7)  Gladys Seward Park. 
(8)  Kiwanis Park. 
(9)  Ledbetter Park. 
(10)  Margaret and Stuart Coleman Plaza. 
(11)  Mayes Park. 
(12)  Memorial Park. 
(13)  Snyder Park. 
(14)  Taber Park. 
(15)  Thomason Park. 
(16)  Trigg Park. 
(17)  Wiggins Park. 
    Vehicle shall mean any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. This term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. This term shall not include baby carriages, bicycles and vehicles in the service of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 100.03; Ord. No. 08-38, § I, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of, and conduct in, the parks and recreation areas of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 100.01) 
Sec. 50-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply in all parks and recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, unless expressly exempted. 
(Code 1995, § 100.02) 
Secs. 50-4-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 50-31. - Permits. 
    Permits for special events in area parks and recreation facilities shall be obtained by application to the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 100.08) 
Sec. 50-32. - Emergency closure. 
    In the case of emergency or at the discretion of the city manager, the director of parks and recreation or his designee, may order any portion of the parks or parkways closed to the public, if the public interest requires such closure. 
(Code 1995, § 100.10; Ord. No. 08-13, § II, 6-10-2008) 
Sec. 50-33. - Posting signs. 
    Appropriate signs shall be posted to notify the public of the park regulations set forth in this chapter, provided that failure to notice or read the signs shall not constitute a defense to any charge of violating this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 100.11) 
Secs. 50-34-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES 

Sec. 50-61. - Nuisances. 
    It shall be an unlawful act for any person to omit to perform a duty, or suffer or permit any condition or thing to be or exist, which: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders dangerous, for its intended use, any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, creek, waterway, ditch or drainage; or 
(5)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
(Code 1995, § 110.04(A)) 
Sec. 50-62. - Noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to violate the noise regulations set forth in chapter 34, article V. 
(Code 1995, § 100.04(B)) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03; graffiti, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.08; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 356.001 et seq. 
Sec. 50-63. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in parks, except by special permit pursuant to section 6-62. 
(Code 1995, § 110.04(E)) 
Sec. 50-64. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use loud, obscene, vulgar or indecent language, or swear, curse, yell or shriek in a manner calculated to disturb persons present. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a neighborhood or area public park or recreation facility to: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, paving material, water line or other public utility, or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property, or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place, or cause to be thrown, discharged or placed, in the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park, or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such water. 
(3)  Take into, carry through or put into any park any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in the provided receptacles. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or refuse shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw objects at any animal, wildlife or bird; or remove or have in such person's possession any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any bird; however, snakes known to be poisonous may be killed on sight. 
(5)  Walk a domestic animal without a leash. The owner or person having custody of such domestic animal shall be responsible for removal of any animal feces. 
(Code 1995, § 100.04(F)) 
Sec. 50-65. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in an area park or recreation facility to: 
(1)  Camp or stay overnight in vehicles or trailers at any place except areas designated for such camping or staying overnight. 
(2)  Enter an area posted as "closed to the public". 
(3)  Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
(4)  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit they claim to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(5)  Unreasonably disturb or interfere with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(6)  Set off any fireworks. 
(Code 1995, § 100.06) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01. 
Sec. 50-66. - Closing hours. 
    No person shall be in any area park and recreation facility during the hours that the park is closed, as posted, except for designated camping areas. 
(Code 1995, § 100.07) 
Sec. 50-67. - Operation, standing or parking of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation facility to: 
(1)  Drive any vehicle on any area other than the paved park roads (or designated park roads if not paved) or parking areas, or such areas as may, on occasion, be specifically designated as temporary areas. 
(2)  Park a vehicle any place other than on a designated parking area. 
(3)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in the park during hours when the park areas are closed. 
(4)  Use any park area, including parking places, for the repair or cleaning of any vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(5)  Violate any of the traffic laws of the state or any of the traffic ordinances of the city, all of which shall apply in full force and effect in all parks. 
(6)  Fail to obey any traffic-control device indicating speed, direction of travel, caution, stopping, standing, parking or other instructions designed to promote traffic-control safety. 
(7)  Drive or operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed limit posted. 
(8)  Operate a motorized sport vehicle, unless authorized by the city manager, or authorized by the city council in park areas specifically designated and marked by appropriate signage for such use. Motorcycles, legal for street use, and golf carts may be operated on paved park roads (or the designated park roads if not paved) only. 
(Code 1995, § 100.05; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 50-68. - Prohibition of dogs in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex and the Brownwood Soccer Complex. 
(a)  Dogs, regardless of whether they are leashed, unleashed or carried, are prohibited in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex during the April 1 to August 31 time period only. 
(b)  Dogs, regardless of whether they are leashed, unleashed or carried, are prohibited in the fenced area of the Brownwood Soccer Complex while league sanctioned soccer games and tournaments are being played by Soccer-4-Fun, the Centex Soccer Association and other leagues (or any successor leagues or associations). 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, (i) guide dogs aiding a totally or partially blind persons or otherwise incapacitated person shall be permitted in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex and the Brownwood Soccer Complex; and (ii) dogs, provided that they are on a leash at all times, may be on the designated portion of the walking trail located in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex. 
(Ord. No. 03-13, § I(100.61), 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 11-12, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 17-02 , § I, 1-10-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-02 , § I, adopted Jan. 20, 2017, amended § 50-68 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Prohibition of dogs in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex" to "Prohibition of dogs in the Bert V. Massey, II Sports Complex and the Brownwood Soccer Complex," as set out herein. 
Sec. 50-69. - Riverside Park. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Brownwood has determined that the back portion of Riverside Park, behind the house and the west side of the park, should be closed at dusk to discourage misuse of the park, including loitering, littering and other nuisance. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Brownwood has determined that it would be in the best interest of the City of Brownwood residents to close the back portion of Riverside Park, behind the house and the west side of the park, from dusk to 7:00 a.m. Signs stating park hours shall be posted permanently in the park. 
(c)  Said hours may be extended during any such program or event following pre-approval by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-29, 12-8-2009) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; duty to remove waste, rubbish and debris from interior of structure, § 34-35; duty to remove waste, etc., from yards, § 34-36; natural resources, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Refuse means all nonputrescible wastes. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding recognizable industrial byproducts, and including all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
(Code 1995, § 50.01) 
Sec. 54-2. - Uncollected solid waste declared nuisance. 
    Fermenting, putrefying, or odiferous solid waste in containers which have not been collected due to failure to pay solid waste fees or for not being placed in proper containers shall be declared a nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 50.02) 
Sec. 54-3. - Discontinuance of water service for nonpayment. 
    If solid waste collection charges are not paid within such time as the city council may establish, water service to the premises shall be discontinued. 
(Code 1995, § 50.03) 
Sec. 54-4. - Permit required for collection. 
    No person shall collect solid waste or refuse who does not possess a permit from the sanitary supervisor. Such permit shall be issued only upon the payment of an annual permit fee set by the sanitary supervisor and city manager and after the sanitary supervisor has been satisfied that the licensee is capable of complying with the requirements of this chapter. The permit may be revoked when deemed necessary to the public welfare by the sanitary supervisor. 
(Code 1995, § 50.04) 
Secs. 54-5-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 54-31. - Solid waste, trash to be kept from scattering. 
    It shall be the duty of every person occupying or having under his control any premises in this city to prevent all solid waste, trash, and refuse from spreading or scattering over the premises, over adjacent premises, or over or into any street, sidewalk, alley, gutter, or drain. 
(Code 1995, § 50.15) 
Sec. 54-32. - Containers to be used; specifications. 
    No owner, tenant, or lessee of any public or private premises shall permit to accumulate upon his premises any solid waste or refuse, except in covered containers approved by the sanitary supervisor. Such containers shall be constructed in such manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible, rodentproof, and insectproof, and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons. The size of containers shall be designated by the sanitary supervisor and city manager. Containers shall be kept covered at all times except when refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. 
(Code 1995, § 50.16) 
Sec. 54-33. - Preparation of certain items for collection. 
    Boxes, papers, trees, and odd articles shall be prepared for collection by being crushed or bundled in lengths not to exceed five feet and not to exceed 50 pounds in weight. 
(Code 1995, § 50.17) 
Sec. 54-34. - Separate containers required for individual disposal. 
    In case solid waste and one or more types of refuse are disposed of separately, separate containers may be required by the solid waste supervisor. 
(Code 1995, § 50.18) 
Sec. 54-35. - Placement for collection; maintenance. 
    No solid waste or refuse shall be collected by any authorized agency or person unless it is placed and maintained as designated by the sanitary supervisor. All containers should be placed in an alley or other place convenient for trucking, and the place and hour of collection shall be designated by the sanitary supervisor. All empty containers shall be disinfected with a suitable disinfectant and removed from the alley or other loading place without unnecessary delay. 
(Code 1995, § 50.19) 
Sec. 54-36. - Collection charge. 
    The solid waste, trash, and refuse collection rate shall be set by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 50.20) 
Sec. 54-37. - Disposal of solid waste and refuse. 
    The disposal of solid waste and refuse in any quantity by any individual, householder, or establishment in any place, private or public, within the city limits or within 5,000 feet outside the city limits shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 50.21) 
Sec. 54-38. - Disposal methods. 
(a)  All disposal of solid waste and refuse shall be by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Incineration; 
(2)  Landfill and cover; 
(3)  Sanitary landfill; or 
(4)  Dumping ground designated by the city or an authorized representative approved by the city and county health officers. 
Such methods shall include the maximum practicable rodent, insect, and nuisance control at the place or places of disposal. 
(b)  The carcasses of dead animals shall be disposed of as directed by the sanitary supervisor. 
(Code 1995, § 50.22) 
Sec. 54-39. - Temporary collection stations. 
(a)  There shall be only private household waste, save and except food or animal waste shall not be permitted; yard waste and large items from private residences disposed of in the container. 
(b)  There shall be no disposal of material by commercial businesses in the container. Such commercial material shall be carried to the city landfill for disposal. 
(c)  There shall be no tires placed in the container. 
(d)  There shall be no littering or spilling of waste material around the container. 
(e)  There shall be no waste placed in the container from commercial haulers who are hauling from private households. 
(Code 1995, § 50.23) 
Secs. 54-40-54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILL 

Sec. 54-71. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Private use of the city sanitary landfill shall be extended only to citizens of the city and to city utility customers residing outside city limits who have made contractual arrangements with the city utility department. 
(b)  Use and fees shall be applied in accordance with ordinances passed by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 50.35) 
Sec. 54-72. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be determined by the utility rate ordinance which is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 50.36) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Maintenance and improvement of streets, sidewalks and public ways, §§ 11, 12, 20; power over obstructions and encroachments, § 11. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way saved from repeal, § 1-8(5); peddlers, itinerant vendors, transient merchants and vendors, § 18-121 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; proximity of oil and gas facilities to streets, roads, highways and alleys, § 46-121; parks and recreation, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; vehicles for hire, ch. 74; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; moving buildings, § 78-481 et seq.; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; signs, ch. 90; subdivisions, ch. 94; design standards for streets, § 94-122; required improvements for streets, § 94-162; zoning, ch. 98; telecommunications, § 98-671 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Street acceptance. 
    Any streets which are or have been delineated as such, on any of the general or official maps of the city, whether in the old town proper or any addition thereto, or which have been donated to the public as such, or which have been acquired by condemnation, long use, or otherwise, whether named or described, are hereby accepted and declared to be the public streets, avenues, and alleys of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98.002) 
Sec. 58-2. - Discharge of water, wastewater and other substances on streets and alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful to cause water, wastewater or any other substance to be discharged on any of the streets or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98.003) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
Sec. 58-3. - Parade permit required. 
    All parades upon the streets and alleys of the city are hereby expressly prohibited unless a permit for the parade has been obtained from the city manager. Parade permits shall designate the time for the parade, the length of time the parade may occupy the streets and alleys, the place where the parade may form and the route the parade shall take or follow during its progress. An applicant for a parade permit may request a hearing before the city council to appeal a denial of his permit application. 
(Code 1995, § 98.004; Ord. No. 08-13, § III, 6-10-2008) 
Sec. 58-4. - Gas pipelines. 
    All pipelines for the distribution of gas, or any other commodity, laid in the streets or alleys of the city shall be located and laid under the direction and supervision of the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 98.065) 
Sec. 58-5. - Temporary closure of streets and alleys. 
(a)  In case of emergency or at the discretion of the city manager, the city manager or his designee, may order any street or alley, or portion thereof, closed to the public if the public interest requires such closure. 
(b)  The city manager may temporarily close a street or alley, or a portion thereof, for a public event. An application for a temporary street closure must be completed and filed with the city manager. An applicant for a street closure may request a hearing before the city council to appeal a denial of his street closure permit application. 
(Ord. No. 08-13, § III, 6-10-2008) 
Secs. 58-6-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR WORK 

Sec. 58-31. - Manner of work; cleanliness of premises. 
    All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be done or performed in a good, workmanlike manner. The work shall not be accepted or approved by the city until the premises thereof have been cleaned and cleared of all debris, trash, and rubbish which may have accumulated during the work. 
(Code 1995, § 98.020) 
Sec. 58-32. - Parking lots, driveways and similar areas. 
(a)  Performance bond required prior to start of construction. Before engaging in the business of construction of driveways, parking lots and other similar areas with asphalt or other similar construction material, all such persons shall give a performance bond in the sum of $5,000.00, or an amount commensurate with the anticipated cost of the project, with an acceptable surety company, payable to the city, to be approved by the city council, and conditioned that all work done by such persons shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with city ordinances. 
(b)  Construction permit required. A permit for construction shall be obtained from the city engineer before the construction and/or paving of any driveway, parking lot or similar area. The permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city engineer. 
(c)  Curb and gutter installation. No driveway, parking lot or similar area shall be constructed or paved without proper curb and gutter being installed at all streets adjoining the property which construction is being placed upon. The city engineer shall set grades and lines for the curb and gutter. 
(d)  Indemnification. Such person shall indemnify the city and the property owner with whom he contracted, or any person, for all damages resulting from his negligence, the violation of any city ordinance or unskilled work done by himself or his employees. 
(e)  Injunctive relief. In addition to the penalty for a violation of this article, the indemnity right set out in subsection (d) of this section, the city shall also reserve the right to file for injunctive relief from the proper court to prevent a contractor from doing business within the city in the construction of driveways, parking lots and other similar construction after a violation of the provisions set out in this section until the violations are corrected at the contractor's own expense. 
(Code 1995, § 98.021) 
Secs. 58-33-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS, STREET CUTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trench safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.021 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-61-58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 58-81. - Required. 
    Before any roadway, alley or other public right-of-way in the city is cut or excavated, an application shall be filed and a construction permit for breaking the ground surface shall be obtained from the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 98.040) 
Sec. 58-82. - Obligation; deposit. 
    Before any street cut permit shall be granted, the person applying for such permit shall sign an obligation to pay the city for the cost of repairing the street or alley, and all broken portions thereof, and to place such street or alley in as good of a condition as it was prior to such penetration, and upon demand by the city, a deposit may be required in an amount as may be determined by the city, guaranteeing the repair of the street or alley. 
(Code 1995, § 98.041) 
Sec. 58-83. - Excavation requirements. 
(a)  All excavations shall be kept to a minimum depth, and the trenches shall be no wider than necessary to perform the excavation operation. The paving breaks shall be made in such a manner that the cut is straight and smooth, so that adjacent material is left undisturbed. 
(b)  Excavations for utility lines shall be adequate to assure no less than two feet of cover over such lines. The utility lines will be properly bedded and tamped to assure adequate compaction. Valve boxes shall be used on all valves, and shall be brought flush with the surface. 
(Code 1995, § 98.042) 
Sec. 58-84. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Procedure. All trenches or excavations shall be backfilled by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Dirt streets, dirt alleys, and unimproved parkways. All excavations within a street right-of-way and not under an improved surface shall be backfilled by tamping in six-inch horizontal layers or by ponding. The excavation shall be finished flush with the natural ground, and all surplus material shall be removed from the site. 
(2)  Gravel on all-weather-improved but not paved roads and alleys. All excavations under improved, but not paved, roads and alleys shall be backfilled within a reasonable time with select material by tamping in six-inch horizontal layers, or by ponding up to within eight inches of the surface. Select base material shall be tamped and finished flush with the natural grade. Muck and other poor materials shall be removed and replaced with select material. Care shall be taken to assure the optimum water content during tamping operations. 
(3)  Paved and hard-surfaced streets and alleys. The contractor may select one of the following procedures: 
a.  All excavated material shall be removed from the site and replaced with sand to a point eight inches below the existing surface. The sand shall be capped with six inches of concrete. 
b.  All excavated material shall be removed from the site and replaced with select material stabilized with Portland cement or with lime. If soil is used, it shall be stabilized with two sacks of cement or lime per cubic yard of material. If sand and gravel or chat is used, it shall be stabilized with one sack of cement per cubic yard of material. The backfill material shall be mixed in a concrete mixer. Water may be added in the mixer or may be added as the material is tamped into place. 
c.  The backfill may be replaced with select material tamped in six-inch horizontal layers to a point ten inches below the surface. The remaining ten inches shall be stabilized with Portland cement or with lime, as outlined in subsection (a)(3)b of this section. Should the contractor elect to use this method, he shall furnish a certificate signed by a competent engineer that the material has been properly placed and tamped. The owner shall be responsible for any failure of this excavation for a period of 12 months from the date of completion of the repairs. The fact that the city performs the finishing repairs shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for the base failure. 
(b)  Use of bonding and sealing material. The backfill in paved streets or alleys shall be finished flush with the surface with a two-inch surface of plant mixed asphaltic concrete. The backfill shall be properly sealed with a tack coat of RC 2 or similar material to assure bonding and sealing of the excavation. The premix shall be raked, tamped, and rolled into place. 
(c)  Responsibility for maintenance; billing. Should the contractor or owner elect to place the premix on the completed backfill, he shall be responsible for maintenance of the patch for 12 months. Should the city perform the finishing with premix, the owner will be billed at the current rate per square foot of surface replaced in the premix. 
(Code 1995, § 98.043) 
Sec. 58-85. - Correction of work. 
    Within 12 months of any excavation, if the city should be required to correct any work performed by an owner or contractor, such correction shall be made and billed to the owner or contractor responsible, on the basis of cost, plus 25 percent, for the correction. 
(Code 1995, § 98.044) 
Secs. 58-86-58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VISIBILITY TRIANGLE 

Sec. 58-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street gutter flow line means the street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering upon each restricted area. If there is no such curb, height restrictions shall be based upon the actual level of the paved or used portion of the public street adjacent to and bordering upon each restricted area. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(E)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-122. - Composition of restricted area. 
(a)  All of the portion of land lying within a triangular-shaped area on each street corner within the city shall comprise a restricted area, whether the land is privately-owned, unpaved or untraveled street right-of-way property, subject to the exceptions set forth in section 58-125, and shall be described by metes and bounds, as follows: 
Beginning at the precise corner of the intersection point of the curbs of each of the two streets intersecting forming each corner and extending 20 feet along each such curbline from the curb intersection point, and the third side is determined by the drawing of a straight line from the ends of such 20-foot extensions, as more fully portrayed in the following diagram:   
(b)  Where no curbs are in existence at the street intersections, the 20-foot lines shall coincide with the central flow line of the ditches paralleling the curbed streets. The central flow line shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(A)) 
Sec. 58-123. - Walls, fences, etc. 
    No person shall erect or maintain any wall, fence or other structure within any restricted area to a height greater than three feet from the street gutter flow line, except utility poles. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(B)) 
Sec. 58-124. - Plant materials. 
(a)  No person shall plant, grow or maintain any plant, hedge, shrub or other growth in any restricted area or street right-of-way to a height greater than three feet from the street gutter flow line, except trees, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  Any tree planted, grown, and maintained in any restricted area or street right-of-way shall not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower than 101/2 feet from the surface of the property on which the tree is located. 
(c)  No tree, shrub, vine, palm or similar plant of any description or kind shall be grown, maintained or cultivated in such a manner that any portion thereof overhangs or obtrudes upon or over any street or highway in the city, unless there is a full 12-foot clearance between the surface of all portions of the street or highway and the overhanging tree, shrub, limb, vine, palm or plant. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(C), (D), (G); Ord. No. 02-38, § 1, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 58-125. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply only to zoned sections of the city requiring construction on lots in such zoned sections to be set back from the property line of each lot. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(F)) 
Sec. 58-126. - Violations; notice; abatement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works, or such other person as may be designated by the city council, that when it shall come to his knowledge that any obstruction, nuisance or traffic hazard, as set forth in this article, exists, to notify the owner of the property on which the violation exists, by certified mail, of the obstruction, nuisance or traffic hazard which is in contravention of the city ordinance, and to request that the obstruction, nuisance or traffic hazard be remedied or removed, as deemed necessary by the notifying official. The owner of the property so notified shall have ten days, as stipulated in the notice, to remedy or remove the obstruction, nuisance, traffic hazard or violation. 
(b)  If the violation has not been abated by the owner of the property within the time allowed, the director of public works may cause the violation to be abated. The officer charged with the abatement of the violation shall have the right, at reasonable times, to enter into or upon the property to investigate or cause the removal of the obstruction, nuisance or traffic hazard, in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1995, § 98.066(H), (I)) 
Secs. 58-127-58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREET RENTAL CHARGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Gross receipts tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.025. 

Sec. 58-161. - Imposed. 
    On or before the day set forth each year in the ordinance granting any franchise within the city, every person occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places in the city with gas mains, pipes and other fixtures for the distribution of gas shall annually pay to the city, as a condition of the further privilege of such occupancy, a rental charge equal to two percent of the gross receipts received by the person from gas sold and delivered to residential and commercial consumers at residential and commercial rates within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding year. 
(Code 1995, § 98.080) 
Sec. 58-162. - Report of gross receipts. 
    All persons using or maintaining any gas pipelines, pipes and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other places within the corporate limits of the city shall, on or before the day set forth each year in the ordinance granting such franchise within the city, file a sworn report with the city showing the gross receipts from gas sold and delivered to residential and commercial consumers at residential and commercial rates by such persons within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding year ending June 30. 
(Code 1995, § 98.081) 
Sec. 58-163. - Examinations of books and records. 
    The city council may, at a reasonable time, have the books and records of any person rendering the report required in section 58-162 to be examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether the report is accurate, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining such facts by any other method. 
(Code 1995, § 98.082) 
Sec. 58-164. - Receipt for payment. 
    Upon receipt of the rental charge imposed in this article by the city, the city secretary shall deliver a receipt to the person paying the charge. The receipt shall authorize the person to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the city in carrying on his business for 12 months from the date fixed in the ordinance granting the franchise for such year. 
(Code 1995, § 98.083) 
Sec. 58-165. - Charge not a tax. 
    The rental charge imposed by this article is made for the privilege now enjoyed by the persons upon whom the charge is imposed for using the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the city in the conduct of their business, and the charge is additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and all taxes of every nature against such persons. 
(Code 1995, § 98.084) 
Sec. 58-166. - Relief not granted from other laws. 
    Nothing contained in this article is intended to relieve any person of any condition, restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98.085) 
Sec. 58-167. - Franchise not granted; right to cancel privileges and refund. 
    This article does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways, and shall never be construed to do so by the courts or otherwise. The city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted under this article and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 98.086) 
Sec. 58-168. - Right to adopt restrictions and regulations. 
    The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect, at any time, other restrictions and regulations as to the erection and maintenance of gas mains, pipes and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the city and, from time to time, to require such gas mains, pipes and other property, equipment and fixtures to be removed on such terms as the city may deem proper. 
(Code 1995, § 98.087) 
Secs. 58-169-58-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 78. 

Sec. 58-201. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curbline means the line established by the city for a particular street. 
    Owner means an individual, firm, company or corporation holding legal fee title of a dwelling or structure. 
    Right-of-way means all public rights-of-way, streets or other public property within the city. 
    Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
(b)  Titles of city officials. When the title of any city official is used in this article, it shall include any duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1995, § 98.115) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-202. - Building identification inspector. 
(a)  The building official of the city shall be the building identification inspector, and it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The building official shall file complaints with the municipal court of the city, as necessary, to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 98.116) 
Sec. 58-203. - Building identification. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner of any building, dwelling, home, house or apartment, residential or commercial, public or private, to place outdoors thereon the proper street number and/or apartment number in conformity with the following requirements: 
(1)  All numbers shall not be less than four inches high, except apartment complexes, and shall be located in a place on the building which is plainly visible from the curbline of the adjacent primary street or right-of-way. 
(2)  Each separate building of an apartment complex and each individual apartment shall be marked with not less than three-inch high outdoor reflective apartment numbers on each adjacent frontage street or right-of-way and at all entrances and exits to adjacent parking areas. 
(3)  All numbers affixed to any building shall be of a contrasting color to the background on which such numbers are affixed. 
(b)  Curb markings of street addresses or apartment numbers shall not be in lieu of building identification numbers required under this article. 
(Code 1995, § 98.117) 
Sec. 58-204. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any owner to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section in this article contains the specific language that a violation or failure to comply is unlawful and is an offense. Any owner who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who fails to comply with the terms of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section 1-14. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to willfully deface, injure or remove any number required under this article, except a person shall have the right to remove a number when altering or changing the building, and then such number shall be temporarily placed at another location on the building where it will conspicuously show from the street. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section 1-14. 
(Code 1995, § 98.118) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxes, §§ 82-87. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-8(7); administration, ch. 2; businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Taxation powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy property tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.011. 

Sec. 62-31. - Homestead exemption to persons 65 years of age or older. 
(a)  From and after January 1, 1984, $15,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads, as defined by law, of persons who have attained the age of 65 years on or before January 1 of the year for which the exemption is claimed shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(b)  In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall comply with provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.43. 
(Code 1995, § 34.02) 
State Law reference- Taxable property, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 11.01, 11.02; residence homestead exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13; application for exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.43. 
Sec. 62-32. - Residence homestead tax freeze for elderly and disabled people. 
(a)  Definitions . 
    Disabled. Has the same meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
    Residence homestead. Has the same meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(j)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
    Tax Code . The Texas Tax Code as it currently exists or may be amended. 
(b)  There is hereby created and established a tax freeze on the amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city on residence homesteads of individuals age 65 or older and/or who are disabled, which shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.261. 
(Ord. No. 15-04 , § 1, 2-10-2015) 
Secs. 62-33-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 62-61. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied and shall be collected from every person pursuing any occupation taxed by the general laws of the state, or which may be so taxed, an annual occupation tax equal in each instance to one-half the state occupation tax, which tax shall be paid annually in advance, except where otherwise provided by state law, in which event, such tax may be paid as provided by the state law. 
(Code 1995, § 34.20) 
State Law reference- Certain services connected with oil wells, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 191.082 et seq.; attorneys, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 191.141; authority to levy occupation tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.101. 
Secs. 62-62-62-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The city levies a one percent sales and use tax which was adopted by referendum on December 5, 1967. 
State Law reference- Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 

Sec. 62-91. - Telecommunications services tax. 
(a)  Authorization. A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  Repeal of telecommunications exemption. The application of the telecommunications exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(a) and (b) is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(b). 
(c)  Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the state legislature. 
(Code 1995, §§ 34.30-34.32) 
Secs. 62-92-62-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Tax assessor, § 82; tax collector, § 82. 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 

Sec. 62-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of a room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or the facility in a hotel, and shall not include the cost of food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, nor any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
    Hotel means any building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for a consideration. Such term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse or bed and breakfast. Such term does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium or nursing home; or 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an "institution of higher education" or a "private or independent institution of higher education," as such terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an education program or activity at the institution. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or right to the use or possession, of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel, for any purpose. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses or possesses, or has a right to the use or possession of, any room, sleeping space or facility in a hotel, under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
    Permanent resident means a person who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, as long as there is no interruption of payment for such period. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means a regular quarterly period corresponding to the period which tax reports are filed with the state comptroller. 
(Code 1995, § 34.45) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-122. - Levied; rate. 
    There is hereby levied in the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room at a hotel which costs $2.00 or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The tax shall apply to every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the right to use or possess a room that is in a hotel in accordance with the terms of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 34.46(A)) 
Sec. 62-123. - Exemptions; refunds. 
(a)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a: 
(1)  Permanent resident. 
(2)  Corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which enures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(3)  United States governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a). 
(4)  Person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(d). 
(b)  A state governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(b) shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  A person who is described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 56.103(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(Code 1995, § 34.46(B), (C)) 
State Law reference- Tax authorized exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 351.002, 351.006. 
Sec. 62-124. - Refund claims. 
(a)  To receive a refund of the tax paid under this article, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by the city, containing the information required by the city. The comptroller, by rule, shall prescribe the form that must be used and the information that must be provided. 
(b)  A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city under this article only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during the quarter. The city may adopt an ordinance to enforce this section. 
Sec. 62-125. - Failure to comply. 
    If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed by this article, or fail to file a report as required by the state, or fail to tax as imposed in this article, when such report or payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum punishment authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax or violates the reporting provisions imposed by the state and this article, within the time required, shall forfeit an additional 15 percent of such tax, plus the delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the maximum rate permitted by law, and in such event, such person shall be liable to the city for reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of the tax or in compliance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(Code 1995, § 34.47) 
State Law reference- Misdemeanor authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004. 
Sec. 62-126. - Filing of reports; payment of tax. 
    On the last day of the month following each quarter, every person required in section 62-127 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall file a report with the city showing the consideration paid for all rooms or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies and any other information the city may reasonably require. Such persons shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Code 1995, § 34.48) 
State Law reference- Use and allocation of revenue, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 et seq. 
Sec. 62-127. - Authority to make rules and regulations; access to books and records. 
    The city shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article, and, upon reasonable notice, shall have access to books and records necessary to enable the city to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 34.49) 
Secs 62-128-62-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OCCUPATION TAX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Power to levy occupation taxes consistent with general laws of state, § 83. 
State Law reference- Home-rule city may collect taxes authorized by charter or general law, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.102; occupation tax authorized on a coin-operated machine, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.451. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-161-62-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.001 et seq. 

Sec. 62-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin-operated machine means any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card or check, including a music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
    Music coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine, including a phonograph, piano or graphophone, which: 
(1)  Dispenses music or is used to dispense music; 
(2)  Is operated by inserting a coin, metal slug, token or check; and 
(3)  Is not an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child. 
    Operator means a person who exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, a coin-operated machine in the city in a place of business that is not owned by the person. 
    Owner means a person who owns a coin-operated machine in the city. 
    Service coin-operated machine means any kind of machine or device, including a pay toilet or telephone, that dispenses only a service. Such term does not include a machine or device that dispenses merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
    Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used, or capable of being used, to dispense or afford amusement, skill or pleasure, or is operated for any purpose other than for dispensing only merchandise, music or a service. Such term: 
(1)  Includes a marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or a machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and 
(2)  Does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child. 
(Code 1995, § 111.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.002. 
Sec. 62-182. - Imposed; rate. 
(a)  The city does hereby impose an occupation tax on a coin-operated machine. 
(b)  The rate of the tax may not exceed one-fourth of the rate of the tax imposed under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401(b). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401. 
Sec. 62-183. - Exempt machines. 
    This division does not apply to: 
(1)  A stamp vending machine; 
(2)  A service coin-operated machine; or 
(3)  If subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, a: 
a.  Gas meter; 
b.  Food vending machine; 
c.  Confection vending machine; 
d.  Beverage vending machine; 
e.  Merchandise vending machine; or 
f.  Cigarette vending machine. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.004. 
Sec. 62-184. - Corporation and association exemption. 
    This division does not apply to: 
(1)  A corporation or association owning, leasing or renting a music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine if the: 
a.  Corporation or association is organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or benevolent purposes; 
b.  Corporation's or association's net earnings do not inure to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual; and 
c.  Corporation or association owns, leases or rents the coin-operated machine: 
1.  For the corporation's or association's exclusive use; and 
2.  To further a purpose of the corporation or association. 
(2)  A corporation or association exempt under this section if the assessment of the tax is prohibited by other law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.005. 
Sec. 62-185. - Private ownership exemption. 
    An individual who owns a music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine for personal use and amusement in the individual's private residence is not required to obtain a license or pay a tax under this division. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.006. 
Sec. 62-186. - Common carrier exemption. 
    A person subject to regulation by the state railroad commission is not required to obtain a license under this division if the person, in the course of his business, transports or stores a music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine not owned by him. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.007. 
Sec. 62-187. - Owner and exhibitor exemption. 
    A person who owns or exhibits a coin-operated machine is exempt from the licensing and recordkeeping requirements of this division if the person: 
(1)  Operates or exhibits the coin-operated machine only on the premises occupied by the person and in connection with the person's business; 
(2)  Does not own a coin-operated machine subject to the tax imposed under this division and located on the business premises of another person; and 
(3)  Does not have a direct or indirect financial interest in the music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine industry, except for ownership of the coin-operated machine operated or exhibited on the premises occupied by the person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.008. 
Sec. 62-188. - Sealing authorized; release fees. 
    The city may: 
(1)  Seal a coin-operated machine if the tax imposed is not paid; and 
(2)  Charge a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office for the release of a sealed coin-operated machine. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.453. 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, § 34-171 et seq.; junked vehicles, § 34-201 et seq.; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 74; traffic control signs, § 90-174. 
State Law reference- Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chs. 541-600; general penalty, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.401. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Obstruction of traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in a manner so as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 71.02) 
Sec. 66-2. - Obstruction of intersections and crosswalks. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1995, § 71.03) 
Sec. 66-3. - Turns restricted. 
(a)  The city council shall determine the intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, such hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or may be removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(b)  No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn at any intersection within the city where a traffic control signal light is suspended and operating. 
(Code 1995, § 71.04) 
Sec. 66-4. - Funeral processions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not a part of a funeral procession to ride or drive a vehicle or walk through or across a funeral procession, or to obstruct the funeral process, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 71.08) 
Sec. 66-5. - Maximum load on bridges and culverts. 
(a)  The city council shall designate, from time to time, the maximum tonnage permitted on specific bridges located on the city streets, and may forbid the use of any bridge or culvert to any vehicle which, by reason of the weight of the vehicle and its load, would tend to rapidly deteriorate or destroy the bridge or culvert. Notices stating the maximum weight permitted shall be posted at any bridge or culvert sought to be protected. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, the tonnage of which exceeds the tonnage permitted for any bridge or culvert as set out by the posting of a sign at or near any bridge or culvert in the city, to drive such excessively weighted vehicle across the bridge or culvert. 
(Code 1995, § 71.09) 
Sec. 66-6. - Vehicles on public property. 
    No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle or otherwise move a vehicle on publicly owned property, except on areas maintained and designated as roads, streets, highways or parking areas for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 71.10) 
Sec. 66-7. - Unmuffled compression release engine brakes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate or engage, or to have activated or engaged, any compression release engine braking system in the city limits, unless such engine braking system is connected to a lawful muffler which is adequate to and does prevent the emission of noise which is louder than normal and lawful engine operating noise. Violation of this section shall be punishable in addition to any violation of any other law, ordinance, or regulation governing lawful muffler or sound-muffling systems. As used in this section, the term "compression release braking system" means any engine retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the engine, thereby converting the engine into an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(b)  Appropriate signs shall be posted at entrances to the city and at other locations determined by the chief of police to be reasonable in order to give notice of the prohibition of the use of compression release engine brakes. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 04-22, § I(71.11), 5-25-2004) 
Sec. 66-8. - Driving of vehicles on public property. 
    No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle or otherwise move said vehicle on the publicly owned property except to areas maintained and designated as roads, streets, highways or parking areas for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 86-49, 10-28-1986) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-49 adopted Oct. 28, 1986, amended the Code by adding a new § 17-28; however, said provision has been redesignated as § 66-8, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format and for purposes of allowing future expansion of the Code. 
Secs. 66-9-66-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Off-street parking and loading requirements, § 98-631 et seq. 

Sec. 66-41. - Unlawful standing and parking. 
    No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in, on or upon any street in the city in violation of any of the ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1995, § 72.01) 
Sec. 66-42. - Prima facie evidence of parking violation. 
    When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on the street where parking of vehicles is prohibited, or with parking such vehicle on a street in a manner which violates the designated manner of parking a vehicle, or with parking a vehicle for a length of time in excess of the time allowed in the space where the vehicle was parked, proof that the vehicle was, at the date of the alleged offense, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by the owner, but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that the vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(Code 1995, § 72.02) 
State Law reference- Offense by person owning or controlling a vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.302. 
Sec. 66-43. - Designation of parking zones. 
    The city council shall designate zones in which parking may be prohibited or limited and which are on file in the city secretary's office. It shall be unlawful to park in such zones, except in compliance with posted signs. 
(Code 1995, § 72.03) 
Sec. 66-44. - Parking of unused cars for storage, repair or sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any unused car in any street or alley for the purpose of storage, repair or sale. 
(Code 1995, § 72.04) 
Sec. 66-45. - Commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Prohibitions and limitations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any truck tractor, road tractor, truck trailer, semitrailer or any other commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one ton, according to the manufacturer's classification, upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public place within or adjacent to any area zoned as a single-family residential district, two-family residential district, multiple-family residential district or mobile home district, as established in chapter 98. This subsection shall not prevent the parking or standing of such vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to leave, park or stand any mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other type of trailer upon any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard abutting real property not his own within any area zoned as a single-family residential district, two-family residential district, multiple-family residential district or mobile home district, as established in chapter 98. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant, or his invited guest, owning or occupying real property abutting a portion of any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard within any single-family residential district to leave, park or stand any mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other type of trailer on the portion of any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard abutting the real property owned or occupied by such owner or occupant for a continuous period of time longer than 72 hours within any calendar year, or for such owner or occupant to permit, allow or suffer any such mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other type of trailer owned by such owner or occupant, or his invited guest, to remain parked or standing on the portion of any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard abutting the real property owned or occupied by the owner or occupant for any continuous period of time longer than 72 hours within any calendar year. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to leave, park or stand any truck tractor, road tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus or any other commercial motor vehicle, or any house trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other type of trailer upon any public street, alley, parkway or boulevard in such a manner as to block the flow of traffic upon the public street, alley, parkway or boulevard. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person or owner, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sundays and city holidays, to leave, park or stand any truck tractor, road tractor, truck trailer, semitrailer or other commercial vehicle in any alley situated within the central business district for a continuous period of time longer than 30 minutes. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Street construction, maintenance and repair. Street construction, maintenance and repair trucks, rollers and implements. 
(2)  Public service utilities. Truck equipment, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities. 
(3)  Buses. Motorbuses, when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops. 
(4)  Loading zones. All other vehicles designated in subsection (a) of this section, when actually parked at a designated loading zone in the areas of limited parking where loading zones are designated. 
(5)  Emergency repairs. Any vehicle defined or designated in subsection (a) of this section developing a mechanical defect after such vehicle has commenced to run, en route, making it unsafe to proceed further, and in such event, it shall be lawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. 
(Code 1995, § 72.05) 
Sec. 66-46. - Parking in alleys in business district. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any alley within the business district. 
(Code 1995, § 72.06) 
Sec. 66-47. - Overnight parking at Brownwood Coliseum. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having the possession, direction, operation or control of any vehicle of whatever character to leave such vehicle parked and unattended, after 12:00 midnight of any day, upon the parking lot located at the Brownwood Coliseum or the parking lot controlled by the Brownwood Coliseum and located at the intersection of Carnegie and Baker Streets. 
(b)  The manager of the Brownwood Coliseum, however, shall have the power to issue permits to permit overnight parking for vehicles operated by persons leasing the Brownwood Coliseum. Such permits shall be valid for 24 hours prior to the date of the first performance and for 24 hours after the last performance and utilization of such facility. 
(Code 1995, § 72.07) 
Sec. 66-48. - Parking areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking area means a privately owned or publicly owned accessway or parking area commonly used by the general public, without charge, and maintained for the convenience of customers, clients or patrons of one or more business establishments or public offices. 
(b)  Prohibited uses of motor vehicles. No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may: 
(1)  Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to disturb the persons present; 
(2)  Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop, or blow the horn of the vehicle, when there is no necessity for the protection of a person or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the persons present; or 
(3)  Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle without the written consent of the parking area owner or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. No person in a parking area may: 
(1)  Fight with another person; 
(2)  Use loud, obscene, vulgar or indecent language, or swear, curse, yell or shriek in such a manner calculated to disturb the persons present; 
(3)  Throw any object which is capable of causing bodily harm or property damage at another person or property with the intent to injure or damage; 
(4)  Congregate with another person, or loiter after entering the premises, and willfully refuse to leave after having been notified to leave by the owner or the person in possession and control of the premises or his agent. 
(d)  Littering prohibited. No person may throw or deposit any trash, litter or other waste on a parking area. 
(Code 1995, § 92.08) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01. 
Sec. 66-49. - Private off-street disability parking spaces. 
(a)  Private off-street disability parking spaces, which are exclusively for vehicles which display the distinguishing license plates, specially designated symbols, tags or other devices issued to disabled veterans and other persons with disabilities pursuant to state or federal law, shall have the dimensions and markings required by prevailing state and federal standards. Such stalls or spaces shall be designated by posting appropriate signage, at the owner's expense. Appropriate signage shall include any sign in or immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, consisting of wording or symbols, or a combination thereof, which conveys to a person of ordinary intelligence that the stalls or spaces indicated are reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate symbol, tag or device issued to persons with disabilities pursuant to state or federal law to stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any space designated for the exclusive use of persons with disabilities pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any vehicle not displaying the proper license plate, tag or device may be towed from a disability parking space designated by subsection (a) of this section, at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and may be impounded until towing and storage charges are paid. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. Repeat offenders shall be subject to higher fines in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 00-14, pt. 1, 3-28-2000) 
Sec. 66-50. - Loading zones. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loading zone means a space or section of the street next to the curb which has been set aside for the exclusive use of loading and unloading persons, supplies and merchandise. 
(b)  Designation and utilization. The city council shall cause loading and unloading spaces or loading zones to be designated for the convenience and regulation of the traffic in the city within the areas in which it regulates parking for any designated period of time. Such loading zones as the city council may from time to time designate shall be clearly marked, and shall be used only for loading and unloading. Such zones are for the convenience of all persons needing loading and unloading facilities in the block in which such zone is located, and are not for the exclusive use of any one person. Any person having control of a vehicle, and who shall park such vehicle in any zone designated as a loading zone for a period of time longer than 15 minutes before or 15 minutes after the time when such vehicle is actually in the process of loading or unloading, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1995, § 72.09) 
Sec. 66-51. - Authority to impound. 
    The police department shall have the authority to impound any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this article, and shall tow such vehicle from the location. Such vehicle shall be impounded until the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall pay the applicable towing and impounding fees for release of the vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 72.10) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide for a sanitary sewer system, §§ 13, 20. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; discharge of water, wastewater and other substances on streets and alleys, § 58-2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; electrical code, § 78-331 et seq.; electrical standards, § 78-451 et seq.; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 94; specifications and design standards for public works improvements, § ch. 94, app. A; utility easements, § 94-267; telecommunications, § 98-671 et seq. 
State Law reference- Water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Permit required for extension or alteration of mains. 
    Any extension or alteration of any fixture or connection with the water or sewer mains must be done under a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 51.01) 
Sec. 70-2. - Access to premises for inspection. 
    The city manager, health officer, director of utilities or any other city officer shall have access to any part of the premises of a city water consumer, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examining anything connected with the waterworks or sewers of the city. 
(Code 1995, §§ 51.02, 52.02) 
Sec. 70-3. - Determination of rates. 
    The rates for the sale of water and sewer service shall be determined by the city council and are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 51.03) 
Secs. 70-4-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-31. - Toilet access required upon city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, reside, live upon or conduct any business whatsoever upon any place, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city or on any other property belonging to the city, whether within the city limits or not, where there is no toilet accessible to persons camping, residing, living upon or conducting a business on such property. 
(Code 1995, § 52.01) 
Secs. 70-32-70-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION 

Sec. 70-51. - Required. 
(a)  All structures located in the city and intended for human habitation or occupancy, containing sinks, toilets, bathtubs, urinals or other waste discharging devices, situated on a lot, the lot line of which is within 100 feet of any public sewer, shall be connected to the public sewer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this section. 
(Code 1995, § 52.15) 
Charter reference- Power to require connection to the sanitary sewer and water systems, §§ 13, 20. 
Sec. 70-52. - Separate connections required; exception. 
    Every building shall be separately and independently connected with the main or lateral sewer, except when otherwise ordered or allowed by the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 52.16) 
Sec. 70-53. - Taps. 
    No person, except the director of utilities or his authorized agent, shall tap any sewer main belonging to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 52.18(D)) 
Sec. 70-54. - Responsibility for costs. 
    The cost of installing a sanitary flush toilet, tapping costs and costs connecting to the public sewer system shall be borne by the owner of the property on which the improvement is to be located. 
(Code 1995, § 52.19) 
Secs. 70-55-70-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE TREATMENT 

Sec. 70-90. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works inadequately treated into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, as well as the general public; 
(4)  Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  Enable the city to comply with state pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.30, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-91. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.31, 7-22-2003) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 
Sec. 70-92. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency gpd Gallons per day mg/L Milligrams per liter TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard Industrial Classification TNRCC Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission TSS Total suspended solids USC United States Code  
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.32, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-93. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abnormal industrial waste means any industrial waste having a pollutant content in excess of that found in normal waste, by which is otherwise acceptable to a sanitary sewer under the terms of this article. 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the state natural resource conservation commission (TNRCC). 
    Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation, the term "authorized representative of the user" means: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasury, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, the term "authorized representative of the user" means a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, the term "authorized representative of the user" means a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or such official's designee. 
Any of the individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative, provided that such authorization is in writing, that the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and that the written authorization is submitted to the director. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405-471. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
    Control authority means the city manager (or other official designated by the city manager) or the city manager's authorized representative. 
    Daily average limit means the highest allowable average of daily discharge over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
    Daily maximum limit means the maximum concentration or loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purpose of sampling. For a pollutant with limitations expressed in units of mass, it is calculated as the total mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For a pollutant with limitations expressed in other units of measurement, it is calculated as the average measurement of the pollutant over the day. 
    Director means the director of the city utilities department or his duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic waste or domestic wastewater means waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveyances of dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories, and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water, and industrial waste. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
    Grab sample means a sample taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes as required in appendix E of 40 CFR 403. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance which, if disposed of other than by discharge into the POTW, would be identified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial waste means waterborne solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, or food processing operations or process, or from the development of any natural resource, including oil or gas, or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater. The term is generally synonymous with "nondomestic wastewater" or "nondomestic waste." 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration or loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine, Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(c)) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that caused the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
The term does not mean construction on a site at which an existing source is located that results in a modification rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)a.2 or (1)a.3 of this definition but otherwise alters, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(2)  Construction which has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
2.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of structures and facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable period of time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, pollutant, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Normal waste means waste which, when analyzed, indicates that: 
(1)  The concentration of BOD in the waste will not exceed 220 mg/l average over any 24-hour period; 
(2)  The concentration of TSS in the waste will not exceed 240 mg/l; 
(3)  The concentration of total oil and grease will not exceed 120 mg/l; and 
(4)  The quantity of other pollutants shall be those levels determined in the latest domestic waste survey. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the city's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    pH means the measure of acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutant, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards means prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 70-94. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. The term includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries wastewater to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, camper trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Significant industrial user. 
(1)  The term "significant industrial user means: 
a.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
b.  A user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated as such by the director on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)b.3 of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, the director may at any time, on his own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 70-94. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Surcharge means the additional wastewater charge levied against any person for discharging abnormal industrial waste into the POTW. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Treatment plant effluent means the discharge from the POTW into waters of the state. 
    User means any person who discharges industrial waste into the POTW, or any source of indirect discharge, as defined herein. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater discharge permit or permit means a permit to discharge pollutants, waste, or wastewater into the POTW that is issued to significant industrial users, and other users as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Waste hauler means any person who transports industrial waste or wastewater, chemically treated human waste, septic tank waste and/or oil, grease or sand trap waste. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.33, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-94. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. 
(1)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature at its introduction to the POTW of greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference; 
f.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, unless specifically authorized by the director in accordance with section 70-100. 
i.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
j.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's TPDES permit. 
k.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
l.  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director; 
m.  Sludges, screening, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
n.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized in a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city; 
o.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
p.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
q.  Any fat, oil, and/or grease, including petroleum-based, animal, vegetable, or mineral oil and grease, exceeding 200 mg/l, unless the director has imposed a more stringent limitation on a user for these constituents, or unless the director grants a written variance from this provision allowing a less stringent limitation. 
(2)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.34, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-95. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(a)  The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR 405-471 are hereby incorporated. The city shall have legal authority to impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c) and to impose and alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e). 
(b)  The city shall have provisions regarding variances from categorical standards for fundamentally different factors in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13 and net/gross calculations in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.35, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-96. - State pretreatment standards. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.36, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-97. - Local limits. 
(a)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits: 
BOD 2000 Total Suspended Solids 2000 Ammonia 48 Arsenic 0.05 Cadmium 0.34 Chromium (total) 2.75 Copper 0.80 Lead 1.29 Nickel 0.32 Zinc 4.49 Silver 0.38 Mercury 1 0.000 Cyanide 2 0.01 Phenols (total) 87.17  
1 Compliance will be measured at minimum analytical level of 0.2 ug/l. 
2 Compliance will be measured at minimum analytical level of 0.2 mg/l. 
(b)  The limits established in subsection (a) of this section shall be measured in milligrams per liter (mg/l) and shall apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. Compliance with the concentration limits for these local limits shall be based on instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal, unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In no case shall a discharge into the POTW have a flow rate and/or concentration of pollutants which exceeds more than five times the average 24-hour flow and/or concentration in a one hour period. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.37, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-98. - Right of city to revise standards or requirements. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.38, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-99. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.39, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-100. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 70-94 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Grease, oil, and sand traps, interceptors, or hold-haul tanks shall be provided for the proper handling of waste containing oil and/or grease in amounts above the limits prescribed herein, for excessive amounts of sand, or for other amounts included in an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the director, or deemed by the director to result in interference with the POTW. Interceptors and traps are not required for private living quarters or dwellings. All traps and interceptors shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease, oil, and sand traps and interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of article VIII of chapter 78, and shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction and shall be equipped with easily removable covers or grates. Where installed, all such traps and/or interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant at the owner's or occupant's expense, and in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(2)  Use of hot water, enzymes, chemicals, other agents or devises for the purpose of causing the oil, grease, or sand to pass through the trap, interceptor, or any other such facility provided is prohibited. 
(3)  At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent, nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(4)  Any sewer line stoppage, damage or restriction of flow caused by an illegal discharge shall be considered a violation of this article, and the person responsible will be held liable. 
(5)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(6)  The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(7)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 70-102(g); and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, measures of containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), building of containment structures or equipment and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate sections 70-94 through 70-99 or any other requirements established by the city. The director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits and may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(2)  The director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.40, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-101. - Wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  Wastewater survey. When required by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by completing a wastewater survey within the time specified by the director. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  Deny/condition new or increased contributions. The city reserves the right to deny/condition new or increased contributions of pollutants to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its TPDES permit. 
(3)  Wastewater discharge permit requirements. 
a.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director. 
b.  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
c.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 70-106 through 70-111. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and/or local law. 
(4)  Wastewater discharge permitting-Existing permits. Permits in force at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall expire on the date specified by the permit, in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(5)  Same-Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without a permit and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (a)(7) of this section and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(6)  Same-New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (a)(7) of this section, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. Baseline monitoring shall be subject to the requirements of section 70-102(a). 
(7)  Contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director may require all users to submit, as part of an application, the following information: 
a.  All information required by section 70-102(a); 
b.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
e.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharged; 
g.  Time and duration of discharges; and 
h.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(8)  Signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(9)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Issuance process. 
(1)  Duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(2)  Permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
a.  Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following conditions: 
1.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration which in no event shall exceed five years; 
2.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (b)(5) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
3.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
4.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and type based on federal, state, and local law; and, 
5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
b.  Wastewater discharge permits may contain other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulation, including: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
2.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
7.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(3)  Permit appeals. The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of administrative appeal; 
b.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal; 
d.  If the director fails to act within 60 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review; 
e.  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction within the appropriate statute of limitations. 
(4)  Permit modification. The director may modify a waste discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
b.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
c.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
f.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
h.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
i.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(5)  Permit transferability. 
a.  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the city and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
1.  States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
2.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and, 
3.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer. 
(6)  Permit revocation. The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 70-102(f); 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
1.  A user will be notified of any proposed permit revocation and offered an opportunity to show cause under section 70-106(c) why the proposed revocation should not occur. 
2.  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(7)  Permit reissuance. 
a.  A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection (a)(7) of this section prior to 90 days of the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  An expired permit will remain in effect and will be enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
1.  The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the permittee's existing permit; and 
2.  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the permittee. 
(8)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. The provisions of this subsection apply to all intermunicipal agreements, or the modification, amendment, or renewal of such agreements, entered into after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
a.  If another municipality or user located within another municipality contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city council shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
b.  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (b)(8)a of this section, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
1.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by or through the contributing municipality; 
2.  An inventory of all industrial users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
3.  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
c.  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (b)(8)a of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
1.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as the provisions of this article, and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 70-97. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinances or local limits; 
2.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
3.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the city; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city; 
4.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
5.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
6.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
7.  A provision ensuring the city access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
8.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.41, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-102. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
(2)  Users described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall submit the following information: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (k) of this section. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (l) of this section. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-101(a)(8). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d-(a)(2)f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-101(a)(8). 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in April and October), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 70-101(a)(8). The director may alter the reporting months prescribed herein. 
(2)  All other users shall report as required by a discharge permit, if a discharge permit has been issued. 
(3)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(4)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutants more frequently than required using the procedures prescribed in subsection (l) of this section, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Inspection and sampling of industrial users by POTW at least once per year. The city shall inspect and sample the effluent from each industrial user at least once a year, and evaluate, at least once every two years, whether each such industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. 
(f)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the city of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, decrease the quality, or increase the volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The city may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 70-101(a)(7). 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 70-101(a)(9) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 70-101(b)(4) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 25 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(4)  No industrial user shall implement the planned change conditions until and unless the director has approved the proposed change. 
(g)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, of waste, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Failure to notify the director of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (g)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(h)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. 
(i)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(j)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notification must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (f) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (j)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued there under, or any applicable federal or state law. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
(k)  Analytical requirements. All pollutants analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(l)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (l)(2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is practically or economically infeasible, in the sole discretion of the director, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples, where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab sample collection techniques. 
(m)  Time of mailing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(n)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, the name of the person taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used, the results of such analyses, and all QA/QC data required by permit. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.42, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-103. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article, and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. The owners or occupants of premises where industrial waste is created or discharged into a sanitary sewer shall allow the director and his representatives (the TNRCC and EPA, along with the other city personnel) shall have the right of entry to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations, etc., when necessary. Failure or refusal of such owners or occupants to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for the disconnection of water, sewer services or both to the premises. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at the user's expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow shall be calibrated yearly to ensure their accuracy. Instruments used to measure quality shall be calibrated as per accepted EPA QA/QC protocol. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.43, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-104. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for users related to the TPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving either the user or the person furnishing the "effluent data," as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.44, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-105. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The city shall publish annually, in the largest local daily newspaper in the area, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 30 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedule; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.45, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-106. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Such notice shall be served personally to the user or its authorized representative, or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. When required in the written notice of violation, the user shall prepare and submit to the director, within ten days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the required actions. If the user denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within ten days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The director may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time limit. If the user does not come into compliance within the specified time limit, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. 
(1)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(2)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may fine such user in accordance with section 70-116. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount, within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city manager may add costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(3)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after any reasonable notice to the user that is practical under the circumstances, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
a.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. 
b.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager prior to the date of any termination hearing under subsection (c) or (h) of this section. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. 
(1)  In addition to the provisions in section 70-101(b)(6), any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
a.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
b.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
c.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
d.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
e.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 70-94 through 70-99. 
(2)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.46, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-107. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city manager finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, to restrain or compel the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.47, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-108. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city of a maximum monetary penalty allowed under state law but not less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, as well as civil penalties, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.48, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-109. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who has willfully or negligently violated any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day and/or imprisonment. 
(b)  A user who has willfully or negligently introduced any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than $2,000.00 per day of offending discharge. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly made any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(d)  In the event of a second conviction, any user shall have criminal charges brought against him. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.49, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-110. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. The city may take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.50, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-111. - Performance bonds. 
    The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.51, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-112. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed by the director. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.52, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-113. - Public nuisances. 
    A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions this Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.53, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-114. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Upset. Upset shall constitute an affirmative defense with a provision providing that in an action brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an event, that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under this article, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article or the permit. 
(1)  An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An upset occurred, and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Bypass. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (b)(1) of this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  Permitted bypasses. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Notice. 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, he shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Prohibited, exceptions; approval required. 
a.  A bypass is prohibited, and the city may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
1.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
b.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (b)(4)a of this section. 
c.  Prohibited discharge standards shall be as follows: A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 70-94(a) or the specific prohibitions in sections 70-94(b)(1)c-(b)(1)g and section 70-94(b)(1)i-(b)(1)o if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
1.  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
2.  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its TPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.54, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-115. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Other sections of this code dealing with cross connections, items pertaining to safeguarding the water supply, waste traps, and items pertaining to safeguarding the sanitary system remain applicable. 
(b)  Compliance with this article does not exempt or excuse a person from complying with provisions of the Texas Water Quality Act and its amendments, the Federal Clean Water Act and its amendments, or the requirements of any applicable waste discharge permit, order, rule or regulation issued by the state natural resource conservation commission (TNRCC). 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall exclude any agreement between the director and any person to discharge wastewater which complies with the objectives of this article, for treatment by the city. Said agreements shall provide for reimbursement to the city for any expenses incurred in the treatment and disposal of such wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.55, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-116. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.56, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-117. - Abnormal waste discharge requirements. 
    Persons generating abnormal industrial waste may discharge the waste into the sanitary sewer, provided: 
(1)  The waste will not cause interference; 
(2)  The waste will not endanger or be harmful to the operating personnel of the sewer system; 
(3)  The waste will not cause damage to the collection system; 
(4)  The waste will not impair the treatment processes; 
(5)  The waste will not affect sludge quality and/or require modifications in sludge disposal practices; 
(6)  The waste will not have an effect on receiving water quality; 
(7)  The discharge is in compliance with all limitations and requirements in section 70-94; 
(8)  The waste shall be assessed a surcharge for any abnormal levels of BOD and TSS; and 
(9)  All required permits are in force and approval in writing has been given by the director for any waivers or special agreements. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.57, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-118. - Computation of surcharges. 
(a)  Computation of the surcharge for the abnormal industrial waste shall be based on the following formulas: 
S = V (8.34) [A (BOD-220) + B (TSS-240) + C (TOG-120)] 
S = Surcharge in dollars that will appear on the customer's monthly bill. V = Volume of wastewater discharge from user, in millions of gallons. This volume may be calculated from discharge meter or by a percentage of water consumption, as determined by the director. 8.34 = Pounds per gallon of water A = Unit charge in dollars per pound of BOD BOD = BOD strength, in mg/l 220 = Normal TSS concentration, in mg/l B = Unit charge in dollars per pound for TSS. TSS = Total Suspended Solids concentration, in mg/l 240 = Normal TSS concentration, in mg/l C = Unit charge in dollars per pound for TOG TOG = Total Oil and Grease concentration, in mg/l 120 = Normal TOG concentration, in mg/l  
Values for A, B, and C shall be set by the city council as deemed necessary. 
(b)  If the strength or concentration for BOD, TSS or TOG is less than the normal strength for that category, there shall be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit given to the total surcharge if the strength or concentration of all three categories is less than the normal. Surcharges payable under this paragraph shall become due monthly after the effective date of the surcharge. 
(c)  All BOD, TSS and TOG values used in determining the surcharge shall be reevaluated and adjusted to reflect any changes in wastewater characteristics, as the city manager deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.58, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-119. - Governmental functions. 
    The inspectors, agents, and representatives of the city charged with the enforcement of this article shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the city, the director, nor the individual inspector, agent or representative shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.59, 7-22-2003) 
Sec. 70-120. - Notices and filings to city. 
    Any notice, filing, application or other written report or correspondence required or authorized to be submitted to the city, director, or the pretreatment coordinator shall be deemed submitted only if addressed as follows: 
City of Brownwood 
ATTN: Pretreatment Coordinator 
C/O Director of Utilities 
P.O. Box 1389 
Brownwood, Texas 76804 
(Ord. No. 03-30, § 52.60, 7-22-2003) 
Secs. 70-121-70-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IIIA. - GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 

Sec. 70-130. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in section 70-131 of this article. 
(b)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(c)  Facilities generating fats, oils or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section 70-132 of this article. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes and any other facility preparing, serving or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(d)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil or any fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 70-131. - Definitions. 
    All terms used in this article shall be given their meaning as provided by the Texas Food Establishment Rules found in 25 Tex. Admin. Code, ch. 229, §§ 161-171 and 173175, including any future amendments of such rules, unless otherwise defined in the following definitions: 
    Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C, 1251, et. seq. 
    BOD means the value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater". 
    COD means the value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater". 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Fats, oils and greases (FOG) means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases". 
    Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste. 
    Grease trap or interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light-density liquids, waterborne fats, oils and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also referred to herein as "grease traps/interceptors". 
    Grease trap waste means material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from dewatering processes. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source. 
    Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit. 
    pH means the measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    POTW or publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
    Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Admin. Code § 312.142. 
    TSS means the value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater". 
    User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 70-132. - Installation requirements and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Installations. 
(1)  New facilities. Food processing or food service establishments which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with these model standards, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW. 
(b)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
(1)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. 
(2)  Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Admin. Code § 312.143. 
(3)  All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state or local regulation. 
(c)  Self-cleaning. 
(1)  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s) located inside a building, provided: 
a.  The grease trap is no more than 50 gallons in liquid/operating capacity; 
b.  Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash); 
c.  The local solid waste authority allows such practices; 
d.  Grease trap waste is placed in a leak-proof, sealable containers) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and 
e.  Detailed records on these activities are maintained. 
(2)  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the POTW for approval. The written request shall include the following information: 
a.  Business name and street address; 
b.  Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title and phone number; 
c.  Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and 
d.  Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
(3)  Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements, procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application, to ensure compliance with this article. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced; 
b.  Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor; 
c.  Waste disposal method used; 
d.  Gallons of grease removed and disposed of; 
e.  Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and 
f.  Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and in operable condition. 
(4)  Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program. 
(d)  Cleaning schedules. 
(1)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge. 
(2)  Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
a.  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or 
b.  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
c.  If there is a history of noncompliance. 
(3)  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
a.  The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW; or 
b.  Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases. 
(4)  In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned and inspected at least once every 180 days. 
(e)  Manifest requirements. 
(1)  Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
(2)  Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
a.  Name, address, telephone and commission registration number of transporter; 
b.  Name, signature, address and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
c.  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
d.  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting and depositing the waste; 
e.  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
f.  Identification (permit or site registration number, location and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
g.  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received; 
h.  The volume of the grease waste received; and 
i.  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
(3)  Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
a.  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
b.  The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
c.  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
d.  One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
e.  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
f.  One part of the manifest shall go to the POTW, pursuant to the requirements of section 70-120 of the Code of Ordinances, within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
(4)  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by the POTW. 
(f)  Alternative treatment. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene and other solvents. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection 70-132 (f)(1) that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
(3)  Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that: 
a.  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160/F. (71/C). 
b.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
c.  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer. 
d.  The BOD, COD and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11. 
(4)  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection 70-132 (f)(3) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136; or Title 30, Texas Admin. Code § 319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 70-133. - Schedule of penalties. 
(a)  If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 70-134. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The director of utilities or his designee shall have the administrative authority to enforce this article. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained in the article, the city will implement the enforcement response plan. Enforcement response necessary to initiate corrective action may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Notice of violation. The city may serve upon any user a written notice stating the nature of violation. Within 24 hours of the time and date of the notice or first regular work day, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator for approval by the utility director. 
(2)  The City of Brownwood may suspend water service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
a.  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; and/or 
b.  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of water service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water utility services, to prevent or minimize damage to the sanitary sewer collection system or endangerment of any individuals. 
(c)  The City of Brownwood shall reinstate utility services when such conditions causing the suspension have been corrected or eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the cause(s) of the violation and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city director of utilities, within 15 days of the date of the occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Secs. 70-135-70-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide for a water system, §§ 13, 20. 

Sec. 70-271. - Connection required. 
    All structures intended for human habitation or occupancy, situated on a lot, the lot line of which is within 100 feet of any public water supply, shall be connected to the public water supply. 
(Code 1995, § 53.34) 
Sec. 70-272. - Water meters required. 
    Water sold to city consumers shall be metered. 
(Code 1995, § 53.45) 
Sec. 70-273. - Water meter ownership, control and maintenance; consumer responsibility; meter access. 
(a)  All water meters shall be owned or controlled and kept in repair by the city; however, any damage done to the case of a meter, meter connections or the dial or working parts of the meter, which shows evidence of having been either carelessly or maliciously handled, shall be paid for by the consumer, and until the cost or expense of repairing such damage has been paid by the consumer, the water shall be cut off, and all water service withheld from such consumer. The consumer shall further be held responsible for the upkeep of such meter, other than the ordinary wear and tear from water running through the meter. 
(b)  City personnel must have access to read and maintain water meters. It is unlawful to block, impair or impede meter access. It is unlawful for any person to store or maintain any goods, merchandise, material, or refuse, or install equipment over any water meter in use on any water meter connection of the city. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle over, upon, or in such a manner as to prevent access to any water meter, gate valve, or other appliance in use on any water meter connection of the city regardless of whether such city property is located on public or private property. It is unlawful to restrain a dog in an area adjacent to, or near, a water meter which would make it hazardous to the meter reader's health and safety to access the water meter in use on any water meter connection of the city. Whenever it is necessary to enter a building to read the meter or work on the water connections, a safe passageway must be maintained by the occupant of the premises, free and clear of obstructions from the entrance of the building to the meter. Shrubs and landscaping shall not obstruct reading of the meter. Any obstructions may be trimmed or removed by the city, including the towing of any vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the premises may be charged the service fees and costs to remove any obstructions as prescribed in the city's annual utility rate ordinance, a copy of which is maintained in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 53.46; Ord. No. 13-31, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 70-274. - Deposit. 
    When application for water service is made, a cash deposit shall be made in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. Such deposit shall guarantee the payment of all charges for utilities and related expenses. Such deposit shall be returned to the customer at any time written notice is given of the intention to discontinue water service, less any amount due under such account. 
(Code 1995, § 53.15) 
Sec. 70-275. - Right to shut off; liability for damages; shared stop boxes. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to shut off any consumer's water, at any time, without notice, for the purpose of making repairs, for scarcity of water or any other unavoidable cause, and the city shall not be liable for damages in any case. 
(b)  In all cases where water consumers shall negligently allow water to waste, the water of such consumer may be cut off by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  In all cases where water is supplied to several consumers from one connection, with the supply controlled by one stop box, and the city has contracted with only one of such consumers, such consumer shall be responsible for any failure on the part of the other consumers to comply with all regulations relative to water service. 
(Code 1995, § 53.16) 
Sec. 70-276. - Authority for service charge for unauthorized turn-on of disconnected meter. 
    The city is authorized to impose a service charge, as established by the utility rate ordinance on file in the city secretary's office for installing a meter cutoff device, upon the unauthorized turn-on of water which has been disconnected for nonpayment. 
(Code 1995, § 53.17) 
State Law reference- Theft of service, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.04. 
Sec. 70-277. - Main and pipe extensions. 
    No person, except the director of utilities, shall extend any city water main or pipe. 
(Code 1995, § 53.30) 
Sec. 70-278. - Cost of line extensions. 
    The cost of all water line extensions shall be borne by the person requesting such extension, except for cost recovery policies established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 53.30(C)) 
Sec. 70-279. - Applications for service. 
    Persons desiring to obtain water service shall submit an application, in writing, to the city manager on a form furnished by the city manager for such purpose. Such application shall give the lot and block number, and the street and house number to be connected, and shall provide that neither the city waterworks, nor any employee thereof, shall be responsible for any damage by water or other damage resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty service or water mains, or any condition of the water itself, or any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water delivered to the consumer. Such application shall further state the purposes for which water is required, and shall fully describe each fixture on the premises attached to such service. 
(Code 1995, § 53.31) 
Sec. 70-280. - Interference with mains and standpipes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any water main or standpipe. 
(Code 1995, § 53.32) 
Sec. 70-281. - Customer cutoff valves. 
    Water consumers shall be required to install a customer cutoff valve, at their own expense, in water pipes on their property. No water shall be supplied to such customer unless the customer cutoff valve is installed. 
(Code 1995, § 53.33) 
Sec. 70-282. - Use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized city employees, to take water from fire hydrants on the city water system without obtaining a special permit as set forth in this section. 
(b)  A permit may be obtained by placing the prescribed deposit at the utility office of city hall. Upon receipt of such deposit, the applicable meter and fittings will be issued by the director of utilities' office in the service center. 
(c)  The contractor or person securing the permit will be responsible for the meter, valve, fittings and hydrant. If repairs are needed on a meter, valve or hydrant, due to misuse or freezing, the contractor or person securing the permit will be billed for the repair. Should the meter, valve and/or fittings be stolen, the deposit will be forfeited. 
(d)  The contractor or person securing the permit may move a meter to various locations, but when such meter is moved, the water office at city hall must be notified. Failure to notify the water office of such move shall cause the cancellation of the permit. 
(e)  If a connection is made on a faulty hydrant, a report of the faulty hydrant will be made to the water office at city hall. 
(f)  Meters will be read as required, and the contractor or permit holder will be billed for water used, and be responsible for all water taken through the meter. The monthly rate, by volume, shall be in accordance with the rate set out in the water charge rate ordinance in effect at that time. 
(g)  (1)  The procedure for securing water from a fire hydrant will be to open the fire hydrant to the full open position by use of the operating nut, at the beginning of each day. The valve will be used for base use and filling tanks. At the termination of the day, the operating nut on the fire hydrant will be completely closed. Should violations of this procedure be observed, the permit holder will be notified of the violation. Should the permit holder not comply in correcting the violation, the city will terminate the permit and remove the meter, valve and fitting from the hydrant, and the deposit will be forfeited. 
(2)  At the termination of a permit, the meter, valve, fittings and wrench will be returned to the city. The meter will be read and checked by the water department personnel for possible damage. After final billing for water consumption, and meter and valve repairs have been paid, the city will refund the balance of the deposit for the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 53.05) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 70-283. - Water conservation and drought contingency plan. 
(a)  A water conservation and drought contingency plan for the city (the "2018 Plan"), entitled Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan 2018 attached [to the ordinance from which this section derives] as exhibit A, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference as if set out herein. The provisions of the 2018 Plan are hereby ordained and enacted, and are expressly made a part of this section. The 2018 Plan is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  No person or entity shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, agricultural, governmental, recreational, wholesale, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of the 2018 Plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the city manager or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of the 2018 Plan. 
(c)  Any water customer who violates the 2018 Plan is guilty of and may be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day that one or more of the provisions in the 2018 Plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense under this section. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of the 2018 Plan, the city manager or his/her designee shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge, hereby initially established at $35.00 but may be amended by the city's annual fee ordinance, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be documented with the city manager or his/her designee that the same action shall not be repeated while the 2013 Plan is in effect. Compliance with the 2018 Plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(d)  The following employees of the city, police officers and code enforcement officers, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of the plan and/or this section. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 18 years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of the plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. 
(e)  A city code enforcement officer, police officer, or other official designated by the city manager or his/her designee, may issue a written notice of violation to a person or entity he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this plan. For subsequent violations following written notice: 
(1)  The city may issue a citation (Class C misdemeanor); 
(2)  The city may install a flow restricting device in the line to limit the amount of water which will pass through the meter in a 24-hour period. The city may charge the customer for the actual cost of installing and removing the flow restricting device, not to exceed $50.00, such amount may be amended by the City's annual fee ordinance; 
(3)  The city may discontinue service at the meter pursuant to paragraph (c) for a period of seven days, or until the end of the calendar month, whichever is less. The normal reconnect fee of the utility will apply for restoration of service. 
(f)  Any person in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of the 2018 Plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(Code 1995, § 33.10; Ord. No. 12-10, §§ 2, 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 13-25, § 2, 3, 8-13-2013; Ord. No. 18-14 , § 3, 7-10-2018) 
Chapter 74 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate vehicles for hire, § 20. 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Power to license, fix the charges and fares, and regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means a trained and/or qualified individual who is responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients, whether or not the attendant also serves as the driver. 
    Attendant driver means a person who is qualified as an attendant and a driver. 
    Emergency medical service has the meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.003 and, in addition, shall expressly include any non-emergency transfer services provided by an emergency medical vehicle. 
    Emergency medical vehicle has the meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.003 and, in addition, shall expressly include any such vehicle used for non-emergency transfer services. 
    License means a license of public convenience and necessity. 
    Non-emergency transfer services shall mean any circumstance in which a patient is transported by an emergency medical vehicle under circumstances which are or have been represented to be of a non-emergency nature. 
(Code 1995, § 113.01; Ord. No. 11-16, § 2, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 74-32. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any emergency medical vehicle or emergency medical service, or the driver or attendant of any emergency medical vehicle which is: 
(1)  Rendering assistance to patients in case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed emergency medical vehicles of the city are unable to cope; 
(2)  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the limits of the city and transported to a location within the city; 
(3)  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location beyond the limits of the city and transported to a location beyond the limits of the city and only incidentally passing through the city; or 
(4)  Transporting a patient picked up from a hospital or clinic within the limits of the city and transported to a location beyond the limits of the city, provided that the emergency medical vehicle or emergency medical service initially transported the patient to the same hospital or clinic and is making a return trip. 
(5)  Rendering emergency medical services to citizens of the city pursuant to a contract entered into by and between Brown County and/or the City of Brownwood and an emergency medical services provider for the provision of such services. 
(6)  Providing mutual aid to the emergency medical services provider who contracts with Brown County and/or the City of Brownwood to provide emergency medical services to the citizens of the city (the "contracted provider"), provided such mutual aid is requested by the contracted provider. 
(Code 1995, § 113.02; Ord. No. 11-16, § 2, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 16-01 , § 2, 1-12-2016) 
Secs. 74-33-74-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 74-51. - Required. 
    No person shall operate an emergency medical vehicle or emergency medical service upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a license of public convenience and necessity from the city council. No license shall be granted until after the publication of a notice and public hearing under the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(A)) 
Sec. 74-52. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to any emergency medical vehicle operated by any agent or employee of the federal or state government, or an agency thereof, if the service is done in the performance of such agent's or employee's official duties. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(B)) 
Sec. 74-53. - Applications. 
    Every application for a license required by this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant, and shall be filed with the city. The application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is a corporation, or proposes or intends to do business as a corporation, the application shall contain: 
a.  The corporate name. 
b.  The place and date of incorporation. 
c.  The names and addresses of the incorporators. 
d.  The names, addresses and corporate titles of all corporate officers. 
e.  The name and address of the corporate registered agent. 
f.  The names and addresses of all persons owning or otherwise holding as much as ten percent of any corporate stock. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership or association, or proposes or intends to do business as a partnership or association, the application shall contain: 
a.  The name of the partnership or association. 
b.  The names and addresses of all partners or associates, whether limited or general. 
(3)  If the applicant is a private person or sole proprietor, the application shall contain: 
a.  The applicant's name and address. 
b.  Any trade or other fictitious name under which the applicant does, or proposes to do, business. 
(4)  The number of vehicles the applicant proposes to operate, together with a description of each vehicle, when available, including the make, model, year of manufacture, state license number for the current year, motor and chassis number, and the length of time the vehicle has been in use. 
(5)  The location and description of the places from which it is intended the vehicle shall be operated. 
(6)  Verification that a copy of the applicant's state emergency medical vehicle license has been filed with the city prior to operation. 
(7)  A schedule of the proposed rates to be charged by the applicant. 
(8)  Copies of all insurance policies required under this division, a certificate of insurance evidencing that policies are in force or a binding agreement to obtain coverage prior to the commencement of service. 
(9)  A complete and up-to-date financial statement of the applicant, partnership, every partner or associate, and, if the applicant is a corporation, a complete and up-to-date balance sheet of the corporation. 
(10)  A complete list of the names and addresses of all persons employed by the applicant, whether full-time or part-time. 
(11)  Such other information as the city shall determine to be reasonably necessary to a fair determination of the applicant's qualifications to operate an emergency medical service in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(C)) 
Sec. 74-54. - Public hearing; notice given to the applicant and public. 
    Within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a license under this division, the city council shall cause a public hearing to be held concerning the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given, in writing, to the applicant and all persons holding licenses for emergency medical service in the city. Notice shall be given to the public by publication in a newspaper published in the city, not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(D)) 
Sec. 74-55. - Ascertaining public convenience and necessity. 
    In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of a proposed emergency medical service, the city council shall consider: 
(1)  Whether the public is, at the time, adequately served; 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant; 
(3)  The number, kind and type of equipment to be operated by the applicant; 
(4)  A schedule of rates proposed to be charged; 
(5)  Whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved; and 
(6)  Such other facts as the city council shall consider relevant. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(E)) 
Sec. 74-56. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
    The city council shall not grant any license under this division unless it finds that: 
(1)  The public convenience and necessity require the proposed emergency medical service for which the application has been submitted, and that service would not adversely affect total emergency medical service to the people of the city, nor the overall quality thereof. 
(2)  The applicant has procured or submitted a binding agreement to provide emergency medical vehicles and equipment, complying with the standards required in this article. 
(3)  The applicant has procured or submitted a binding agreement to secure insurance, as required by this division. 
(4)  The applicant and all attendants, drivers and attendant drivers are fit and proper persons to conduct the proposed emergency medical service. 
(5)  All the requirements of this article, all other applicable ordinances of the city and state laws have been met by the applicant. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03(F)) 
Sec. 74-57. - Conditional licenses. 
(a)  License subject to compliance with division. A conditional license may be granted subject to the applicant complying with all of the conditions of this division, but any applicant granted a conditional license who has not fulfilled all of the conditions of this division shall not go into operation until all of the conditions are fulfilled and all of the information required by this division has been filed with the city secretary. 
(b)  Expiration. All conditional licenses granted subject to the fulfillment of the conditions of this division shall expire and be null and void if the applicant has not complied with all conditions in ten days from the date of the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Reapplication. If the conditions are not met in ten days, the applicant must reapply to the city council for a new license. 
(d)  Request to consider applicant compliance. Should a question arise as to the applicant's compliance with this division, where a license has been granted subject to certain conditions being met, the applicant may request a hearing before the city council, which shall consider the applicant's license and may revoke or grant the license if the applicant has complied with all of the conditions of this division. 
(e)  Failure to meet conditions for reissuance. An applicant who previously has been given a conditional license subject to meeting certain conditions and has failed to meet the conditions will not be issued another conditional license, subject to the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.04) 
Sec. 74-58. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Minimum coverage. An applicant for a license required by this division shall file with his application an insurance policy, to be approved by the city attorney, providing insurance coverage for each and every emergency medical vehicle owned, operated and/or leased by the applicant for injury to or death of persons in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of the vehicle would be liable on account of any liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the emergency medical vehicle was being driven by the owner, his agent or lessee, and against damage to the property of another, including personal property under similar circumstances, in sums as may be approved by the city attorney or the minimum amount as prescribed by the state torts claim act or applicable statute. 
(b)  Continuance after recovery. Every policy of insurance shall continue to the full amount of such policy, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the assured. The policy shall run to the city for the benefit of any and all judgment creditors. 
(c)  Coverage period. Every insurance policy required under this section shall extend for the period to be covered by the license applied for, and the insurer shall be obliged to give not less than 30 days' written notice to the city and the assured before any cancellation or termination of the policy earlier than its expiration date, and the cancellation or other termination of any policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the licenses issued for the emergency medical vehicles covered by the policy, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Code 1995, § 113.05) 
Sec. 74-59. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Every license issued under this division shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city council when it shall appear that: 
(1)  The operator has failed or neglected to render the full service authorized by his license. 
(2)  The operator has been convicted of a felony or any criminal offense involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  The license was obtained by an application in which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(4)  The operator has persisted in permitting his vehicles to be operated in violation of any law. 
(5)  The operator has failed to comply with, or willfully or knowingly violated, any of the provisions of this article. 
(6)  The operator has given or allowed a rebate commission or any reduced rate discount not provided for in the established rates. 
(7)  The operator or his agent has induced, or sought to induce, a change of destination to or from a hospital or other place specified by the person hiring the emergency medical vehicle. 
(8)  The operator or his agent has knowingly received any payment, favor or gratuity from any mortuary operating in the city for the purpose of inducing any person transported by the operator or his agent to utilize the services of the mortuary, and no emergency medical vehicle operator shall engage in or have any financial interest in a mortuary service. 
(9)  The operator allows his insurance, as provided for in this division, to be canceled, withdrawn or terminated. 
(10)  The operator allows his vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated or unclean to the extent that it is unfit for public use, in the judgment of the city. 
(b)  Proceedings for the revocation or suspension of a license shall be undertaken by the city council in the same manner as proceedings for issuance of a license. All complaints shall be referred to the city manager, who shall cause an investigation to be made prior to any action for revocation or suspension, and the city secretary shall give ten days' notice thereof, by certified mail, to the operator holding the license that the action will be considered at a certain date, which shall not be less than 30 days from the date of the notice. The city council shall thereupon undertake to consider the complaint and either revoke or suspend the license or dismiss the complaint. 
(Code 1995, § 113.06) 
Secs. 74-60-74-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-81. - Qualifications of attendants. 
    Attendants shall have qualifications as required by the state department of health. 
(Code 1995, § 113.07) 
Sec. 74-82. - Provision of 24-hour service. 
(a)  Certification and licensing by the state department of health required. No person within the city shall operate any emergency medical vehicle upon the public streets of the city unless and until the emergency medical vehicle has been certified and licensed for such usage by the state department of health. 
(b)  License holder to provide emergency medical service. Every license holder shall be required to provide immediate emergency medical service 24 hours a day, each and every day. 
(Code 1995, §§ 113.08, 113.09) 
Sec. 74-83. - Prompt service required. 
    Every call for emergency medical service shall be answered promptly. Patients shall be loaded and transported without being subjected to unreasonable delays. 
(Code 1995, § 113.10) 
Secs. 74-84-74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State mandate to license, control and regulate taxicabs, including establishment of safety and insurance requirements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.004. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Limousine service means service which is chartered or reserved by the customer well in advance of the time the service is rendered. 
    Taxicab and limousine mean all vehicles which transport passengers for hire, except only the classes of vehicles which are specifically excluded by section 74-122. 
    Taxicab service means service which is rendered in prompt response to the receipt of a request for such service from the customer. Such requests are typically received in one of the following ways: 
(1)  By telephone, in which case a dispatcher forwards the customer's request to a taxicab driver via two-way radio as soon as a taxicab vehicle is available to respond. 
(2)  By direct contact, in which case the customer communicates directly with the driver of a taxicab waiting at a motel, hotel, airport, bus terminal or similar location. 
(3)  By direct contact, in which case a customer hails or flags down a passing taxicab. 
(Code 1995, § 113.20) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-122. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emergency medical services. 
(2)  Automobile or truck leasing operations in which the leased or rented vehicle is driven by the customer or his agent. 
(3)  Vehicles operating under a permit or certificate of the state railroad commission or the Federal Interstate Commerce Commission. 
(4)  Vehicles owned or operated by motels, hotels and other businesses for transporting their guests or employees. This article shall apply, however, to other companies or individuals providing such service under a contract with the motels, hotels or other businesses. 
(5)  Transportation of people where the taxicab or limousine is licensed by another governmental entity from a point outside the city to a destination inside the city if the taxicab or limousine leaves the city without receiving a passenger inside the city. 
(Code 1995, § 113.21) 
Sec. 74-123. - Rates and fares. 
(a)  All meter rates and fares shall be established by the taxicab service. 
(b)  Each taxicab operated in the city shall have affixed thereto at a location in plain view of any passenger therein a placard setting out the meter rates and fares for taxicab service. The rates and fares shall be readily visible to and legible by any occupant of such taxicab and, at a minimum, must be posted on each window of the taxicab where passengers enter the taxicab and on the inside compartment of the taxicab in prominent locations for all passengers to see. 
(c)  The rate of fare for trips made by taxicabs shall be determined by an approved taximeter. It shall be unlawful for any permit holder, owner, operator or driver of any taxicab to operate or allow or cause to be operated or driven any taxicab on the streets of the city unless the same is equipped with a taximeter approved by the city and calibrated for the computation of fares at the posted rates as provided herein. It shall be the duty of every permit holder, owner, operator or driver using any taximeter to keep the same accurate at all times, and the failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. All taximeters shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city. 
(d)  Nothing in this section precludes a permit holder, owner, operator or driver of any taxicab from agreeing to make a flat rate charge for a trip to a destination, provided that such flat rate is either agreed to in writing with the passenger or responsible paying party or the flat rate is established prior to trip commencement and the rate is not in excess of the maximum meter rate as posted. 
(Code 1995, § 113.25; Ord. No. 06-02, § I, 1-10-2005) 
Secs. 74-124-74-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 74-141. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or dispatch, or cause to be operated or dispatched, a taxicab or limousine without being properly licensed by the city under the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(A)) 
Sec. 74-142. - Classifications; fee. 
(a)  Type of license. Licenses shall be issued under this division in three classifications: 
(1)  Operating license. The operating license classification shall authorize the operation of one or more vehicles which are owned or controlled by the licensee, provided that each vehicle has a vehicle permit as set forth in division 3 of this article, and each driver thereof has a driver's permit as set forth in division 4 of this article. 
(2)  Dispatching license. The dispatching license classification shall authorize the operation of a dispatch service, which receives requests for taxicab service by telephone or other means and then forwards the request by two-way radio to a taxicab. 
(3)  Combined operating/dispatching license. The combined operating/dispatching license classification shall authorize both of the activities described in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(b)  Prescription, refund of fee. The fee for any such license shall be as prescribed by city council from time to time and on file in the city secretary's office. No portion of the fee shall be refunded if the license is terminated. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(B)) 
Sec. 74-143. - Applications. 
    Every application for a license required by this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant, and filed with the city manager. The application shall be on a form provided by the city manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  All classifications of licenses. 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, or proposes or intends to do business as a corporation, the application shall contain: 
1.  The corporate name. 
2.  The place and date of incorporation. 
3.  A certificate of corporate existence and of good standing. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership or association, or proposes or intends to do business as a partnership or association, the application shall contain: 
1.  The name of the partnership or association. 
2.  The names and addresses of all partners or associates, whether limited or general. 
c.  If the applicant is a private person or sole proprietor, and proposes or intends to do business as a private person or sole proprietor, the application shall contain: 
1.  The applicant's name and address. 
2.  Any trade or other fictitious name under which the applicant does, or proposes to do, business. 
d.  Any other information that the city manager or city council considers necessary for implementation or enforcement of the regulations set forth in this article. 
(2)  Additional requirements. 
a.  For operating or combined operating/dispatching licenses. 
1.  The number of vehicles the applicant proposes to operate, together with a description of each such vehicle, when available, including the make, model, model year and state license plate number. 
2.  Copies of all insurance policies required under this division, a certificate of insurance evidencing that such policies are in force or a binding agreement to obtain coverage prior to commencement of service. 
b.  For dispatching or combined operating/dispatching licenses. 
1.  The location and telephone numbers of all offices from which dispatching operations will be conducted. 
2.  A description of the system by which calls for service will be transmitted to individual taxicabs or limousines, including all two-way radio frequencies to be used, along with corresponding FCC license numbers. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(C)) 
Sec. 74-144. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Minimum coverage. 
(1)  Operating and combined operating/dispatching licenses. Applicants for operating or combined operating/dispatching licenses shall furnish evidence of vehicle liability insurance currently in effect as part of their application. Evidence of such insurance shall be in the form of a properly executed certificate of insurance or a certified copy of the insurance policy, and shall be written through an insurance company approved by the city attorney. The insurance shall clearly evidence coverage for each and every vehicle to be licensed or permitted, and shall provide coverage for personal injury and property damage, and types and amounts of coverage with minimum limits set by the city council. The policy shall include a requirement that 30 days' advance written notice of cancellation or material change of such policy be provided to the city manager. Minimum amounts notwithstanding, the city reserves the right to increase the minimum required insurance to be effective 90 days after notice is sent to a holder of a license. 
(2)  Taxicabs. 
a.  Type. Comprehensive auto, or business auto, liability insurance, covering all owned/leased vehicles and all hired vehicles. 
b.  Amount (limits of liability). State minimum amounts, as prescribed by the state board of insurance. 
(3)  Limousines. 
a.  Type. Comprehensive auto, or business auto, liability insurance, covering all owned/leased vehicles and all hired vehicles. 
b.  Amount (limits of liability). State minimum amounts, as prescribed by the state board of insurance. 
(b)  Policy to comply with change in state standards. Should the state board of insurance adopt changes to policies of insurance required by this section, the holder of a license shall be required, on issuance of the next policy, to comply with the newly adopted insurance standards. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(D)) 
State Law reference- Minimum coverage amounts, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.072. 
Sec. 74-145. - Assignability. 
    Licenses shall be issued to a person and shall not be assignable. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(E)) 
Sec. 74-146. - Terms. 
    The term of all licenses shall be for 24 months. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(F)) 
Sec. 74-147. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Every license issued under this division shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city manager for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The operator has been convicted of a felony or any criminal offense involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  The license was obtained by an application in which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(3)  The operator has persisted in permitting his vehicles, drivers and/or dispatching operation to be operated in violation of any law. 
(4)  Failure to pay city, school, county or water district ad valorem taxes on any property the applicant uses in connection with taxicab or limousine service. 
(5)  The operator has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the city manager determines that grounds exist for revocation of a license, the licensee shall be notified of the revocation, in writing, by certified mail, stating the reasons for the revocation, the effective date of the revocation, and that the licensee has the right to appeal. The licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council by filing written notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten days of receipt of the revocation. Otherwise, the decision of the city manager is final and nonappealable. 
(Code 1995, § 113.22(G, H)) 
Secs. 74-148-74-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLE PERMIT 

Sec. 74-171. - Required. 
    No taxicab or limousine shall be operated within the city until a vehicle permit for the vehicle has been issued by the city manager. Vehicle permits shall be issued only to applicants who possess a valid operating or combined operating/dispatching license. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(A)) 
Sec. 74-172. - Classifications. 
    Vehicle permits shall be issued in the following two classifications: 
(1)  Limousine only permit. The limousine only permit classification shall permit the vehicle to be used for limousine service only. 
(2)  Taxicab permit. The taxicab permit classification shall permit the vehicle to be used either for limousine service or taxicab service. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(B)) 
Sec. 74-173. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for either classification of vehicle permit shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. Fees for permits issued for less than a full year shall be prorated, except that the minimum fee shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. The fee is not refundable if the permit is canceled or revoked prior to expiration of the permit. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee as established by the city council from time to time and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(C)) 
Sec. 74-174. - Applications. 
    Every application for a vehicle permit under this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant, and shall be filed with the city manager. The application shall be on a form provided by the city manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  For either classification of vehicle permit: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
b.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, place of incorporation, address and telephone number. 
c.  If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the partnership, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners. 
d.  The number of the applicant's operating or combined operating/dispatching license. 
e.  The make, model, body style, model year and color of the vehicle. 
f.  The number and expiration date of the state license plate number and state vehicle inspection sticker. 
g.  The vehicle identification number. 
h.  The owner of the vehicle, if different than the applicant. 
(2)  For a taxicab permit, a description of the electric identification sign. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(D)) 
Sec. 74-175. - Vehicle requirements. 
    Vehicles must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  For either class of vehicle permit, the vehicle shall: 
a.  Conform to all minimum safety standards as required by the state. 
b.  Display the city permit inside the vehicle at a place visible to the occupants. 
c.  Have a taximeter of a size and design approved by the city. The taximeter shall be accurate to the extent that measured mileage or waiting time is not more than five percent incorrect to the prejudice of the passenger. 
(2)  For taxicab permits only, the vehicle shall: 
a.  Display the permit number on the outside of the vehicle at the rear and on both front doors, in letters not less than 21/2 inches high. Letters shall be in a color which contrasts with the color of the vehicle so as to be clear and legible. 
b.  Have an electrically illuminated sign on the top of the vehicle to identify the operator of the vehicle. 
c.  Have an accurate, calibrated odometer. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(E)) 
Sec. 74-176. - Vehicle inspections. 
    No permit shall be issued or reinstated until the vehicle has been inspected by the police department. The police department shall complete an inspection checklist form provided by the city and certify that the vehicle has fully complied with all requirements on such checklist. Vehicles shall be reinspected and recertified every 12 months. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(F)) 
Sec. 74-177. - Transferability; fee. 
    Vehicle permits may be transferred from one vehicle to another only upon application to the city manager. A nonproratable fee, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be charged. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(G)) 
Sec. 74-178. - Term; expiration; renewal. 
    The term of all vehicle permits shall not be for more than one year, with expiration on January 31. Renewals shall be applied for in the same manner as specified in this division for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of January, and shall expire on January 31 of the following year. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(H)) 
Sec. 74-179. - Revocation. 
    A vehicle permit issued under this division may be revoked if: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by an application in which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(2)  The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or has persisted in permitting his vehicle to be operated in violation of any law. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(I)) 
Sec. 74-180. - Suspension. 
    Every vehicle permit issued under this division shall be suspended by the city manager if the vehicle has ceased to comply with the requirements as set forth in sections 74-174 and 74-175. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(J)) 
Sec. 74-181. - Revocation or suspension proceedings. 
    If the city manager determines that grounds exist for revocation or suspension of a permit, the permit holder shall be notified of the revocation or suspension, in writing, by certified mail, stating the reasons for, and effective date of, the revocation or suspension, and that the holder of the permit has the right to appeal the revocation or suspension to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten days. Otherwise, the revocation or suspension is final and nonappealable. In addition, the chief of police may confiscate the permit document. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(K)) 
Sec. 74-182. - Reinstatement of suspended permit; fee. 
    Vehicle permits suspended because of failure to comply with the requirements of section 74-174 may be reinstated as soon as the vehicle is brought back into compliance with section 74-174. Application for reinstatement shall be made, in writing, to the city manager on a form provided by the city manager. The nonproratable fee for reinstatement shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 113.23(L)) 
Secs. 74-183-74-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR DRIVERS 

Sec. 74-201. - Driver's permit required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine within the city unless such person has a valid driver's permit as provided for under this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(A)) 
Sec. 74-202. - Requirements. 
    Applicants for a driver's permit under this division must possess a valid state driver's license of the appropriate classification. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(B)) 
Sec. 74-203. - Application. 
    Every application for a driver's permit shall be, in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant and shall be filed with the city manager. The application shall be on a form provided by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Previous addresses of the applicant for the past three years. 
(3)  Height, weight, eye color, hair color, race, sex and other physical characteristics useful in identifying the applicant and in distinguishing the applicant from other persons. 
(4)  Number, classification and expiration date of the applicant's state driver's license. 
(5)  All traffic violations of the applicant during the last five years. 
(6)  Details concerning all previous felony convictions of the applicant, if any. 
(7)  Two nonreturnable color photographs of the applicant. Such pictures shall be approximately two inches by three inches and shall show a front, head/shoulders view, of sufficient clarity for positive identification. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(C)) 
Sec. 74-204. - Grounds for refusal to issue permit. 
    The chief of police shall recommend approval or disapproval of a driver's permit application under this division. Recommendation for disapproval shall be made if the applicant's past criminal or traffic record indicates unfitness for driving a taxicab or limousine. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(D)) 
Sec. 74-205. - Term of permit; expiration; renewal; renewal fee. 
    The term of all permits under this division shall be for not more than one year, and shall expire on January 31. Renewals shall be applied for in the same manner as specified in this division for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of January, and shall expire on January 31 of the following year. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(E)) 
Sec. 74-206. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for driver's permits shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. Fees for permits issued after January 31 shall be prorated, except that the minimum fee shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. No portion of the fee shall be refunded if the permit is terminated prior to expiration. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(F)) 
Sec. 74-207. - Display of permit; removal or substitution of photograph. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine within the city unless a copy of the driver's permit issued by the city is displayed at a conspicuous place inside the vehicle in view of the passengers. The identification photograph affixed to the permit by the city shall not be removed or substituted. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(G)) 
Sec. 74-208. - Revocation. 
    Every driver's permit issued under this division shall be subject to revocation by the chief of police for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by an application in which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(2)  The permit holder has been convicted of a felony or any crime or offense involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  The permit holder's traffic record has become unfit for driving a taxicab or limousine, in the opinion of the chief of police. 
(4)  The permit holder has altered, forged or counterfeited, or possesses an altered, forged or counterfeited, driver's license, badge, sticker, emblem or permit required by law. 
(5)  The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or has persisted in permitting his vehicle to be operated in violation of the law. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(H)) 
Sec. 74-209. - Suspension. 
(a)  Every driver's permit issued under this division shall be subject to suspension by the chief of police if the permit holder is charged with any felony or crime involving moral turpitude. The suspension may take effect at the time the charges are filed under the state penal code and may remain in effect until final disposition of the charges. 
(b)  Every driver's permit issued under this division shall be subject to suspension by the city manager if the driver fails to comply with the regulations set forth in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(I)) 
Sec. 74-210. - Notification of suspension or revocation; appeal. 
    The driver shall be notified of the suspension or revocation of his driver's permit either by certified mail or a personally delivered written notice. The notice must include the reason for suspension or revocation and a statement that the driver has the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten days of receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation. Otherwise, the suspension or revocation is final and nonappealable. 
(Code 1995, § 113.24(J)) 
Secs. 74-211-74-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWING SERVICES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Tow truck regulation, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 643.201. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief of police for the city or his designee. 
    Consent towing service or consent tow means any towing of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle. Such term does not include the tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include trailers, semitrailers and motorcycles. 
    Nonconsent towing service or nonconsent tow means any towing of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow. 
    Owner means any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle, has the legal right of possession thereof or the legal rights of such vehicle. 
    Person means an individual person, firm, corporation or association. 
    Street means any public street, alley, public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Wrecker means any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing disabled or wrecked motor vehicles from the streets upon the request of the city. 
    Wrecker business means the business of towing or removing disabled or wrecked motor vehicles off the streets of the city. 
    Wrecker company means any person engaged in the wrecker business. 
    Wrecker rotation list means the rotation list of companies prepared and used as provided in section 74-315. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 6-26-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-242. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall be cumulative of all laws of the state and the United States governing the subject matter of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 14, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-243. - Interpretation and construction. 
    This article does not require any person, repair company or wrecker company to obtain any permit or limit any fees charged, except such persons, businesses and companies that voluntarily obtain a permit and meet the standards provided in this article in order to receive requests from the city for towing vehicles and/or placement on the wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 15, 6-26-2001) 
Secs. 74-244-74-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 74-261. - Tow truck committee. 
    There is hereby created a tow truck committee, which shall be referred to as the "committee," for the purposes of this article. The committee shall be composed of the chief of police or a police officer designated by the chief of police, the city manager or a city employee designated by the city manager, and three citizens. The three citizen committee members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to city council approval, to serve one-year terms. One of the citizen committee members shall be an owner of a wrecker business or employed by such business. The remaining two citizen committee members shall not be in the wrecker business. Subsequent terms of the citizen committee members shall be for two years. Appointments to the committee shall be made in June of each year. The tow truck committee shall have the power to suspend or revoke a wrecking company's permit or otherwise discipline a wrecking company for violations of this article. The tow truck committee's authority as provided in this section does not preclude the prosecution of a violation of this article in the city's municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 12(intro. ¶), 6-26-2001) 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 74-262. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person shall have the right to appeal any decision of the tow truck committee to the city council by making a written request to the city manger. Such request must be filed with the city secretary within 15 days after such person has been notified of the decision of the tow truck committee. 
(b)  No person shall have any right to appeal for relief to any court in regard to any matter covered by this article until after such person has exhausted the appeal procedure provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 12(a), (b), 6-26-2001) 
Secs. 74-263-74-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 74-281. - Application; fees. 
    Every wrecker company desiring to qualify to provide nonconsent towing services to the city and to be placed on the wrecker rotation list to provide nonconsent towing services at the request of the city shall make written application for a permit to the chief of police upon a form provided for such purpose. Such permit application shall contain the name, address, telephone number, number and types of wrecker equipment operated and the owner of the business. The applicant shall name all employees of the wrecker company who will be driving the wreckers and will furnish the chief of police with the employees' addresses, drivers' license numbers and telephone numbers. When filed, every application shall be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, which fee is to cover inspection and permit charges, and shall not be returned to the applicant. The permit fee shall cover the permit fees for one wrecker per wrecker company, and an additional fee, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be submitted for each wrecker that will provide nonconsent towing services, and such fees shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-282. - Issuance requirements. 
    Upon payment of the permit fees stated in section 74-281, the chief of police shall issue a permit for wrecker companies to be eligible to provide nonconsent towing services at the request of the city, and shall issue a permit for all wreckers of such wrecker companies providing such services only if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Every wrecker proposed to be used by the applicant shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Each wrecker shall be no less than one-ton dual in size, and be equipped with booster brakes. 
b.  Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power- or hand-operated winch and winch line, with a factory rated lifting capacity of not less than four tons, single line capacity. 
c.  Each wrecker shall carry the following standard equipment: 
1.  Tow bars; 
2.  Safety chains; 
3.  Fire extinguisher (minimum five-pound, class B or C); 
4.  Wrecking bars; 
5.  Brooms; 
6.  Shovel; 
7.  Axe; and 
8.  Amber color flashing ray light, mounted at the highest practical point on the vehicle. 
(2)  The applicant shall procure, and keep in full force and effect, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company in the standard form approved by the state, with the insured provisions of the policy including the city as an additional insured, and the coverage provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of such company, and providing that the amount of recovery on each wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following: 
a.  For damages arising out of bodily injury or death, such limits shall meet the state minimum requirements for wreckers as set by the state department of transportation. 
b.  For injury to or destruction of property, such limits shall meet the state minimum requirements for wreckers as set by the state department of transportation. 
(3)  A copy of the policy of insurance, or a certificate of insurance issued by the insurer, shall be obtained and filed with the city secretary. 
(4)  The owner of the wrecker for which such permit or license is sought shall render the wrecker for ad valorem taxation, and all taxes due and owing on such vehicle shall have been paid to the city. 
(5)  Proof shall be provided that the owner of the wrecker has a storage facility located a distance of not greater than five miles from the city limits, which shall be licensed by state law as suitable for the protection of stored motor vehicles and fenced as required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 3, 6-26-2001) 
State Law reference- Minimum coverage amounts, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.072. 
Sec. 74-283. - Additional permits required; display; unlawful service; transferability; duplicates; expiration. 
(a)  In addition to a permit authorizing a person to engage in nonconsent towing services at the request of the city, a permit shall also be issued for each wrecker owned by the permittee and authorized to provide such service. 
(b)  Each permit for a wrecker shall be securely affixed to the inside of the windshield of the wrecker. 
(c)  No wrecker shall provide service to the city in response to a request by the city police department, be placed or remain on the wrecker rotation list, or perform any nonconsent towing services unless a permit has been issued to the owner of such wrecker pursuant to this article. 
(d)  No permit shall be transferable, and if such permit is lost or destroyed a charge for a duplicate shall be made as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(e)  Every permit shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the calendar year in which the permit is issued. 
(f)  No wrecker company shall provide nonconsent towing services at the request of the city without the permits issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 4, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-284. - Revocation. 
    Any of the permits defined in this division may be revoked by the tow truck committee established under section 74-261 for the violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 5, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-285. - Operation without valid and current permit. 
    No wrecker company shall provide nonconsent towing services in response to a request for wrecker services from the city or in response to a notice resulting from being on the wrecker rotation list unless a valid and current permit for such wrecker has been issued for such vehicle by the chief of police, and no person shall operate a wrecker on the public streets of the city for such purposes unless the permit duly issued to such wrecker is posted on the windshield of such wrecker as provided in section 78-283(b). 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 6, 6-26-2001) 
Secs. 74-286-74-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-311. - Towing charges. 
(a)  A wrecker owner is hereby authorized to collect fees, as established by the city council in its annual fee ordinance on file in the city secretary's office, for the following nonconsent towing services: 
(1)  Regular towing charge (for vehicles not requiring the use of a heavy-duty wrecker during regular business hours only, Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.). An additional surcharge may be imposed during afterhours on holidays or weekends. 
(2)  Additional charge when towing dolly is used. 
(3)  Mileage fee per mile (roundtrip). 
(4)  Additional charge if drive line must be dropped. 
(5)  Additional charge if wheel and tire must be changed. 
(6)  Additional charge if winch required (per 50 feet). 
(7)  Additional charge to upright a vehicle. 
(8)  Additional charge to pull axle prior to tow. 
(9)  Clean up. 
(10)  Additional charge for any other necessary labor, chargeable in 15-minute increments, such time and labor charges not to accrue until after wrecker has been on the scene for 30 minutes or longer (not to include delays for police investigations). 
(b)  The fees for services set forth in subsection (a) of this section and in the amounts established by the city council in the annual fee ordinance, which may be amended, shall be all inclusive, and there will be no additional towing charges to a motor vehicle owner. Towing fees for a heavy-duty wrecker, when required, are not regulated by this section. However, any preservation and notification fees provided by this law may be applied. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 13, 6-26-2001; Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 13-30, § 1, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 74-312. - Following emergency vehicles. 
    No person in a motor vehicle shall follow any ambulance or police car traveling on a public street in response to the report of an automobile collision or accident for the purpose of following such ambulance or police car to the location of the collision or accident. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 7, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-313. - Location of traffic accidents. 
    No person shall drive a wrecker, or other motor vehicle used in the business of towing motor vehicles, to the scene or site of a traffic accident or collision on the streets of the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department or the owner of a motor vehicle involved in the accident, provided that when it is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident or collision, the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 8, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-314. - Solicitations at accident scene. 
    No person shall solicit business at the scene of any traffic accident or collision on a public street in a manner which disrupts, impedes or otherwise interferes with the flow of traffic or the provision or conduct of police, fire or emergency medical services. Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business, or any wrecker or motor vehicle owned or operated by any person engaged in the wrecker business, at or near the scene or site of a wreck, accident or collision on any public street in the city within one hour after the occurrence of such wreck, accident or collision shall be a violation of this section, except when such person or wrecker has been called to the scene of such accident or collision by the police department or owner. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 9, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-315. - Wrecker rotation list; failure to respond to a call. 
(a)  If the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision is physically unable or refuses to designate the wrecker company desired, the investigating officer shall immediately communicate such fact to the police department headquarters. The police department or its authorized designee shall keep a master list (known as the "wrecker rotation list") of all wrecker companies which meet the requirements of section 74-282. Upon receiving the first communication, the police officer receiving such communication at the police department headquarters shall call the wrecker company in line on the wrecker rotation list to tow the disabled vehicle and remove such vehicle from the city streets. On each succeeding communication of the inability or refusal of the owner to designate a wrecker company, the next wrecker company on the list shall be called, and proper rotation of each such call shall be made on the master list. 
(b)  If a wrecker company fails to respond to a call on two consecutive instances or more than twice in any six-month period, the wrecker company's permit shall then be subject to suspension and/or revocation and removal from the wrecker rotation list, as determined by the tow truck committee. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 10, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 74-316. - Wrecker recommendation by police officer. 
    No police officer investigating or present at the scene or site of any wreck, accident or collision on a public street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name of any particular person engaged in the towing or wrecker service or repair business; nor shall any such police officer influence, or attempt to influence, in any manner, the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a towing, wrecker or repair service, provided that any police officer, in the exercise of his discretion as a police officer, may direct that any vehicle, whether towed by a company selected by the owner of the vehicle or from the wrecker rotation list, shall be taken by the driver of the tow truck or wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the pound or a place approved by the chief of police and held at such place until properly released; however, this section shall not be interpreted as preventing any police officer from making any recommendation to a member of his immediate family. 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 11, 6-26-2001) 
Subpart B - LAND USE REGULATIONS 
Chapter 78 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate buildings, § 13. 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, ch. 26; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; natural resources, ch. 46; proximity of oil and gas facilities to structures, buildings and grounds, § 46-122; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; numbering of buildings, § 58-201 et seq.; utilities, ch. 70; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; signs, ch. 90; subdivisions, ch. 94; exterior of buildings and structures in industrial park district, § 94-254; zoning, ch. 98; building official to enforce provisions, § 98-141; nonconforming uses and structures, § 98-181 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Amendments to regulatory codes. 
    Amendments to regulatory codes adopted by reference in this chapter, which, from time to time, are adopted and published by the organizations or agencies referred to in this chapter or amended, from time to time, by the city by ordinance, shall be effective in the city at the time the amendments are placed on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 150.06) 
Sec. 78-2. - Fire limits. 
    The fire limits of the city shall be as shown and indicated on the official map of the fire zones on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 150.15) 
Charter reference- Power of the council to designate and regulate fire limits, § 20. 
Secs. 78-3-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the council to adopt and modify the building code, § 20. 
State Law reference- Building codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.211 et seq. 

Sec. 78-31. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices C, D, E, F, G, I , J and K as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Brownwood for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnations of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-32. 
(Code 1995, §§ 131.301, 150.01; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(A), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.A., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.A., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-32. - Local amendments to International Building Code. 
    The following sections of the International Building Code adopted by reference in section 78-31 are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)  (1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 113. Board of Appeals - Refer to Section 3 herein. 
(3)  Section 1612.3 Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(4)  Section 1612.3 Insert: "July 1982" 
(5)  Section 3412.2 Insert: "July 14, 1970" 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions are hereby added to Chapter 2, Section 202 of the International Building Code. In the event of conflict or contradiction, these definitions shall take precedence over any provisions stated in the codes. 
    ADDITION - An increase in the volume associated with the structural or thermal envelope of a building or structure whether served by conditioned air or not. 
    ALTERATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure 
    RECONSTRUCTION / REHABILITATION / RENOVATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of making the building or structure habitable. 
    REMODEL - The changing of finishes; painting, floor finishes, new trim, changing fixtures, etc. 
    REPAIR - The upkeep of existing finishes; painting, floor finishes, trim, etc. to include the replacement of non-structural members and parts. 
    RESTORATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of returning an existing building or structure to a former, original, or unimpaired condition. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(A), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.A., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, §§ 1.A., 2, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-33-78-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 78-51. - Adopted. 
    That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices with the exception of appendices I, L and O as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Brownwood for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Residential Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-52. 
(Code 1995, §§ 131.301, 150.02; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(B), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.B., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.B., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-52. - Local amendments to International Residential Code. 
    The following sections of the International Residential Code adopted by reference in section 78-51 are hereby revised as follows: 
(a)  (1)  Section R101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section R112. Board of Appeals - Refer to Section 3 herein. 
(3)  Table R301.2(1) - Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. The following values shall be input into the said table. 
VALUE GROUND SNOW LOAD 5 lb/ft 2 WIND DESIGN SPEED 90 mph WIND DESIGN TOPOGRAPHIC EFFECTS No SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY A WEATHERING Negligible FROST LINE DEPTH 12" Minimum Footing TERMITE Moderate to Heavy WINTER DESIGN TEMP 22° F ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED No FLOOD HAZARDS Adoption - 10/15/1980 FIRM 7/6/1982 AIR FREEZING INDEX 74 days MEAN ANNUAL TEMP 65.3° F  
(4)  Section R313.1. Replace "...sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses..." with "...sprinkler system may be installed in townhouses...". 
(5)  Section R313.2. Replace "...residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and two-family dwellings..." with "...residential fire sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings...". 
(6)  Section P2603.6.1 - Insert "12 inches" in 2 places. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions are hereby added to Chapter 2, Section R202 of the International Residential Code. In the event of conflict or contradiction, these definitions shall take precedence over any provisions stated in the codes. 
    ADDITION - An increase in the volume associated with the structural or thermal envelope of a building or structure whether served by conditioned air or not. 
    ALTERATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure 
    RECONSTRUCTION / REHABILITATION / RENOVATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of making the building or structure habitable. 
    REMODEL - The changing of finishes; painting, floor finishes, new trim, changing fixtures, etc. 
    REPAIR - The upkeep of existing finishes; painting, floor finishes, trim, etc. to include the replacement of non-structural members and parts. 
    RESTORATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of returning an existing building or structure to a former, original, or unimpaired condition. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(B), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.B., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, §§ 1.B., 2, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-53-78-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 78-71. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices, including appendix A - Boarding Standards, as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-72. 
(Code 1995, § 131.301; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(G), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.G., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.C., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-72. - Local amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference in section 78-71 are hereby revised as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 103.5. Insert: "See the City's Fee Schedule, which may be amended from time to time." 
(3)  Section 111 - Means of Appeal. 
1.  Appeal of a Code Officials' interpretation of the Property Maintenance Code shall be directed to the City of Brownwood Building and Standards Commission. 
(4)  Section 112.4. Insert: "$250.00; $500.00" 
(5)  Section 202. Insert. "SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer of the type conventionally licensed to be coupled with a road tractor used to haul cargo over the roads of the state." 
(6)  Section 202. Insert "TRAILER. Trailers include semi-trailer, utility trailer, box trailer, single and multi axle trailers, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other conveyance conventionally labeled as a trailer. " 
(7)  Section 202. Insert "JOB TRAILER - A manufactured home or mobile structure conventionally used by field personnel as a temporary office on work sites. 
(8)  Section 302.4. Insert: "12 inches". 
(9)  Section 302.7. Add Section 302.7.1 - Trailers. 
1.  Trailers shall not be used as storage buildings unless wheels, axles, jack stands and landing gear have been removed and it is secured to an appropriate foundation and anchored to the ground in a manner specified by the City of Brownwood Building Code. A permit shall be required as it would for any other structure and it must meet all applicable building code requirements. 
2.  Trailers shall be maintained in a manner which permits their designed use; i.e., currently registered, inspected and legally operable on the roads of the state. 
3.  A loaded trailer that has been located on the same property for 90 or more days shall be considered a storage unit and will be subject to the foregoing and all applicable requirements of the City of Brownwood Building Code. Successive 90 day periods shall be separated by no less than 30 days during which the trailer is not located on the property. 
4.  Job Trailers shall: 
a.  Be installed in full compliance with all of the locally adopted codes and ordinances related to occupancy; e.g., building, plumbing, electric, mechanical, etc. when being used at a work site. 
b.  Be occupied for office use only and not as residential quarters. 
c.  When stored at a non-working site be, at a minimum, maintained in good condition and appropriately secured to the ground in accordance with the locally adopted codes. Job trailers may be indefinitely stored at a non-working site provided all the foregoing provisions are complied with. 
(10)  Section 302. 
1.  Add Section "302.10 No person shall park or allow to be parked a motor vehicle or trailer on any portion of the front yard of a property zoned for residential use (including manufactured home districts) in such a manner or for such a length of time that kills the ground vegetation, causes wheel ruts, creates excessive dust, results in spreading of dirt and/or mud onto adjacent properties or public Right of Way. In this instance "front yard" shall be that portion of land between the front property line and the structure's front wall furthest from said property line excluding porches and other unconditioned spaces." 
2.  Add Section "302.11 A motor vehicle or trailer shall not be parked on a public sidewalk or greenway; i.e., the portion of land between a property line and the edge of a street or face of a raised curb." 
(11)  Section 304.14. Insert: "January 1 - December 31" 
(12)  Section 602.3. Insert: "January 1 - December 31" 
(13)  Section 602.4. Insert: "January 1 - December 31" 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(G), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.G., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.C., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-73-78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 78-101. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices with the exception of appendix B as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing the design, construction, type and quality of materials, erections, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-102. 
(Code 1995, §§ 131.301, 150.03; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(D), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.D., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.D., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-102. - Local amendments to International Mechanical Code. 
    The following sections of the International Mechanical Code adopted by reference in section 78-101 are hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 106.5.2. Insert: "See the City's Fee Schedule, which may be amended from time to time." 
(3)  Section 106.5.3. Insert: "100%; N/A". 
(4)  Section 108.4. Insert: "misdemeanor; $500.00; N/A." 
(5)  Section 108.5. Insert: "$50.00; $500.00" 
(6)  Section 109 - Means of Appeal. Refer to Section 3 herein 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(D), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 2-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.D., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.D., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-103-78-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 78-121. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Brownwood for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-122. 
(Code 1995, § 150.04; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(I), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.I., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.E., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-122. - Local amendments to International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference in section 78-121 are hereby revised as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 106.6.2. Insert: "See the City's Fee Schedule, which may be amended from time to time." 
(3)  Section 106.6.3. Insert: "100%; N/A". 
(4)  Section 108.4. Insert: "misdemeanor; $500.00; N/A." 
(5)  Section 108.5. Insert: "$50.00; $500.00" 
(6)  Section 109 - Means of Appeal. Refer to Section 3 herein. 
(7)  Section 403 - Piping Materials 
1.  Section 403.4.3 - Copper & Brass: Insert "any hydrogen sulfide." after the word "...contains" and delete all after "sulfide". 
2.  Section 403.5.2 - Copper & Brass Tubing: Insert the words; "any hydrogen sulfide." after the word "...contains" and delete all after. 
(8)  Section 406.4.1 - Test Pressure: Change the test pressure from "...3 psig." to 10 psig. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(I), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.I., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.E., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-123-78-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 78-151. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Existing Building Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-152. 
(Code 1995, § 150.05; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(H), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.H., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.F., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-152. - Local amendments to International Existing Building Code. 
    The following sections of the International Existing Building Code adopted by reference in section 78-151 are hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  (1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 112 - Means of Appeal. Refer to Section 3 herein 
(3)  Section 202. Change "EXISTING BUILDING" definition to read: "A residential or commercial building erected prior to the date specified in Section 1201.2." 
(4)  Section 1201.2. Insert: "July 14, 1970" 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions are hereby added to Chapter 2, Section 202 of the International Existing Building Code. In the event of conflict or contradiction, these definitions shall take precedence over any provisions stated in the codes. 
    ADDITION - An increase in the volume associated with the structural or thermal envelope of a building or structure whether served by conditioned air or not. 
    ALTERATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure 
    RECONSTRUCTION / REHABILITATION / RENOVATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of making the building or structure habitable. 
    REMODEL - The changing of finishes; painting, floor finishes, new trim, changing fixtures, etc. 
    REPAIR - The upkeep of existing finishes; painting, floor finishes, trim, etc. to include the replacement of non-structural members and parts. 
    RESTORATION - Any construction to an existing building or structure for the purpose of returning an existing building or structure to a former, original, or unimpaired condition. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(H), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.H., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, §§ 1.F., 2, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-153-78-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 78-181. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of the code administrator are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-182. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(F), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.F., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.G., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-182. - Local amendments to International Energy Conservation Code. 
    The following sections of the International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference in section 78-181 are hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
(2)  Section 108.4. Insert: "$50.00; $500.00" 
(3)  Section 401.1. Insert: Add the following after the final sentence: "No construction or component in a residential structure subject to the International Existing Building Code shall be required to possess a thermal efficiency greater than that existing at the time of original construction." 
(4)  Section 501.1. Add the following after the final sentence: "No construction or component in a commercial structure subject to the International Existing Building Code shall be required to possess a thermal efficiency greater than that existing at the time of original construction." 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(F), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.F., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.G., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-183-78-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD PLUMBING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-211. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator; being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, including all chapters and appendices, specifically including appendix C - Subsurface Grey Water Recycling Systems but excluding appendix A as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Brownwood for regulating and governing the construction, type and quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Plumbing Code on file in the office of the code administrator be are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in section 78-212. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 153.01, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1(C), 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 07-19, § 1.C., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.H., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-212. - Local amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
    The following sections of the International Plumbing Code adopted by reference in section 78-211 are hereby revised as follows: 
a.  Section 101.1 Insert: "City of Brownwood." 
b.  Section 106 - Permits: 
i.  Add "106.1.1 - Water Supply Pipe Repair. A no-cost permit shall be required for the repair of a residential water supply pipe ("yard line") up to a maximum of 3 foot in length and no larger than 2-inch in diameter from property line to the residential structure water distribution system inlet. The repair will not normally require an inspection unless the Plumbing Inspector determines such is necessary to ensure the public health and safety." 
ii.  Section 106.6.2 Insert: "Reference the City's Fee Ordinance which may be amended from time to time." 
iii.  Section 106.6.3 Insert: "100%; N/A" 
iv.  Section 108.4. Insert: "misdemeanor;" "$500.00;" 
v.  Section 108.5. Insert: "$50.00;" "$500.00" 
vi.  Section 109 - Means of Appeal - Refer to Section 3 herein. 
vii.  Section 303.3. Add: "All plastic piping shall not have thickness less than that established for schedule 40." 
viii.  Section 305.6.1. Insert: "12 inches" in 2 places. 
ix.  Section 603 - Water Service: 
1.  Add "603.1.1 - Irrigation Lines. Irrigation lines shall comply with the requirements of water service lines, except for that portion of the irrigation line installed after the backflow prevention device. The City shall have no obligation to inspect any portion of the irrigation line installed after the backflow prevention device." 
x.  Section 605.16 - CPVC Plastic: 
1.  Add "Section 605-16.4 - UV Exposure. CPVC plastic exposed to UV light shall be painted or otherwise protected." 
xi.  Section 608 - PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY 
1.  Add "Section 608.1.1 Testing. All backflow assemblies shall be tested annually in accordance with the requirements of 30 TAC 290. 
xii.  Section 904.1. Insert: "12 inches" 
xiii.  Section 917 - Air Admittance Valves. Delete this Section in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 153.01, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 01-07, § II, 3-13-2001; Ord. No. 05-10, § 2(C), 3-22-2005; Ord. 07-09, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-19, § 2.C., 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 08-42, § 2, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 11-02, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.H., 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 12-07, § 2, 4-24-2012) 
Sec. 78-213. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.h.iii., adopted Dec. 13, 2011, deleted § 78-213, which pertained to gas system test and derived from Ord. No. 01-33, § (E), adopted 10-23-2001. 
Sec. 78-214. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.h.iii., adopted Dec. 13, 2011, deleted § 78-214, which pertained to water heating equipment and derived from Ord. No. 01-07, § I, adopted 3-13-2001. 
Sec. 78-215. - Fees. 
    The permit and inspection fees, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be paid to the city before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started. Plumbing contractors licensed and bonded to do work in the city may, upon approved credit, place a deposit with the city for such permits. Plumbing contractors with a deposit may call by telephone for a permit. If, at anytime during the month, permit costs exceed the deposit on file with the city by the plumbing contractor, the plumbing contractor must immediately pay the difference. If such event happens two months in succession, the plumbing contractor must increase his deposit or go on cash on deliver (COD), which shall be at the sole discretion of the plumbing code official. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 153.02, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 78-216. - Bond required. 
    Before any person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the city, such person shall possess a valid state license and deposit a good and sufficient bond with the city, in the sum set by the city council by resolution and on file in the city secretary's office, conditioned that the person engaged in the plumbing business will faithfully observe all of the laws pertaining to plumbing, and that the city shall be indemnified and saved harmless from all claims arising from accidents and damages of any character caused by the negligence of the person engaged in the plumbing business, or by any other inadequate work done either by himself or his agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 153.03, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 78-217-78-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION 

Sec. 78-241. - Violations; penalties; sanctions; review and revocation of certified tester's registration. 
(a)  A person who violates any portion of this division is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable, as set forth in applicable law, for each act of violation and each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of section 78-282(1), the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person committing any violation of this article, including injunction and civil penalties. 
(c)  In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by other ordinances of the city. 
(d)  A certified tester's registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if it is determined that the tester has: 
(1)  Falsely, incompletely or inaccurately made assembly reports; 
(2)  Used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Used improper testing procedures; or 
(4)  Created a threat to public health or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(H)(4)-(6), 11-28-2000) 
Secs. 78-242-78-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 78-261. - Responsibility; backflow prevention assembly installation inspections and tests. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city manager or his designated representative or employees. 
(b)  The city shall inspect and initially test, or cause to be inspected or tested, all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the city shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to a backflow prevention assembly as a result of such inspection or testing. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(H)(1), (2), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-262. - Offenses. 
    A person commits an offense: 
(1)  If there is failure to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article. 
(2)  If there is failure to comply with a repair order issued by the city. 
(3)  If backflow from the premises owned, operated, managed or under the control of such person enters the public water supply system. 
(4)  If there is a failure to pay any fees required by this article. 
(5)  By violating any section of this article. 
(6)  If disconnected or discontinued water service to a premises under this article is reinstated, except as directed by the city. 
(7)  If such person is in charge of a facility and allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at the establishment. 
(8)  By testing a backflow prevention assembly within the city without being registered with the regulatory authority. 
(9)  By testing a backflow prevention assembly within the city without being certified by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC). 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(H)(3), 11-28-2000) 
Secs. 78-263-78-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 78-281. - Right-of-way installations of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way, except as follows: 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installation of the assembly; such installation will not interfere with traffic or utilities; and a permit is obtained from the city for such installation. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure and other requisites of the backflow prevention assembly prior to the installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by this Code to perform work in a right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The backflow prevention assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade, except when it is not practical to install the backflow prevention assembly in such manner. Any backflow prevention assembly, or portion thereof, which extends above the ground shall be located no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb. 
(4)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to, or caused by, a backflow prevention assembly installed in the right-of-way. 
(5)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(A), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-282. - When backflow prevention assembly required. 
(a)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized backflow prevention assemblies listed in the state-approved plumbing code, or as determined by the regulatory authority prior to installation. Each backflow prevention assembly must have been approved by the regulatory authority prior to installation. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the regulatory authority. The city shall determine the type and location of the backflow prevention assembly to be installed within the service area of the city. A backflow prevention assembly will be required in, but not limited to, each of the following: 
(1)  Where the nature and intent of any activity on the premises, or the materials used in the connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored on the premises could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  A premises which has any one or more cross connections and the cross connections are protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(3)  Where internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  Where intricate plumbing arrangements are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether a cross connection exists. 
(5)  Where there is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that the cross connections do not exist. 
(6)  Where installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this article, in the judgment of the city. 
(7)  When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the public works/plumbing/water utilities department of the city, upon request of the city. 
(8)  Where a fire suppression system is connected to the city's water system. 
(9)  All new construction, if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  Any used water return system. 
(11)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(b)  If a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this article, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(c)  When a building is constructed on a commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for domestic use. 
(d)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining the proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(e)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever the city deems it necessary. 
(f)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection by the city. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subject of physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations following current national guideline standards. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(B), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-283. - Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested, or caused to be inspected and tested, by the city in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installation; 
(2)  Whenever the backflow prevention assembly is moved; 
(3)  A minimum of once a year; 
(4)  Prior to reoccupancy of a premises that has been vacated and unoccupied for one year; 
(5)  Immediately after repairs. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this section. Persons and occupants of the premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, testing, records examination or the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security guard so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing or inspection. 
(e)  A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or provides water to the public. Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of this section and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the condition or to install the proper backflow prevention assembly shall be issued. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the person who owns or controls property to have all backflow prevention assemblies tested in accordance with this section. 
(g)  All results from backflow prevention assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that may be purchased by the tester from the city for a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, or may use an approved identical form. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(C), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-284. - Customer service inspections. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) water system regulations, a customer service inspection for cross connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service: 
(1)  To a newly constructed facility or previously nonexisting premises. 
(2)  To a building or premises after any material improvement. 
(3)  To any facility or premises after any correction or addition to the plumbing of such facility or premises. 
(4)  When the city deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a newly construction facility until after the customer service inspection is complete. 
(c)  Temporary water service which poses a potential cross connection threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(D), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-285. - Backflow prevention assembly installation guidelines and requirements. 
(a)  Generally. To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following national guideline requirements shall apply to the installation of such assemblies: 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) rules and the regulations set forth in this section. The backflow prevention assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by the city. 
(2)  At facilities which require a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation must be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. The city may specify other areas for installation of the backflow prevention assembly. Backflow prevention assemblies that must be installed or are located on the city right-of-way are the responsibility of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(3)  The backflow prevention assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
(4)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city. 
(5)  All vertical installations of backflow prevention assemblies must have prior approval by the city. 
(6)  Backflow prevention assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five feet above the floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
(7)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line must not be installed. 
(8)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two backflow prevention assemblies installed in parallel. Such assemblies should be sized in a manner so that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required. 
(9)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(10)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and a backflow prevention assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed. 
(11)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation, operation and/or maintenance of a backflow prevention assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris. 
(12)  Upon completion of installation of a backflow prevention assembly, the city shall be notified and all backflow prevention assemblies must be inspected and tested. All such assemblies must be registered with the city and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number and initial test report. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs). Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized at premises where substance is handled that would be hazardous to the health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP shall be effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. The manufacturerer's specifications shall be consulted for specific performance data. 
(2)  The RP must be readily accessible for testing and located in an area where water damage to a building or furnishings would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from a RP. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RPs. 
(3)  No part of a RP shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in well drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight is provided. The drain shall be of an adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the RP and shall be screened on both ends. 
(4)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established in subsection (b)(5) of this section. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the RP. 
(5)  RPs which are two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly, and a 12-inch clearance below and behind the assembly. All RPs larger than two inches on the test cock side, and the relief opening shall be at least 12 inches, plus nominal size of the assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches is required on all vault lids. 
(6)  All RPs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from the specifications of this subsection (b) will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation from such specifications must have prior written approval of the city. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDAs). Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RP) as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The line size and bypass RP assemblies must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(d)  Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DCs). Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Manufacturer's specifications shall be consulted for specific performance data. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two DCs installed in parallel. Such assemblies should be sized in a manner so that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements, while the two together will provide minimum flow requirements. 
(3)  DCs shall be readily accessible, with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, provided all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials and sized to allow the minimum clearance established in subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(4)  DCs two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall not be more than 24 inches below grade. All DCs larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the backside, 24 inches on the test cock side and 12 inches below the assembly. Headroom of six feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum check valve assembly shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. The clearance standards set forth in this subsection apply to all DCs installed in vaults, enclosures and meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches, which meet the following requirements. 
(6)  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from the specifications set forth in this subsection (d) will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation must have prior written approval of the city. 
(e)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDAs). Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs) as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  The in-line and bypass DC assemblies must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(f)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs). Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized for point-of-use protection only where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only, and shall not be installed where there is a potential for backpressure. 
(1)  PVBs shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(3)  PVBs shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly. 
(4)  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. 
(5)  Variances from the specifications set forth in this subsection (f) will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation must have prior written approval of the city. 
(g)  Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVBs). Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies as set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(E), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-286. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Property owners. It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article and comply with the following: 
(1)  Pay all costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  Install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practices. 
(3)  All commercial establishments shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their premises tested annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified cross connection tester who is registered with the city. 
(4)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair, as required. 
(5)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner which allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the regulatory agency. 
(6)  Maintain on the premises, for a minimum of three years, all records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and repair. 
(b)  Commercial establishments. All commercial establishments shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their premises tested annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified cross connection tester who is registered with the city. 
(c)  Certified backflow prevention assembly testers. Certified backflow prevention assembly testers shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Annually register with the city and pay the required fee. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition and calibration. 
(3)  Maintain the design of operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on the cross connection test form obtained from or approved by the city. 
(6)  Report test results to the regulatory authorities within three days of testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(F), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-287. - Backflow prevention assembly testers. 
    Only approved Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test backflow prevention assemblies in the city. Testers must: 
(1)  Register annually with the city; 
(2)  Provide proof of TNRCC certification; 
(3)  Provide proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus two-tenths psig accuracy; and 
(4)  Pay an annual nonrefundable tester registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(G), (N), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-288. - Multiple service connections. 
    Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnection between any of the buildings and/or systems on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(I), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-289. - Residential service connections. 
    Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection will be required to eliminate such actual or potential cross connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(J), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-290. - Rental properties. 
    Any person who owns or controls rental property is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies on the property. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(K), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-291. - Fire suppression systems. 
(a)  All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have backflow prevention devices installed and approved according to the degree of hazard. 
(b)  An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for a periodic flow-through during each 24-hour period, unless a variance has been issued, in writing, from the city. A RPDA must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of a DCDA or RPDA device is the responsibility of the property owner and persons in charge of any premises. 
(d)  Upon the approved installation of a DCDA or RPDA, a cross connection test report, completed by a licensed fire line tester, must be sent to the attention of the city, and shall include the information required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(L), 11-28-2000) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 78-292. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  An approved double check device backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other use which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. A RPDA must be installed if any solution, other than the potable water, can be introduced into the system. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current requirements as provided by the city. 
(c)  Only the city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within the city limits. 
(d)  A refundable deposit is required to ensure the return to the city of all water meter and backflow prevention assemblies. Failure to return the assemblies can result in the forfeiture of the deposit and/or enforcement action being taken against the responsible party pursuant to section 78-241. 
(e)  All nonapproved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be confiscated and enforcement action shall be taken against the responsible party pursuant to section 78-261. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(M), 11-28-2000) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 78-293. - Lawn irrigation systems. 
    All permits, issued by the building inspection department, shall be required for all lawn irrigation system installations. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code or guidelines for the appropriate device found in this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source is prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. High hazard backflow protection devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used within the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(O), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-294. - Mobile units. 
    The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual device testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the city before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(P), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-295. - Required forms. 
    The following forms shall be required: 
(1)  Certificate. 
(2)  Backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report. 
(3)  Customer service agreement. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(Q), 11-28-2000) 
Sec. 78-296. - Hazard assessments and assembly selections. 
    Hazard assessments and backflow prevention assembly selections shall be performed in accordance with Title 30 TAC Chapter 290 and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality regulations published from time to time by that agency. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 153.01.01(R), 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.h.4., 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-297-78-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CITY OF BROWNWOOD ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Adherence to the National Electrical Code, 2001 edition, required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice electrician means any person other than a master electrician or journeyman electrician who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of electrical work, is licensed by the city, and works under the supervision of a licensed master electrician or journeyman electrician. 
    Control electrician means a person who engages in or works at the installation, maintenance or repair of AC or DC electrical controls. 
    Electrical work means any work related to or involving the furnishing of labor, equipment, appliances or materials, or the performance of any operation in connection with electrical installations, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Power and lighting systems, secondary services, distribution panels, lighting panels, conduits, junction boxes, pull boxes, outlets, feeders, subfeeders, wiring devices, service fittings, lighting fixtures, lamps, etc. 
(2)  All power and control wiring and any other electrical installations incidental to any equipment furnished by any other contractors, owners or their agents. 
    Electrician's apprentice means any person, other than a master or journeyman electrician, who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of electrical work under the personal, constant supervision of a master or journeyman electrician. 
    Installation means any electrical work of any nature performed on, in or near any premises. 
    Journeyman electrician means any person licensed by the city who, under the supervision of a master electrician, engages in, or works at the actual installation, alteration, repair, service, and renovation of electrical work, and who has successfully fulfilled the examinations and requirements as set out in this chapter. 
    Legal entity has the same meaning as the term "person," as defined in section 1-2. 
    Maintenance electrician means a person who is employed by one single person, firm or organization to maintain and repair existing electrical installations on properties within the city owned by such person, firm or organization, and does not otherwise engage himself as either a master or journeyman electrician. 
    Master electrician means any person licensed by the city who is skilled in the planning, superintending, and practical installation, repair, and service of electrical work, who secures permits for electrical work, who is knowledgeable about the codes, ordinances, or rules and regulations governing those matters, who, alone or through a person or persons under his supervision, performs electrical work, and who has successfully fulfilled the examinations and requirements as set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 151.02; Ord. No. 02-41, § 1, 8-27-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-332. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Fire, police and traffic signal installations installed and maintained by the city and state department of transportation. 
(2)  Electric light, heat and power companies, and telephone and telegraph companies operating under a state charter and state laws or a franchise from the city in the operation, installation, maintenance, removal, repair or replacement of equipment and facilities of any kind or character which are necessary to, or a part of, the companies' production, operation, distribution or transmission systems. 
(3)  Manufacturers of electrical equipment carrying on reasonable electrical experiments with materials and products within the confines of their own premises, provided that the electrical inspector may, when he deems it necessary for the general welfare, inspect such premises and all installations therein, and the electrical inspector may require the manufacturer to make whatever changes he believes necessary for the protection of public life and property. 
(4)  All installations for the illumination of public grounds, ways, alleys or parks, and other exterior areas which also are owned and maintained by an electric light, heat and power company operating under a franchise from the city, or have been installed by or for such company, or are placed upon easements of such company, and have all lights installed upon poles, with no more than four lights on any one pole, and the poles shall not be closer together than 50 feet on any one tract of land. 
(5)  Any bona fide homeowner personally installing electrical conductors or equipment within his own home, provided that the owner shall: 
a.  File approved plans and specifications with the electrical inspector, which shall satisfy the electrical inspector as to such person's ability to install electrical wiring; 
b.  Apply for and secure a permit; 
c.  Pay the required fees; 
d.  Do the work in accordance with this article; and 
e.  Apply for an inspection and receive a certificate of approval. 
Personal installation by an owner under this subsection shall be by himself, for himself, on his homestead premises, without compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him, in any way, on such work. No homeowner shall be issued a permit under the provisions of this subsection more frequently than once every two calendar years, except for additions or repairs. 
(Code 1995, § 151.01) 
Sec. 78-333. - Compliance with National Electrical Code. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Brownwood Code Administrator, being marked and designated as the National Electric Code, 2011 edition, including all Chapters and Appendices as published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Brownwood, for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said National Electric Code are hereby referred to adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 151.03; Ord. No. 07-22, § 1, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 08-33, §§ 1, 3, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.J., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-334. - Changes or deviations from provisions. 
    Means of appeal shall be as provided in Article XIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 151.04; Ord. No. 11-30, § 1.J., 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-335. - Master electrician to supervise wiring. 
    All wiring within the city shall be done under the supervision of a master electrician, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1995, § 151.05) 
Sec. 78-336. - Connections between service and control. 
    No master, journeyman or maintenance electrician shall make any connection between the point of service and the work to be served until the electrical inspector has inspected and approved the work. 
(Code 1995, § 151.07) 
Secs. 78-337-78-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, adopted Dec. 13, 2011, deleted Div. 2, §§ 78-361-78-367, which pertained to administration and enforcement and derived from the Code of 1995, § 151.44, §§ 151.70-151.75. 

Secs. 78-361-78-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, adopted Dec. 13, 2011, deleted Div. 3, §§ 78-391-78-400, which pertained to licenses and derived from the Code of 1995, § 151.06, §§ 151.20-151.26, §§ 151.43, 151.44; Ord. No. 02-41, §§ 2, 3, adopted 8-27-2002. 

Secs. 78-391-78-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 78-421. - Permit required. 
    No person shall begin any electrical installation or any work of installing, erecting or altering material, wiring fixtures or any other apparatus to be used for the generation, transmission or utilization of electricity for light, heat or power in or on any building or premises in the city without first securing a permit for such installation or work. 
(Code 1995, § 151.35) 
Sec. 78-422. - Permit application. 
    Homeowners and master electricians shall make application to the city development services department for a permit required by this division. 
(Code 1995, § 151.36) 
Sec. 78-423. - Issuance of permit. 
    After payment of the required inspection fees, the city development services department shall issue to the applicant a permit under this division for the proposed work. If other than homeowners apply for a permit, the permit will be issued to a master electrician only, unless prior arrangements have otherwise been made, in writing. 
(Code 1995, § 151.37) 
Sec. 78-424. - Expiration of permit. 
    If a building has not received and passed a final inspection within 60 days after completion of the building, the permit shall expire and may be renewed only after a fee in the amount of the original permit fee has been paid. However, the permit may be extended for a reasonable length of time, without charge, if application for an extension has been made to the office of the electrical inspector before the expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 151.38) 
Sec. 78-425. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, adopted 12-13-2011 deleted § 78-425 which pertained to permit for temporary service and derived from the Code of 1995, § 151.39. 
Sec. 78-426. - Inspection fees. 
    Upon application for a permit under this division, the inspection fees shall be paid by the applicant to the city as prescribed in the fee schedule passed by the city council from time to time and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 151.40; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-427. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, adopted 12-13-2011 deleted § 78-427 which pertained to baseboard heating and derived from the Code of 1995, § 151.41. 
Sec. 78-428. - Notice of readiness for inspection. 
    Permit holders and other persons whose installations are ready for inspection shall allow the electrical inspector's office 24 hours, Sundays and holidays excluded, before proceeding with the installation. 
(Code 1995, § 151.42) 
Secs. 78-429-78-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ELECTRICAL STANDARDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 78-451. - Wiring methods. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 78-333, all wiring shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any new buildings built for commercial use and any existing building being remodeled that is to be used for any type of commercial purposes shall have all wiring in and/or on the building enclosed in National Electrical Code approved conduit, and: 
a.  Any existing building which is to be used for commercial purposes shall have the service entrance brought up to code and any additions or changes to the electrical system shall be installed according to the NEC. 
b.  All electrical installations or alterations done in or on any building which is to be used for commercial purposes shall be done by a master electrician licensed in the city. 
c.  Existing businesses will be excepted from subsection (1)a. of this section unless a permit is issued for any electrical additions or alterations, at which time the existing business shall comply with subsections (1)a. and (1)b. of this section. 
(2)  Any structure containing three or more living units shall be wired in NEC-approved conduit or shall have a fire wall approved by the International Building Code separating it from all other units. 
(3)  Electrical grounding systems shall consist of any type of wiring that is allowed by the NEC, except grounding systems shall not be attached to any plumbing pipes. 
(4)  Armored cable wiring, open wiring on insulators and concealed knob and tube wiring methods shall not be used. 
(5)  No grounding conductor run separately shall be smaller than No. 14 AWG. 
(6)  All buildings in the fire zone of the city shall be wired in NEC-approved conduit. 
(7)  In all construction, no electric wiring smaller than No. 14 AWG on 15 amp breakers shall be used in accordance with the 2011 National Electrical Code, as may be amended. 
(8)  Service masts which support service drops shall be made of a minimum size of two-inch trade size rigid steel electrical conduit. In addition, mast supports (guying or other suitable supports) to support the tension of the service drop cable is required if the service drop attachment is more than five feet above the roofline. 
(9)  The use of aluminum wire as a service/feeder conductor is permitted so long as the requirements of the 2011 National Electrical Code Table 310.15(B), as may be amended, are followed. 
(10)  Apprentice electricians shall perform electrical work only under the direct supervision of a licensed master or journeyman electrician. An apprentice electrician found doing any electrical work by themselves will be subject to the general penalties provided for in this Code. If the unsupervised apprentice electrician is working for a master electrician, the master electrical is held equally liable. 
(Code 1995, § 151.55; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 17-03 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 78-452. - Minimum wiring standards for residential rehabilitation. 
(a)  Application to owner-occupied residences. The following standards shall apply to installations and alterations of the electrical system of owner occupied existing residences: 
(1)  Services. All service equipment shall meet NEC requirements. No service conductor shall be smaller than No. 2 AWG. 
(2)  Circuits. Wiring methods not presently approved by this article may remain if they are in a safe condition and not disturbed in any manner other than by reconnection to an electrical panel, provided also that such systems were legal at the time of original installation. 
(b)  Moved into or relocated buildings. All buildings moved into or relocated within the city shall be required to be in total compliance with NEC requirements and this article. The same requirements apply to residences being rehabilitated for sale or use as rental property. 
(Code 1995, § 151.56) 
Sec. 78-453. - General regulations. 
(a)  Pull chain switches shall not be installed over sinks or lavatories, regardless of the wiring method used. 
(b)  Scuttle holes shall be located and all recessed panels, fixtures or heater cans and other outlet boxes shall be in place for the rough-in inspection, unless otherwise excepted by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  If the wiring of a building is covered, in any manner, before the rough-in inspection is made, the wiring shall be uncovered or tests shall be made to ensure the proper functioning of the circuits. 
(d)  All plans for commercial and industrial construction, educational and institutional facilities, and apartment buildings shall show the following, as minimum requirements: 
(1)  A floor plan locating all electrical outlets, lighting fixtures and panel locations. 
(2)  A lighting fixture schedule showing type, location and wattage. 
(3)  A single line riser diagram showing conduit and wire size, beginning at the service entrance and continuing through the main and distribution panels. Fuse or breaker size shall be shown. 
(4)  A notation shall be placed on the riser diagram showing the planned total electrical load, in amperage, to be provided. 
Plans which are not required to be certified by a professional engineer shall be signed by a licensed master electrician. 
(e)  All panels and switches shall be properly labeled and indexed for circuit and equipment control identification. 
(f)  All wiring in space enlargements or additions to buildings shall consist of entirely new circuits. 
(Code 1995, § 151.58; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.D.i, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 78-454-78-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MOVING BUILDINGS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-481. - Article not to be construed to repeal, amend or supersede other ordinances. 
    No provision of this article or the ordinance adopting this article shall be construed to repeal, amend or supersede any ordinance, or provision thereof, relating to moving buildings. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(A)) 
Secs. 78-482-78-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND LICENSES 

Sec. 78-501. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  Before any house, building or structure of any kind, over the maximum loaded height of 14 feet, maximum width of eight feet, six inches, or maximum length of 65 feet, is moved over or along any street, highway, alley or public way in the city, the person proposing to do such moving shall first secure a permit from the building official authorizing the applicant to move such house, building or other structure. 
(2)  Each individual house, building or other structure moved under the terms of this article shall require the issuance of a separate permit. 
(3)  Any person may submit an application form at city hall for a moving permit, and upon approval of the travel route, may request a waiver up to, but not to exceed, 16 feet maximum loaded width upon approval of the building official. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following do not require a moving permit from the building inspection department: 
(1)  A house, building or other structure of any kind originating outside the city limits and only passing through the city on a state highway or interstate highway. 
(2)  Transporting mobile homes. 
(3)  A structure built on-site for the express purpose of being relocated to another site, and which does not exceed a loaded height of 14 feet, a width of 12 feet or a maximum loaded length of 65 feet. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(B), (C)) 
Sec. 78-502. - Permit application. 
    Before a permit is granted under this division, the owner of the property shall furnish a statement, in writing, upon forms furnished by the building inspection department, authorizing the moving of a structure and the name of the mover. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(D)) 
Sec. 78-503. - Approval of route. 
    No person shall move any house, building or structure of any kind over, along or across any street, highway, alley or public way unless such route is expressly approved and a permit issued by the building official. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(E)) 
Sec. 78-504. - Notice to utility companies; removal and replacement of utility wires. 
(a)  Before a permit authorizing any proposed move or relocation is issued under this division, and before the move is begun, if the height of the house, building or structure is over 15 feet, the permittee shall notify each utility company which has wires, poles or other instruments used as an electrical generating, transmission or distribution system, or as a communication system, located on, over or across any street in the city along, over or across which the proposed moving operation is routed. 
(b)  Within 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) after the permittee shall have notified any such utility company of the issuance by the building official of a permit for the moving of a house, building or other structure, the utility company shall cut, move and repair all wires, cables, poles or other instruments necessary to be altered in the furtherance of the proposed moving operation. 
(c)  The permittee requesting the services on the part of the utility companies shall pay a sum of money, in cash, to each utility company which shall be sufficient to defray the actual expense of performing any such services, including all repairs necessary to restore such utilities as they were, provided that no charge shall be made to the permittee for the removal or replacement of wires across streets, alleys or other public ways lower than the required minimum height set up by the electrical ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Such payment may be required by the utility companies in advance. It shall be the duty of each utility company to make all necessary repairs and alterations set forth in this section in a safe and workmanlike manner and restore its utility system to a safe condition. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(F)) 
Sec. 78-505. - License and bond required. 
(a)  No person, except a licensed mover, shall move any house or building within the city, and every such person shall obtain an annual license before engaging in such occupation. Such license shall be in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. The license shall not be granted until the person applying for such license has given a bond to the city, as approved by the city secretary, in an amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, and executed by a surety company duly authorized to transact such business in the state. 
(b)  The bond shall be conditioned that the principal will: 
(1)  Pay any damages which may accrue to persons, as well as the city, on account of moving such houses or structures along and across the public streets, alleys and highways, and damages to the water and sewer lines of the city, whether the damage is inflicted by the principal, his agents or employees; 
(2)  Save and keep the city harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may, in any way, accrue against the city in consequence of granting a license or permit under this division; and 
(3)  Strictly comply with the conditions of his permit or license, this article and any other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Any person sustaining damage because of the moving of a house or structure may, with the consent of the city council, sue on such bond without joinder of the city as plaintiff. 
(d)  The bond shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  Any person who sells structures for the express purpose of being relocated to another site is excepted from the license and bond requirements. Proof of state required liability insurance is to be provided to the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(G)) 
Sec. 78-506. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be assessed as established by the city council, by resolution, and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(H)) 
Sec. 78-507. - Ad valorem taxes. 
    No permit shall be issued to move any house, building or other structure from any location until the applicant furnishes the building official with certificates from the county appraisal district indicating the status of ad valorem taxes on the property. Any delinquent property taxes will have to be addressed to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(I)) 
Sec. 78-508. - Issuance of permit. 
    The building official shall grant the issuance of a permit under this division when all of the facts, information and approvals required by this division have been furnished by the permit applicant. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(J)) 
Sec. 78-509. - Appeal of denial. 
(a)  Should the building official refuse to issue any permit under this division, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to the city council. The applicant desiring such appeal shall file a written appeal with the city secretary within 15 days of the denial of a permit, which shall include a brief statement of the reasons for the appeal and a detailed statement of facts supporting the appeal. Upon the expiration of the 15-day period without a written appeal being filed with the city secretary as provided in this subsection, the denial shall become final. 
(b)  Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the denial of a permit by the city council may appeal to any district court, which shall determine whether or not the decision of the city council was supported by substantial evidence. The appeal shall not stay the effect of the decision appealed from unless the court to which the appeal is taken shall so order. Upon expiration of the 15-day period without an appeal having been perfected as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the ruling of the city council shall become final. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(L)) 
Secs. 78-510-78-530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-531. - Certain work required. 
    At the time that any house, building or other structure is removed from a property by moving or razing, the owner of the property shall complete the following work, as evidenced by the owner's signature on a no fee additional work agreement: 
(1)  Remove all floor slabs, foundations, footings, sidewalks, fences and posts; 
(2)  Clear and remove all loose tree limbs, appliances and other trash, weeds, tall grass and other debris within 25 feet of the building perimeter; 
(3)  Fill in all holes or depressions remaining at the building site, and level the area to facilitate future mowing maintenance; 
(4)  Mow the grass; 
(5)  After coordination with the plumbing inspector, plug all sewer lines with concrete; and 
(6)  Complete all of the requirements of subsections (1)-(5) of this section within 30 days of the actual moving or completion of razing of the house, building or structure from the property. 
(Code 1995, § 150.16(K)) 
Secs. 78-532-78-560. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

Sec. 78-561. - Conflict requirements. 
    Whenever the requirements of this article are at a variance with the requirements of the general law or any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive requirement or the requirement imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(E)) 
Sec. 78-562. - Nonconforming uses. 
    By the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to be legalized, and such use shall remain a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(F)) 
Sec. 78-563. - Permit required; fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install a satellite dish antenna without first securing a building permit, and the fee for such permit shall be as established by the city council, by resolution, and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(C)) 
Sec. 78-564. - Installation in residential districts. 
    Satellite dish antennas located in residential districts shall meet the following conditions for installation: 
(1)  Such antennas shall not be located in the front or side yards, and shall be installed so that the closest point on the satellite dish antenna is not less than two feet from any property line. 
(2)  Installation on the roof is permitted, provided that the total height of the structure and the antenna does not exceed the district height restriction as set forth in chapter 98. 
(3)  All antennas shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications, and a building permit shall be required for each installation. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(A)) 
Sec. 78-565. - Installation in commercial districts. 
    Satellite dish antennas located in commercial districts shall meet the following conditions for installation: 
(1)  All permanent installations shall: 
a.  Require a building permit; 
b.  Be installed according to manufacturer's requirements; and 
c.  Meet appropriate setbacks as set forth in chapter 98. 
(2)  All antennas, whether for sales and service or permanent installation, shall be located in a manner that: 
a.  Will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement; 
b.  Shall not be a visual obstruction to traffic; or 
c.  Will not eliminate required parking spaces. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(B)) 
Sec. 78-566. - Variances. 
    The city council may grant a variation in the yard or setback requirements for satellite dish antennas whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this article will impose unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship upon him due to an irregular shape of the lot or topographical or other conditions, but only when the city council is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the property owner, but will alleviate a demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant such variation, and, at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected and the general welfare will not be interdicted. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(D)) 
Sec. 78-567. - Civil remedies. 
    If any satellite dish antenna is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of the terms of this article, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided for in section 1-14, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion or use, and restrain, correct or abate the violation, and the criminal penalties provided under this section shall not preclude the city from invoking civil remedies given to the city by law in such cases. Such actions and proceedings shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such violation. 
(Code 1995, § 150.17(G)) 
Secs. 78-568-78-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - UNIFIED BOARD OF APPEALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2011, enacted provisions designated as Ch. 78, Art. XII. To avoid duplicate Articles and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 78, Art. XIII. 

Sec. 78-581. - Unified board of appeals established. 
    In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by code officials relative to the application and interpretation of the codes listed in [ch. 78, Arts. II-X, and ch. 38, Art. II] (hereinafter referred to as "the codes") there shall be and is hereby created a unified board of appeals (hereinafter referred to as "the board"). 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-582. - Ex officio members. 
    The City of Brownwood Code Administrator and/or a city staff member designated thereby, shall serve as ex officio members of the board. Ex officio members shall have the right to debate issues but not make motions, vote or hold office of chair or vice chair. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-583. - Procedures. 
    The board shall utilize the "Guide to Parliamentary Procedure" as adopted by the Brownwood City Council on November 12, 1996 for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-584. - Application for appeal. 
    Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals. The application for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from the City of Brownwood code administrator within 20 days after appellant was notified of the official's decision. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-585. - Powers and duties of the board. 
(a)  The board shall have no authority to waive the requirements of the adopted codes. 
(b)  Hearing of all appeals from rulings or actions of the city Code officers by persons aggrieved thereby who shall have followed the procedures for an appeal as provided in this article. 
(c)  The board may issue non-binding advisory opinions as to the true intent of the codes or rules adopted thereunder and make written recommendations and suggestions to the city council for the improvement, enforcement and administration of the codes. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 78-586. - Membership of the board. 
    The board of appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, and approved by the city council, as follows: one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or until a successor has been appointed. 
(a)  Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of five individuals, one from each of the following professions or disciplines: 
(1)  Registered design professional who is a registered architect or engineer with structural experience; or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten years experience, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(2)  Registered design professional with mechanical engineering experience; or a licensed mechanical tradesman licensed and possessing at least ten years experience, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(3)  Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience; or a licensed Master Electrician possessing at least ten years experience, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(4)  Registered design professional with plumbing engineering experience; or a licensed Master Plumber possessing at least ten years experience, five years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work. 
(5)  Citizen at large. Mayoral appointment of a citizen representing the public consumer of the services regulated by the adopted codes. 
(b)  Alternate members. The mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the city council, at least one alternate for each board position. Alternates shall sit when regular members are not available. 
(c)  Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chair person. A vice chair person shall also be elected to serve when the chair person cannot. 
(d)  Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a conflict of interest as defined under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code ch. 171. 
(e)  Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(f)  Member compensation. Members shall not be compensated. 
(g)  Appeal. Any person dissatisfied with any ruling, order or decision of a city Code officer, his authorized representative or other officer in the enforcement of this article may appeal such ruling, order or decision to the unified board of appeals. The person desiring to appeal shall file a written appeal in the office of the code administrator within 15 days of any ruling, order or decision appealed from, which shall include a brief statement of the reasons for the appeal and a detailed statement of the facts supporting the appeal. Upon the expiration of the 15-day period without a written appeal being filed with the code administrator as provided in this subsection, the order, ruling or decision by the Code officer, his authorized representative or any other officer in the enforcement of this article shall become final. 
(h)  Investigation; stay of order appealed from. Upon the filing of an appeal pursuant to the provisions of subsection (h) of this section, the code administrator, if he has not already done so, shall personally investigate the facts upon which the order, ruling or decision appealed from is based. If, in the opinion of the code administrator, based upon such personal investigation, the facts warrant a stay of the effect of the order, ruling or decision appealed from, pending a determination of the appeal by the unified board of appeals, the code administrator may order such stay. 
(i)  Hearing by unified board of appeals. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an appeal as provided in subsection (h) of this section, the code administrator shall notify the chairperson of the unified board of appeals. The appeal shall be heard no later than 15 days after receipt of the appeal. Upon filing of the appeal, the appellant shall be notified of the time and place of the appeal hearing. When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
Prior to the hearing, the code administrator shall furnish each member of the unified board of appeals with a copy of the written appeal, a copy of the order or ruling appealed from, a copy of the section of the order involved in the appeal, and any other facts pertinent to the appeal. 
(2)  The unified board of appeals shall try the appeal de novo, and the hearings shall be public. The appellant or his representatives and the Code officers shall be granted the opportunity to be heard. Any other person whose interest may be affected may be granted the opportunity to be heard. Such evidence as is pertinent may be introduced by either party. The unified board of appeals may adopt rules of procedure as it deems appropriate for the conduct of the hearing. The chairperson of the board shall administer the oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses for the purposes of the hearing. 
(j)  Decisions of the board; records. A concurring vote of the majority of the members of the unified board of appeals present shall be necessary to reverse or modify rulings, orders or decision of the authority appealed from. All decisions of the board shall be in writing. The board shall keep clear and detailed minutes of all proceedings, including its decision, the reasons for such decision and the vote of each member participating in the decision. Immediately following the board's decision, the record shall be filed in the office of the code administrator and shall be a public record. Notice of the board's decision shall be properly furnished to the appellant, his representatives or any other person who has filed a written entry of appearance and the Code officer. 
(k)  Appeals from decisions of the board. A person desiring to appeal a decision of the unified board of appeals shall, within 15 days after a decision of the board is rendered, appeal to any district court of the county. The court shall determine constitutional issues, questions of law and whether or not the decision of the unified board of appeals was supported by substantial evidence. The appeal shall not stay the effect of the decision appealed from unless the court from which the appeal is taken shall order such stay. Upon the expiration of the 15-day period without an appeal having been perfected as provided in this subsection, the ruling of the unified board of appeals shall become final and nonappealable. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Chapter 82 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-30. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 82-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city planner/building official's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), with base flood depths range from one to three feet. Such conditions occurs where a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30 or AR, that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the base flood). 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built: 
(1)  In the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor: 
a.  Elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and 
b.  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
(2)  In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, also, a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
(3)  In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, also, a building otherwise meeting the definition of an "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of 44 CFR 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction and existing structure mean, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or before January 1, 1975, for the FIRMs effective before such date. 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary-floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of the city, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of the city on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    Flood protection system means the physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been specifically constructed to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within the city subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. Such specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain and flood-prone area mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See the definition of Flood . 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. Such term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for the purpose of working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a habitable floor. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system consisting of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, such term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, such term does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Program deficiency means a defect in the city's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of the floodplain management regulations. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Start of construction and start of substantial improvement mean the date the building permit was issued, provided, the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building which is principally above the ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. Such term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardships. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1995, § 152.03; Ord. No. 09-15, 7-14-2009) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1995, § 152.01) 
Sec. 82-33. - Purpose; methods of accomplishment. 
(a)  Statement. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(b)  Methods of accomplishment. The following methods are used in order to accomplish the purposes of this article: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1995, § 152.02) 
Sec. 82-34. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 152.04) 
Sec. 82-35. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 152.05) 
Sec. 82-36. - Compliance required. 
    No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 152.06) 
Sec. 82-37. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Brownwood", dated October 15, 1980, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM), and any revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The flood insurance study is on file at City Hall, 501 Center, Brownwood, Texas. 
(Code 1995, § 152.07) 
Sec. 82-38. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 1995, § 152.08) 
Sec. 82-39. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1995, § 152.09) 
Sec. 82-40. - Violations; penalties. 
    No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with such conditions, shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be fined as set forth in section 1-14. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 152.98) 
Secs. 82-41-82-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 82-61. - Administrator. 
    The city's floodplain administrator, or his designated representative, is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Code 1995, § 152.45; Ord. No. 09-15, 7-14-2009) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-331 et seq. 
Sec. 82-62. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
    Duties of the administrator shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Review of all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344) from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway; if located in the floodway, ensure that the encroachment provisions of subsection 82-113(a) are met. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 82-37, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsections 82-112(1) and (2). 
(5)  Obtain and maintain the following information on record: 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
b.  For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
1.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); 
2.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 82-82(3); and 
3.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(6)  If a permit application proposes a stream alteration: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and the Texas Water Development Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to Federal Insurance Administration. 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(7)  Should base contour maps showing areas of special flood hazard not be detailed enough to reflect all site conditions, make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards. Should the administrator determine that the property is outside the area of special flood hazard, the property owner would then not have to satisfy the floodplain management requirements set forth in this article. If the administrator should determine that the property is within the floodplain boundary and the property owner disagrees, the person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided in subsection 82-63(a). 
(8)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the city's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 152.46; Ord. No. 09-15, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 82-63. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Appeal board. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the city, shall hear and render judgment on appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the city manager in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal the decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the city; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
i.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of the area; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and action, if applicable, at the expected site; and 
k.  Cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (a)(4) of this section and the purposes of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(6)  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, upon request. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided subsections (a)(4)a.-k. of this section has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (a)(4) of this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Code 1995, § 152.47(A)(1)-(6), (B)) 
Secs. 82-64-82-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 82-81. - Development permit required. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 152.20) 
Sec. 82-82. - Application; required information. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section 82-37. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city manager, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities; and the location of thereof. The following information shall be required specifically: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in subsection 82-112(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(Code 1995, § 152.21(A)) 
Sec. 82-83. - Action. 
    Following the filing of a written application for a development with the city manager, such application shall be acted upon within: 
(1)  Ten working days, if in an area of special flood hazard; 
(2)  Twenty working days, if in a floodway. 
(Code 1995, § 152.21(B)) 
Sec. 82-84. - Denial. 
    If the city manager denies the granting of a permit, the denial shall be in writing, specifically setting forth the reasons that the development permit is denied. It is intended that the written denial will point out to the applicant how he has failed to be entitled to a development permit in a manner so that the applicant can reasonably determine the reasons for the denial, and to give the applicant an opportunity to provide additional material and information required, or provide additional drainage facilities, in a subsequent application. 
(Code 1995, § 152.21(C)) 
Sec. 82-85. - Appeal. 
    Any person whose application for a development permit is denied may appeal the decision to the appeal board by giving written notice to the city manager within 30 days of the city manager's denial of the application for the development permit. The appeal board shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the filing of the notice of appeal and shall render its written decision to grant or deny the development permit within three days following the hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 152.47(A)(7)) 
Secs. 82-86-82-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 82-111. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utilize equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
d.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(Code 1995, § 152.30) 
Sec. 82-112. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, where basic flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 82-37 or subsection 82-62(4), the following standards are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the city manager that the standard of this division as proposed in subsection 82-82(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Have had a registered professional engineer or architect develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section. A record of the certification, which includes the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the city manager. 
(3)  Enclosure. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting such requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of such requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. Such requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM shall be required to be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with subsection 82-111(1). 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 82-82, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1995, § 152.31; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 09-15, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 82-113. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize floodplain damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, and electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Code 1995, § 152.32) 
Sec. 82-114. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
(a)  Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 82-37 are areas designated as shallow flooding. Such areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and velocity flow may be evident. 
(b)  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this article, as proposed in section 82-82, are satisfied. 
(4)  Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1995, § 152.33) 
Sec. 82-115. - Floodways. 
(a)  Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 82-37 are areas designated as floodways. 
(b)  Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, unless certification by a professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Because the potential impact of a single structure cannot be measured, the city shall weigh the impact should all adjacent property owners wish to develop their property to the same degree as the applicant. 
(2)  If subsection (b)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Code 1995, § 152.34) 
Chapter 86 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Code enforcement, ch. 26; environment, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; floods, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98; MH manufactured home/mobile home district, § 98-351 et seq. 
State Law reference- Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1201. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-31. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Home Subdivisions Regulation of the City of Brownwood." 
(Code 1995, § 155.01) 
Sec. 86-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a mobile home park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this article. 
    Building official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building official for the use of a building, structure and/or land, when it is determined by the building official that the building, structure and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations. 
    City health officer means the legally designated head of the city health department or his authorized representative. 
    City official means the legally designated head of a city department or his authorized representative when acting in an official capacity. 
    Common access route means a private way which affords the principal means of access to individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Driveway means a minor entranceway of the common access route within the park, into an off-street parking area serving one or more mobile homes. 
    HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. Such term does not include a "recreational vehicle," as such term is defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
    Internal street means the same as the definition of "common access route." 
    License means a written license issued by the building official permitting a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this article. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this article. 
    Manufactured housing or manufactured home means a HUD-code manufactured home or mobile home, and collectively means and refers to both. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on-site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
    Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single person ownership, meeting all requirements of this article. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision so named by the city council for the development of mobile home residences, regardless of ownership. 
    Parking space, off-street, means a minimum space ten feet in width by 20 feet in length, located within the boundary of a mobile home space or in a common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street. 
    Permit means a written permit or certification issued by the building official permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home park, under the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this article. 
    Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
    Pier means the portion of the anchorage system between the pier foundation and the mobile home. 
    Pier foundation means the portion of the anchorage system that transmits loads directly to the soil. 
    Plot plan means the graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to the adjoining use and to the boundary of the property. 
    Police chief means the legally designated chief of the police department of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Replacement means the act of moving one mobile home from its existing stand and replacing it with another mobile home. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this article. 
    Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile home park. 
    Sewer service riser pipe means the portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a mobile home space. 
    Site plan means the same as the definition of "plot plan." 
    Space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park which is designed for the accommodation of one mobile home, together with such open space as is required by this article. Such term also shall include the terms "lot," "stand" and "site." 
    Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home. 
    Water riser pipe means the portion of the private water service system serving a mobile home park, which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a mobile home space. 
    Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinances of the city as set forth in chapter 98. 
(Code 1995, § 155.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 86-33-86-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 86-51. - Inspections; right of entry; duty of occupants. 
(a)  Inspections required. The appropriate city official is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  Right of entry. The appropriate city official shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Inspection of register. The appropriate city official shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of a mobile home park. 
(d)  Duty of occupants. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the licensee, his agent or authorized employee access to any part of such park, at reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 155.05) 
Sec. 86-52. - Notices; hearings; orders; appeals. 
(a)  Notice of violation; requirements of notice. 
(1)  Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the building official shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as set forth in this subsection (a). 
(2)  Such notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of such notice; 
c.  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act such notice requires; 
d.  Be served upon the licensee or his agent, provided that the notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with the notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of the state; and 
e.  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Appeal from denial of permit by the building official. Any person affected by the refusal of the building official to issue a permit under the provisions of this article, as set out in section 86-71, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, provided that such person shall file in the office of the building official, within 30 days after the day the permit was refused, a written petition requesting the hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for such appeal. Upon receipt of such petition, the building official shall forward the petition to the city secretary, who shall request the city council to set a time and place for a hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  Appeal from notice issued by the building official. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued by the building official in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article applicable to a mobile home park may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, provided that such person shall file in the office of the building official, within 30 days after the day the notice was served, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for such request. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under subsection (e) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the building official shall forward the petition to the city secretary, who shall request the city council to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(d)  Issuance of order after hearing. After such hearing, the building official shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the refusal, which order shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(2)d. of this section. Upon failure to comply with an order by the building official sustaining or modifying a decision by the building official, the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(e)  Emergencies. Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom an order is directed shall immediately comply with the order, but, upon written petition to the building official, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of section 86-72 shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued after such hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 155.06) 
Secs. 86-53-86-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND LICENSES 

Sec. 86-71. - Permits. 
(a)  Generally. No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home park, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  One existing residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(2)  An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for use by the residents of the mobile home park. 
(b)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the building official in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the building official and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(3)  The date and serial number of the special use permit granted under the zoning ordinance set forth in chapter 98. 
(4)  An attachment of four copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of one foot equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more, and at a minimum scale of one foot equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres. 
a.  The site plan shall include all data required under section 86-91(a). 
b.  One print of the plot plan is to be circulated by the building official to each of the city departments designated in section 86-91(b) for approval prior to issuing the permit. The plot plan does not replace or supersede the subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is located. 
(d)  Fee. All permit applications to the building official shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, plus a fee for each trailer space as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(e)  Issuance. Upon review of the permit application, when the building official is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this article, a permit shall be issued. 
(f)  Denial; hearing. Any person whose application for a permit under this section has been denied may request a hearing on the denial under the procedure provided by section 86-52. 
(Code 1995, § 155.03) 
Sec. 86-72. - Licenses. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the city unless such person holds a valid license, issued annually by the city, in the name of the person for the specific park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the city, in writing, on forms furnished by the city, which shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application for original license. Application for the original license shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and a deposit of the license fee as provided in subsection (e) of this section, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(3)  A site plan of the mobile home park, showing all mobile home spaces, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities. 
Before the original license is issued, the city shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(c)  Hearing upon denial. Any person whose application for a license under this section has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health authority under the procedure provided by section 86-52. 
(d)  Application for renewal. 
(1)  Application for renewal of a license shall be made by the licensee, in writing, on forms furnished by the city, on or before January 1 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal was granted. 
(2)  Before the renewal license is issued, the city shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(e)  Fee. All original license applications, or renewals thereof, shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office for each mobile home space in the mobile home park. All renewal fees shall be due on January 1 of each year. 
(f)  License transfer. Every person holding a license shall give notice to the city, in writing, within ten days after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park. Application for transfer of a license shall be made within 15 calendar days after notification of such change as required by this subsection. Within ten calendar days thereafter, the city shall act on the application for license transfer, and such transfer shall be approved if the mobile home park is in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Transfer fee. All applications for a license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(h)  Violations; notice; suspension of license. Upon inspection of any mobile home park, whenever the building official, after consultation with the city officials he deems competent to judge, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article applicable to such mobile home park, he shall give notice, in writing, in accordance with section 86-52(a), to the licensee or his agent that, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time as specified in the notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the building official shall reinspect the mobile home park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice of such suspension, in writing, to the licensee or his agent. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of the mobile home park, except as provided in section 86-52. 
(Code 1995, § 155.04) 
Secs. 86-73-86-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 86-91. - Site plans. 
(a)  The site plan shall be filed as required by section 86-71(c)(4) and shall show the following: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of the location and boundaries; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces; 
(3)  The location, width and specifications of driveways, roadways and walkways; 
(4)  The location and specifications of water and sewer lines, and riser pipes; 
(5)  The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems; 
(6)  The location and specifications of all buildings constructed, or to be constructed, within the mobile home park; 
(7)  The location of fire mains, including the size, hydrants and any other equipment which may be provided; 
(8)  Such other information as city reviewing officials may reasonably require. 
(b)  A print of the site or plot plan shall be circulated by the building official to the following city officials and departments, and approval shall be obtained from such officials and departments prior to the issuance of a permit: 
(1)  Zoning department; 
(2)  Building department; 
(3)  Fire chief; 
(4)  Health department; and 
(5)  City council. 
(Code 1995, § 155.15) 
Sec. 86-92. - Site requirements. 
    Any mobile home park constructed after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any extension or addition to an existing mobile home park in the city shall be done in compliance with the following site requirements: 
(1)  Location. A mobile home park shall have no less than ten mobile home spaces and shall be located only on sites having a special use permit as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  Basic mobile home minimum site requirements. 
a.  Space requirements. Each mobile home space shall provide a minimum area of 4,000 square feet; however, no mobile home space shall have dimensions less than 40 feet on the narrow dimension, nor 100 feet in the long dimension. 
b.  Occupancy limitation. No more than one family unit shall occupy any mobile home space. 
(3)  Open space requirements. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
b.  No mobile home shall be closer than five feet to any property line, nor closer than 25 feet to the property line adjoining a public street. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for other structures on each space shall be at least ten feet. 
d.  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 15 feet. 
(4)  Height regulations. 
a.  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile home park shall be 35 feet. 
b.  The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet. 
(5)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. 
(6)  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(7)  Design and location of storage facilities. Unless provided in current mobile home models, storage facilities, with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per mobile home space, may be provided on the mobile home space, or in compounds located within 100 feet of each mobile home space. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the mobile home park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel steel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability and appearance. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the mobile home shall be permitted only if such storage is in such storage facilities. 
(8)  Mobile home stands. The area of the mobile home stand or space shall provide adequate support and drainage for placement of the mobile home. 
(Code 1995, § 155.16) 
Sec. 86-93. - Access and traffic circulation; parking. 
(a)  Internal streets, no parking area signs and street name signs shall be privately owned, built and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all mobile home spaces and to facilities for common use of mobile home park residents. 
(b)  Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstructions in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the mobile home park. The code enforcement shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this section and to remove and impound offending vehicles. 
(c)  On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this section, the owner or agent shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the city public works director prior to installation of such sign. 
(d)  All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established by the city council and the owner or agent shall maintain such streets free of cracks, holes and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with good engineering designs, and shall be approved by the city public works director on an occupancy permit for the mobile home park. 
(Code 1995, § 155.17) 
Sec. 86-94. - Internal street dimensions and parking; numbering; required intersections. 
(a)  An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each mobile home space. Such street or route shall be paved and have a minimum width of 30 feet if off-street parking is provided in the ratio of two parking spaces for each mobile home space. On-street parking shall be permitted on only one side of the street. The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other internal streets or public streets or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of 95 feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
(b)  If no off-street parking is provided or is provided in a ratio of less than two spaces for each mobile home site, the minimum street width shall be 36 feet. All other requirements shall remain the same as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, except that parking will be permitted on both sides of the street. 
(c)  If the mobile home park is constructed with internal streets having a width less than 36 feet, off-street parking shall be provided on each mobile home space in the ratio of two parking spaces for each mobile home space. Each parking space shall be hard-surfaced with all-weather material, and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes and public parking in the mobile home park. 
(d)  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of each mobile home. 
(e)  Within each mobile home park, all streets shall be named and mobile homes numbered to conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. All street name signs and house numbers shall be of a reflective material. The street signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with the signs on public streets so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. The signs and numbers shall be of a standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
(f)  Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90 degrees and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on such public streets. 
(Code 1995, § 155.18) 
Sec. 86-95. - Streetlighting. 
    Streetlighting within a mobile home park shall be provided along all internal streets. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average illumination level of not less than 0.2 footcandle. 
(Code 1995, § 155.19) 
Sec. 86-96. - Fire safety standards. 
(a)  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In mobile home parks in which liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, the handling and storage of such gases shall comply with requirements of the city plumbing and fire codes, as applicable. 
(b)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In mobile home parks in which gasoline, fuel oil or other flammable liquids are stored or dispensed, the handling and storage of such flammable liquids shall comply with the city fire code set forth in chapter 38. 
(c)  Access for firefighting. Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting purposes. 
(d)  Firefighting instruction. The mobile home park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the mobile home park fire protection equipment and in the staff's specific duties in the event of a fire. 
(e)  Water supply facilities for fire department operations. 
(1)  Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city public water supply system, unless a special exception is granted by the city council to use a private water supply system. If a private water supply is utilized for service to the mobile home park, the private water supply must be adequate both for domestic and firefighting requirements established by the city. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by the fire chief. If the mobile home park owner and agent utilize a private water supply, such supply shall have sufficient volume and pressure so that the city water supply will not be required for firefighting. 
(2)  The mobile home park owner shall provide standard city fire hydrants, which shall be located within 500 feet of all mobile home spaces when measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the city fire department. It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park licensee to ensure that the fire hydrants in need of immediate repair shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner within 24 hours. Nonemergency repairs shall be made within seven days. 
(f)  Dry vegetation. The mobile home park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the mobile home park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(Code 1995, § 155.20) 
Sec. 86-97. - Recreation areas and facilities. 
(a)  When required. All mobile home parks exceeding 100 mobile home spaces shall have at least one recreation area. 
(b)  Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings, shall be provided, which, in the judgment of the mobile home park licensee or agent, will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele which the mobile home park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and tot lot recreation areas is encouraged. 
(c)  Size. Not less than five percent of the total gross site area of the mobile home park exceeding 100 mobile home spaces shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. 
(d)  Playground space. When playground space is provided, it shall be designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Such playground space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(Code 1995, § 155.21) 
Sec. 86-98. - Water supply. 
(a)  Required. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park or subdivision. Connection shall be made to the public supply of water, unless a special exception is granted by the city council to use a private water supply system. If a private water supply is utilized for service to the mobile home park, the private supply shall be adequate both for domestic and firefighting requirements established by the city. 
(b)  Water distribution system. 
(1)  The water supply system of the mobile home park or subdivision shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. 
(2)  All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements. 
(c)  Riser pipes and connections. Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be in accordance with requirements of chapter 78, article VIII. 
(Code 1995, § 155.22) 
Sec. 86-99. - Sewage disposal. 
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (4-12-1977), the following shall apply: 
(1)  General requirements. In all mobile home parks or subdivisions, an adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided for conveying and disposing of all sewage. The sewer system for a mobile home park shall be constructed in accordance with the city plumbing code. All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the city plumbing inspector prior to construction, except that the use of septic tanks for the disposal of sewage shall not be approved. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state, except with prior approval of the city plumbing inspector and the appropriate regulatory agency of the state. 
(2)  Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be constructed of materials in accordance with chapter 78, article VIII. 
(3)  Individual sewer connections. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a three-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be located on each stand so that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. 
a.  The sewer connection to the mobile home from the sewer riser pipe and any other sewer connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of chapter 78, article VIII. 
b.  All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with chapter 78, article VIII. 
c.  Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no mobile home occupies the mobile home space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. 
(Code 1995, § 155.23) 
Sec. 86-100. - Electrical and telephone distribution systems. 
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (4-12-1977), the following shall apply: 
(1)  Electrical and telephone wiring. All electrical and telephone wiring in a mobile home park or subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the city electrical code set forth in chapter 78, article X. 
(2)  General requirements. Every mobile home park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. 
(3)  Power distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding. All power distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding of the mobile homes and equipment shall comply with chapter 78, article IX. 
(Code 1995, § 155.24) 
Sec. 86-101. - Service buildings and other community service facilities. 
    The requirements of sections 86-102-86-106 shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities within a mobile home park or subdivision, such as: 
(1)  Management offices, repair shops and storage areas; 
(2)  Sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Laundry facilities; and 
(4)  Indoor recreation areas. 
(Code 1995, § 155.25) 
Sec. 86-102. - Structural requirements for buildings. 
(a)  Protection from damages. All portions of a structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials, and constructed and protected so as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather, and to comply with all applicable codes of the city. 
(b)  Sanitary or laundry facilities. All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall have: 
(1)  Sound-resistant walls, extending to the ceiling, between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture resistant materials; 
(2)  At least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall not be less than ten percent of the floor area served by such windows; and 
(3)  At least one window which can be opened easily, or a mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room. 
(c)  Toilets. Toilets shall be located in separate compartments and be equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. 
(d)  Illumination levels. Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  General seeing tasks, five footcandles; 
(2)  Laundry room work area, 40 footcandles; and 
(3)  Toilet room, in front of mirrors, 40 footcandles. 
(e)  Hot and cold water. Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(f)  Heating. Between October 1 and May 1, service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating equipment permitted by city regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 155.26) 
Sec. 86-103. - Barbecue pits, fireplaces and stoves. 
    Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and wood-burning stoves shall be located, constructed, maintained and used so as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which they are used and on neighboring property, and shall conform to all state certification regulations. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(Code 1995, § 155.27) 
Sec. 86-104. - Refuse and garbage handling. 
(a)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a mobile home park or subdivision shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding area, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution, and shall conform to all city ordinances and regulations pertaining to such storage, collection and disposal. 
(b)  Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the mobile home park at least twice each week. 
(c)  The mobile home park licensee or agent shall ensure that containers at mobile home spaces are emptied regularly and maintained in a usable, sanitary condition. 
(Code 1995, § 155.28) 
Sec. 86-105. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements of the city health director. 
(b)  Mobile home parks and subdivisions shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests. Mobile home parks and subdivisions shall be maintained so as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds which are detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Code 1995, § 155.29) 
Sec. 86-106. - Fuel supply and storage. 
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (4-12-1977), the following shall apply: 
(1)  Natural gas systems. 
a.  Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground within a mobile home park and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
b.  Each mobile home space provided with piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when not in use in order to prevent accidental discharge of gas, and shall be in accordance with chapter 78, article VIII. 
(2)  Liquefied petroleum gas systems. Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an available natural gas system is more than 1,000 feet from the mobile home park or subdivision. The liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city governing such systems and regulations of the state railroad commission pertaining to such systems. 
(Code 1995, § 155.30) 
Secs. 86-107-86-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 86-131. - Responsibilities of management, licensees and agents. 
(a)  Mobile home park management shall have all of the responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  The licensee or agent shall operate the mobile home park in compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The licensee or agent shall notify mobile home park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(d)  The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of mobile home park occupancy, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of mobile home park residents. 
(2)  The mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number. 
(3)  The location of each mobile home within the mobile home park by space or lot number and street address. 
(4)  Dates of arrival and departure. 
(e)  A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year and the old register shall be retired, but the old register shall be retained on the premises for at least three years following its retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection, at all reasonable times, by an official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained in the registers. 
(f)  Within ten days after January 1 of each year, the licensee or agent shall furnish to the city a list of all mobile homes resident in the park on January 1. The list shall contain the owners' names and addresses; the makes, lengths, widths, years of manufacture and identification numbers of the mobile homes; and the addresses or location descriptions of the mobile homes within the mobile home park. Such lists shall be prepared using forms provided by the city. 
(g)  Within ten days after July 1 of each year, the licensee or agent shall furnish to the city the same data as required in subsection (f) of this section for all residents who have moved into and out of the park after January 1, including the date on which each mobile home left the mobile home park. 
(Code 1995, § 155.40) 
Sec. 86-132. - Responsibilities of occupants. 
(a)  Mobile home park and subdivision occupants are responsible for all responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  An occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall maintain his mobile home space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home in its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the mobile home park management or appropriate city official. 
(d)  Fire-resistant skirting, with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings, shall be required on all mobile homes and shall be installed within seven days after emplacement of the mobile homes. 
(e)  Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
(1)  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material. 
(2)  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(f)  Each mobile home shall be anchored in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Anchorage. Over-the-roof devices shall be located within two feet of the ends of the mobile home and at intervals not to exceed 15 feet, and shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Not be less than 3/16 -inch diameter steel aircraft cables; 
b.  Be constructed of corrosion-resistant chromium, nickel steel, AISI Types 201, 202, 301, 302, 304 and 316, straps having a cross sectional area of not less than 0.185 square inch; or 
c.  Where over-the-roof devices are used and the horizontal members at the intersection of the walls and the roof are not adequate to transfer forces to the cables or straps, auxiliary horizontal members, adequate in size to resist a bending moment of 7,200-inch-pounds, shall be used. 
(2)  Anchors. 
a.  There shall be an anchor for each tie and each anchor shall be installed so that the rod is in line with the tie. 
b.  Integral eye screw anchors, eight inches in diameter, having a rod of one inch in diameter, shall be used. Plate anchors, not less than six inches by 27 inches, with a rod of five-eighths inch diameter, six feet in length, may be used for ties from the frame. 
c.  Anchors shall be installed to a depth of five feet or a depth approved by the enforcing official. 
(3)  Blocking. Pier foundations shall be installed directly under the main frame or chassis of the mobile home and must conform to the following standards: 
a.  All grass and organic material shall be removed and the pier foundation placed on stable soil. The foundation shall be 16-inch by four-inch solid concrete pad, precast or poured in place, or its equivalent. 
b.  Piers supporting the mobile home shall be placed upon the pier foundation and shall be constructed of regular eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch concrete blocks, open cells or solid (with open cells vertical), or in combination with two-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch or four-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch solid concrete blocks, meeting ASTM-C90-70 grade (n) standard, placed above the foundation blocks. Wood plates of not less than one inch or more than two inches in vertical thickness shall be placed on top of the piers. Piers shall be installed perpendicular to the I-beam of the mobile home. 
c.  All piers over 30 inches in height, when measured from the top of foundation block to the I-beam, shall be double-tiered with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block and cushioned with the wood blocking. In no case may piers exceed 48 inches in height. 
d.  The use of four-legged metal stands as a substitute for the concrete blocks and pads is acceptable as long as the stands comply with the specifications of the state department of labor and standards. 
e.  Any other alternative blocking systems must be approved by the state department of labor and standards and must not be in conflict with any of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Reinforced concrete slabs. 
a.  Reinforced concrete slabs used as a component of the anchorage system shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
b.  The devices shall be capable of transmitting a force of not less than 3,700 pounds. 
c.  The foundation bolt, or combination of foundation bolts, for fastening each device to the concrete shall be capable of withstanding a withdrawal force of 3,700 pounds. 
d.  Where foundation bolts with an eye are used, the bolts shall not be less than five-eighths-inch diameter and shall be capable of withstanding a withdrawal force of 3,700 pounds normal to the surface of the concrete and a shearing force of 3,700 pounds at an angle of 30 degrees to the surface of the concrete. 
(Code 1995, § 155.41) 
Chapter 90 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Brownwood Sign Code". 
(Code 1995, § 154.01) 
Sec. 90-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator, zoning, means a member of the city staff designated to administer this chapter. 
    Advertising sign means an outdoor structure, object, display, lighting device, figure, painting, drawing, message, pictorial, picture, plaque, poster, billboard or other thing which is used to advertise, identify, display or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. 
    A-frame sign means a stationery outdoor sign with two faces attached at one surface on each face to form a triangle with one side parallel to the grade, which sign is often used to advertise fuel prices. 
    Animation means the presentation of pictorials or graphics in a progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes. 
    Average grade means the grade of the finished ground level at the midpoint of each exterior surface of a sign, or a structure if the sign is attached to the structure. 
    Awning sign, canopy sign and marquee sign mean a projecting sign attached to, hung from or painted on a canopy or covered structure, which extends beyond the building line or property line. 
    Back-to-back sign means a structure with two parallel signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions, located not more than ten feet apart. A back-to-back sign shall constitute one off-premises sign. 
    Billboard means any freestanding sign or a sign that is attached to or part of a building, and is an off-premises sign. 
    Building official means the designated authority for enforcement of this chapter. 
    Candelas means a unit of luminous intensity, defined as the amount of luminous flux (total luminous power emitted from a source and expressed as lumens) per unit solid angle in a given direction. 
    Community service sign means any sign which solicits support for, or advertises, a nonprofit community use or social institution. Such signs may include, but shall not be limited to, seasonal holidays, such as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs or religious activities. 
    Crown of street means the highest point of grade elevation of a cross section of a street, usually at a point approximately on the centerline of a street. 
    Cultural facilities means establishments, such as museums, art galleries, public libraries, botanical and zoological gardens, and theaters of the performing arts, which, although they may charge an admission fee, are essentially nonprofit and principally funded through public expenditures, grants and donations. 
    Dissolve/fade means a mode of message transition on an electronic billboard or electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually reduces intensity or appears to dissipate to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually appears or increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
    Electronic billboard means an off-premises sign which permits light to be turned on or off periodically or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off periodically, including any illuminated sign in which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign that varies in intensity or color. An electronic billboard does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MLJTCD), as amended and approved by the Federal Highway Administration as the national standard. 
    Electronic message sign means an on-premises sign which permits light to be turned on or off periodically or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off periodically, including any illuminated sign in which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign that varies in intensity or color. 
    Electronic message sign/large means an on-premises electronic message sign that exceeds 30 square feet in size. 
    Electronic message sign/small means an on-premises electronic message sign that does not exceed 30 square feet in size. 
    Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any way bring into being or establish. 
    Flashing means a sign containing an intermittent or blinking light source, or which gives the illusion of intermittent or blinking light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. 
    Floodway means the channel of a stream and adjacent land areas which are required to carry and discharge the floodwaters and flood flows of any river or stream associated with the regulatory flood. (Refer to floodway boundary and floodway maps which identify special flood hazard areas resulting from a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Brownwood".) 
    Frame means a complete, static display screen on the entire face of an electronic billboard or electronic message sign. 
    Frame effect means a visual effect applied to a single frame to transition from one message to the next. 
    Freestanding sign means any sign which is not attached to, or on the walls, face or exterior of, a building, except as provided in the definition of a "Standard roof sign". 
    Glare means an effect created when an illumination source shines with sufficient brightness to cause discomfort, distract attention, or lead to the reduction or loss of visibility or visual function of the public. 
    Hanging sign means a sign which is suspended over a sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way. An overhanging sign may or may not be a projecting sign. 
    Height means the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and that point on the crown of the street which is used to establish the setback of the sign, as setback is hereinafter defined. For signs located 200 feet or further from a street, height shall be considered to be the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the highest adjacent grade. The term "highest adjacent grade", for the purpose of this definition, means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the structural support of the sign. 
    Historic building or structure means any building or structure which is officially designated as historically or architecturally significant by a unit of the local, state or federal government. 
    Home occupation sign means any nonilluminated nameplate sign which does not exceed one square foot in area. 
    Lumens means the luminous flux emitted per unit solid angle from a uniform point source whose luminous intensity is one candela. 
    Major thoroughfare means each street designated as a thoroughfare on the thoroughfare plan, including all existing and proposed streets shown on the major street plan adopted by the city council. 
    Moving video shall mean the use of live action footage shot with a video camera or similar device which is sized to fit and be displayed by an electronic message sign. Moving video shall not include animation as defined in this article. 
    Nits means a photometric unit defined as cd/m 2 (candelas per square meter). 
    Official sign means any sign erected by or at the direction of any governmental body. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign displaying advertising or information copy that refers to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means a sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person or activity, or displaying a noncommercial message on the premises of a business, person or activity. 
    Outdoor advertising sign. See the definition of "Advertising sign". 
    Political sign means a temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election. 
    Portable sign means any sign which is designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another, including signs mounted upon, or designed to be mounted upon, a trailer, wheeled carrier or other nonmotorized mobile structure. 
    Portable sign, small, means any portable sign, as defined herein, that does not exceed 64 square feet in area and/or ten feet in height. 
    Premises means any lot or unplatted tract, or any combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts, held under single ownership. 
    Projecting sign means a sign affixed to any building, wall, roof, marquee or other structural element which extends or projects more than 12 inches from the wall, roof, marquee or other structural element. 
    Public information sign means any sign which is intended to identify community, civic or social events and is not a commercial, political, official or real estate sign. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign displayed during, and in connection with, construction operations, pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building upon which the sign is placed, and not exceeding 64 square feet, and pertaining to the sale of an addition or a subdivision, the area of which subdivision exceeds one acre of land for a period not to exceed two years. 
    Residential nameplate sign means a sign permitted for the sole purpose of identifying the inhabitant residing in the house, the house name or the address of the house. The sign may contain no advertising of any kind and may not exceed two square feet in area. 
    Roof sign means a sign attached to a roof, and extending more than three feet above the ridge line. 
    Scroll/travel means a mode of message transition on an electronic sign where the message appears to move vertically or horizontally across the display surface. 
    Setback means a line parallel to and the required distance from the lot frontage adjacent to any street abutting the lot or tract in question, or a line parallel to and the required distance from any lot abutting the side of the lot or tract in question. For purposes of determining the requirements for this definition, no portion of any sign or its support shall project or extend beyond the required setback line. 
    Sign means any structure or combination of structure and/or message in the form of a display, device, figure, painting, drawing, placard, poster, billboard, advertising structure, advertisement, logo, symbol or other form designed to advertise or to inform the public. The term "sign" does not include an official traffic control sign, an official governmental marker, a national, state, city, or educational institution flag, or governmental signs and announcements. 
    Sloping roof sign means a sign affixed to the wall, roof, marquee or other structural element of any building, which does not project more than 12 inches from the wall, roof, marquee or other structural element or extend more than three feet above the wall to which the sign is attached. 
    Spectacular sign means any sign that physically rotates, oscillates, contains any moving parts, or contains flashing lights, including lights flashing in sequence. 
    Temporary sign means a sign not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground. 
    Traffic control sign means a permitted sign for the purpose of identifying parking areas and directing the flow of traffic on private property. 
    Transition means a visual effect used on an electronic billboard or electronic message sign to change from one message to another. 
    Wall sign. See the definition of "Sloping roof sign". 
(Code 1995, § 154.04; Ord. No. 02-31, § 3, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 04-10, § I, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 08-36, § I, 10-14-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-3. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  In order to promote a positive city image reflecting harmony and order, the city council finds that it is appropriate to regulate signs and provide uniform sign standards. 
(b)  New businesses and industries are increasingly basing their decisions to locate in a particular area on the quality of life in that area, and the regulation of visual clutter can help to preserve such quality and promote the steady growth that is vital to continued economic health and prosperity of the city. 
(c)  The city council further recognizes that the proliferation of signs without reasonable regulation and control can create a hazardous driving condition by distracting the motoring public. 
(d)  In enacting the regulations set forth in this chapter, special notice has been taken of the often competing viewpoints of citizens and the sign industry, particularly the part of the industry engaged in billboard operations. This chapter has been designed to protect and accommodate both concerns. 
(e)  Therefore, the general objectives of this chapter are to promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public, while recognizing that the reasonable and orderly display of signs is a necessary public service and a necessity for the conduct of commerce and industry in the continuing quest to inform, direct and attract shoppers and prospective clients. 
(Code 1995, § 154.02) 
Sec. 90-4. - Compliance required. 
    All signs shall be erected, displayed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable state laws and city ordinances. If there is a conflict between the regulations of this chapter and a state law or city ordinance, the most restrictive standard applies and controls. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 1(154.021), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-5. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the entire area within the corporate limits of the city and those areas within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. For those areas within the ETJ, the allowable signage shall be determined by the regulations from the most restrictive zoning district in which the use would be allowed as if the signage was within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 154.03; Ord. No. 02-31, § 2, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-6. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign which existed and/or was erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which does not conform to the intent and specifications of this chapter, is considered to be a nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign may remain in place as long as it is kept in good repair and maintained in a safe condition. Loss of legal nonconforming status will result if the nonconforming sign is part of an establishment that discontinues its operation for a continuous period of one year. 
(Code 1995, § 154.35) 
Secs. 90-7-90-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 90-41. - Authority for enforcement and administration. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city building official/electrical inspector and administered by the zoning administrator. The building official/electrical inspector shall have the authority to order the painting, repair or removal of a sign. 
(Code 1995, § 154.45) 
Sec. 90-42. - Removal of signs. 
(a)  The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If any sign is installed, erected or constructed in violation of the terms of this chapter, the building official shall notify, by registered mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign so as to comply with this chapter and to secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If such order is not complied with within ten days, the building official shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(b)  All abandoned signs and their supports shall be removed within 90 days from the date of abandonment. 
(c)  All damaged signs shall be removed within 90 days from the date of such damage, except in times of natural disaster. The building official shall have the authority to grant a one-time extension, not to exceed 90 days, for abandoned, nondamaged signs, provided that the extension is requested in writing. 
(Code 1995, § 154.36(B)) 
Sec. 90-43. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  An applicant for a sign permit may include with the sign permit application an application for a variance from the requirements of this chapter on forms approved by the board of adjustment for use. The application shall state the reasons why the applicant requests a variance. 
(b)  The procedures for consideration of the variance are set forth in section 98-64. 
(c)  The board, subject to appropriate conditions, may authorize only the following variances from the requirements of this section if it finds that the public convenience and welfare will substantially be served, that the appropriate use of the neighboring area will not be substantially affected and that the variance is the minimum necessary to prevent an unnecessary hardship not created by the applicant: 
(1)  A variance from the front or side yard setbacks. 
(2)  A variance from the height restrictions. 
The board may not grant a variance from the size or spacing requirements for signs. 
(d)  The board, as authorized by section 98-65, may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the building official in the administration of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 154.46; Ord. No. 02-31, § 11, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 12-18, § I, 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 90-44. - Board on sign control. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.C.T.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq., there is hereby created a city board on sign control to consist of five members. 
(b)  The city board on sign control shall have all powers and perform all duties vested in the board by or under V.C.T.A., Local Government Code § 216.004 et seq. 
(c)  The code administrator of the city or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the board without the power to vote and in such capacity shall act as secretary to the board and shall set up and maintain the minutes and record of all board activities, actions, notices, attendance, orders and proceedings. 
(d)  The members of the board on sign control shall be appointed by the mayor as the presiding officer of the city council. 
(e)  Members of the board shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
(f)  The membership of the board shall be composed of the following persons: 
(1)  Two persons who must be real estate appraisers, each of whom must be a member in good standing of a nationally recognized professional appraiser society or trade organization that has an established code of ethics, educational program, and professional certification program; 
(2)  One person who must be engaged in the sign business in the city; 
(3)  One person who must be an employee of the state department of transportation and must be familiar with real estate valuations in eminent domain proceedings; and 
(4)  One person who must be an architect or a landscape architect licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 10(154.47), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-45. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties found in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-36, § II, 10-14-2008) 
Secs. 90-46-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 90-71. - License required. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the commercial sign business, including, without limitation, constructing, erecting, installing, or relocating commercial signs within the corporate limits of the city shall obtain a commercial sign contractor's license and such license shall require annual renewal. 
(Code 1995, § 154.15; Ord. No. 02-31, § 4, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-72. - Bond required. 
    Before any person shall be issued a commercial sign contractor's license to engage in the sign business in the city and a permit for the installation, erection, and maintenance of signs, such person shall first file with the city a performance bond guaranteeing performance and compliance with all applicable laws of the city, including, without limitation, this chapter. The performance bond shall be issued by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state in the sum of $3,000.00. The performance bond shall insure that the licensee and permittee shall install, erect, repair, maintain, remove and/or demolish signs in accordance with the prevailing standards of the trade and with this chapter. The performance bond shall remain in place for as long as the licensee and permittee has signs permitted in the city and/or the city's ETJ. Notwithstanding the foregoing, wall signs shall be exempted from bonding requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 154.16; Ord. No. 02-31, § 5, 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-73. - Permits required. 
(a)  Requirement. Except as set forth in subsection 90-101(2), a permit shall be obtained from the city for a proposed sign. 
(b)  Applications for permits. An application for a permit shall contain information concerning the location and size of the sign, date to be erected, value, name, address and telephone number of the sign owner, name, address and telephone number of the sign lessee, if any, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property where the sign is to be located. An application for a permit shall also include a drawing to scale of the proposed sign, including a list indicating the size of all existing signs maintained on the premises and visible from the right-of-way, a drawing of the lot plan or building facade indicating the proposed location of the sign, and specifications for its construction, lighting, motion and wiring, if any. If the ownership or leasehold interest of any sign for which a permit has been issued changes, the permit holder shall provide this information to the city within 30 days. 
(c)  Structural. For the purposes of the structural design of signs, the building code of the city adopted in section 78-31 shall be utilized. All signs 35 feet and higher shall have a professional engineer's seal. 
(d)  Electrical. All illuminated signs or signs utilizing any electrical devices shall require an electrical permit and shall be wired in accordance with the electrical code of the city. 
(e)  Permit to enlarge, alter, repair, etc. No sign shall be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, replaced or relocated, nor shall sign faces be renewed or neon tubing be rearranged when the values of such work exceeds 50 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, except upon the issuance of a permit, and all work done under such permit shall be in conformity with the requirements of all applicable laws of the city, including all sign location requirements of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a sign owner who desires to repair or rebuild a sign where the value of such work exceeds 50 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location may seek a variance to the location requirements of applicable city laws from the board of adjustment, pursuant to sections 90-43 and 98-64, if the owner can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the following has occurred: 
(1)  A sign was located in a conforming location when it was originally permitted and constructed, but such sign would no longer be allowed to be constructed, repaired or rebuilt in such location pursuant to the applicable laws of the city; 
(2)  The sign was damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster, vandalism or the negligence of a third party and due to no fault of the sign owner, its agents, employees, contractors or assigns, and the sign was in good condition and being maintained in accordance with all applicable laws; and 
(3)  The sign owner makes a written request for a variance to the city no later than 30 days following such damage or destruction of the sign. 
(f)  Construction time limitations. Construction activities pertaining to permanent off-premises signs must commence within 30 days of the date the sign permit is issued by the city. Construction will be completed within 45 days of such date. Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the revocation of the sign permit. In addition, the same applicant may not reapply for another sign permit for the location concerned for a period of six months. 
(g)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid a sign permit and inspection fee. A fee shall be paid on all signs requiring a permit in accordance with the schedule of permit fees, pursuant to the International Building Code, as amended, and kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator, or as established by the city council by ordinance and placed on file in the office of the city secretary. No permit fee shall be required for a sign 15 square feet or less over a show window or door of a store or business establishment which contains only the name of the proprietor and nature of the business. No permit shall be required for ground signs; provided that such signs are not over four square feet in area; and provided further that no business or location shall have more than 12 square feet of ground signs cumulative on any one location without a permit. 
(Code 1995, § 154.17; Ord. No. 02-31, § 6, 7-9-2002) 
Secs. 90-74-90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-101. - Sign requiring permits; exceptions. 
    This section sets forth the categories of permanent and temporary signs governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Signs requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter are as follows: 
a.  Back-to-back signs. 
b.  Billboard signs. 
c.  Canopy signs. 
d.  Hanging signs. 
e.  Marquee signs. 
f.  Portable signs. 
g.  Projecting signs. 
h.  Roof signs. 
i.  Sloping roof signs. 
j.  Wall signs. 
k.  Electronic billboards. 
1.  Electronic message signs. 
(2)  Signs not requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter are as follows: 
a.  A-frame signs. 
b.  Community service signs. 
c.  Home occupation signs. 
d.  Official signs. 
e.  Political signs, temporary. 
f.  Public information signs, temporary. 
g.  Real estate signs, temporary. 
h.  Residential nameplate signs. 
i.  Traffic control signs on private property. 
j.  Portable signs, small. 
(Code 1995, § 154.30; Ord. No. 04-10, § II, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 08-36, § III, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 90-102. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Searchlights, except they may be permitted for a period not to exceed ten days for grand openings or other special occasions. 
(2)  Any sign which resembles official traffic signs or signals, or which bear the term "stop", "go slow", "caution", "danger", "warning" or similar words, or any sign which, by reason of its size, color, location, movement or manner of illumination, may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or device. 
(3)  Lighted signs within 100 feet of a residential district, unless lighting is shielded from view in the direction of the residential district. 
(4)  Signs erected closer than six feet to any telephone cable, power line or streetlight standard. 
(5)  Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature. 
(6)  Spectacular signs and signs which emit audible sound, odor or visible matter. 
(Code 1995, § 154.33; Ord. No. 08-36, § III, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 90-103. - Signs not requiring a license, bond or permit. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following signs, except that no license, bond or permit will be required for such signs: 
(1)  Prior existing signs. A legal sign in existence before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Holiday displays. Temporary displays, commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday or celebration. 
(3)  Home occupation signs. One nonilluminated nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, which is used to identify legal home occupations. 
(4)  Official signs. Federal, state or local government traffic, directional and informational signs and notices issued by any court, person or officer in the performance of a public duty. 
(5)  Political signs. See section 90-168. 
(6)  Public utility signs. Signs giving information regarding the location of underground electric transmission lines, telegraph or telephone properties and facilities, pipelines, public sewers or water lines. 
(7)  Real estate signs. Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease or development of the property on which the signs are located. Such signs shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
(8)  Residential nameplate signs. Signs indicating the name and/or address of the occupants of the residence, not to exceed two square feet in area. 
(9)  Safety, warning and directional signs. Signs warning of construction, excavation or similar hazards, and parking lot and other private traffic directional signs, each not to exceed the uniform sizes recommended in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. Such signs are limited to directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the premises on which they are located and are not intended to advertise a product or service. 
(10)  Portable signs (small). A portable sign that does not exceed 64 square feet in area and/or ten feet in height. 
(Code 1995, § 154.34; Ord. No. 04-10, § III, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 90-104. - Maintenance. 
    All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable or structurally sound condition, at all times, including replacement of defective parts. All pennants, banners, streamers, spinning or similar moving devices shall be kept in a presentable condition, at all times. The owner of any property on which a sign is located and the persons responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the condition of the sign and the area in the immediate vicinity of the sign, and shall be required to keep the area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive substances, rubbish and flammable waste materials. 
(Code 1995, § 154.36(A)) 
Secs. 90-105-90-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-131. - Contents. 
    This division contains the general regulations pertaining to the location, size, number, height, setback and spacing of signs. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31) 
Sec. 90-132. - Identification of outdoor advertising display signs. 
    Every outdoor advertising display sign erected, constructed or maintained, for which a permit is required, shall be plainly marked with the name of the person erecting and maintaining such sign. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(A)) 
Sec. 90-133. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, construct, or use any signs in any residential district, including, without limitation, R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3 or MH residential districts, except residential name plate signs, home occupation signs, lease or sale signs, temporary signs displayed during construction and in connection with construction operations, temporary signs pertaining to the sale of an addition or subdivision, freestanding institutional signs, as described herein and political signs. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of egress. 
(c)  No sign shall be attached to a fire escape, nor be placed in a manner so as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation. 
(d)  No sign shall be erected on or over public property in a manner which interferes with any fire hydrant, traffic light or streetlight, or which hampers the functions of the fire department. 
(e)  No person shall place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric light of any kind or color within 1,000 feet of any state maintained street or highway intersection, unless a permit is granted by the state highway commission for such sign. All lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent intensive light or glare on adjacent property and roadways. 
(f)  V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 752.004 and 752.006 make it unlawful to operate or erect any object within six feet of high voltage overhead electric lines and to operate machinery or equipment within ten feet of high voltage electric lines. All signs which are erected, constructed, installed or relocated shall comply with such statute and the minimum clearance restrictions set out in the National Electrical Safety Code and OSHA standard 29 CFR 1910.1807. 
(g)  No sign will be permitted in areas identified as floodways or the 100-year floodplain without compliance with the requirements for a special development permit. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(B); Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(B), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-134. - Fastening and anchoring. 
    All signs shall be securely fastened or anchored to a building wall, structural framing or other foundation with a sufficient number of bolts or anchors to resist stress resulting from the dead weight of the sign and wind loads. (See the building code adopted in section 78-31 for allowable working stresses.) Trees, rocks, bridges, fences, windmills, towers, utility poles and dilapidated buildings shall not be used for sign supports. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(C)) 
Sec. 90-135. - Construction materials. 
    All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and securely attached to framework and supports made of wood, metal or other material of an equivalent strength. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(D)) 
Sec. 90-136. - Electrically illuminated signs. 
(a)  Electrically illuminated signs (including electronic billboards and electronic message signs), or signs which are equipped in any way with electrical devices or appliances, shall conform to the provisions of chapter 78, article X. 
(b)  Light from any exterior source intended to illuminate a sign: 
(1)  Shall be shaded, shielded or directed in such a way so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect the vision of pedestrians or vehicle operators on public or private streets, driveways or parking areas, or operators of aircraft in the approach path to any airport runway; 
(2)  Shall not be flashing. 
(c)  Illumination from any sign: 
(1)  Shall not interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(2)  Shall not be flashing. 
(3)  Shall not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during the daylight hours or 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign's face. 
(d)  Electronic message signs and electronic billboards must have an electronic control to produce the required illumination change required in subsection (c). 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(E); Ord. No. 08-36, § IV, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 90-137. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The city building official/electrical inspector shall have the right to visit any site where a sign is being erected, or enter any building where a sign is being constructed for installation within the city, for the purpose of making any necessary inspection. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(F)) 
Sec. 90-138. - Public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No sign may be placed on or over a public right-of-way, whether used or unused, across the public right-of-way extended across a railroad right-of-way, on utility poles or in such a manner as to create a hazard to traffic, except as set forth below in the commercial areas located in the development area created by the city in Ordinance No. 99-37. Signs projecting from a building or extending over a public right-of-way in the development area shall maintain a clear height of nine feet above the sidewalk grade, and all such signs shall not extend into the public right-of-way for a distance of more than two feet of the curbline. Bench signs located on public property are exempt from this provision if approval has been granted pursuant to a contract with the city for the location of such bench signs. 
(b)  In no instance shall a sign extend into the right-of-way of any state maintained street or highway. 
(c)  No pole, post or standard used to support any sign or floodlight shall be set in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public property. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(G); Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(G), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-139. - Area beneath freestanding signs. 
    A 100 square foot area beneath freestanding signs shall be mowed and maintained in a neat and clean condition. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(H)) 
Sec. 90-140. - Area calculation. 
    In calculating the area of a sign, the perimeter of the area shall be a line including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations, or a line including the outer extremities or the framework of the background upon which the sign is placed, whichever line includes the larger area. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(I)) 
Sec. 90-141. - Freestanding billboard signs prohibited in certain areas. 
    Freestanding billboard signs are prohibited in the following areas: 
(1)  The development area created by the city in Ordinance No. 99-37; 
(2)  The entire length of Austin Avenue; and 
(3)  The entire length of Coggin Avenue. 
(Code 1995, § 154.31(J); Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(J), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-142. - Height of signs. 
(a)  Except as set forth in this section, no sign shall exceed a height of 35 feet unless located along an interstate highway or a state highway, whereupon the maximum height shall not exceed 42 feet. 
(b)  Signs located in an area 660 feet from state highways and bound by West Austin Avenue, the slough of the Pecan Bayou, Commerce Street and Belle Plain Avenue shall not exceed 60 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(K)), 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 04-27, § I, 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 90-143. - Off-premises signs in agricultural districts. 
    In A-1 districts, off-premises signs may be permitted upon issuance of a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment after a public hearing. In determining the suitability of a site for placement of an off-site advertising sign, the board shall consider the proximity of the proposed location to existing or proposed residential uses as may be indicated on the zoning map of the city or any land use plans that have been approved by either the planning and zoning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(L)), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-144. - Freestanding institutional signs in residential districts. 
    Freestanding institutional signs (identifying churches and other public service nonprofit institutions) located within residential districts are permitted to be up to 80 square feet in area and up to 25 feet in height. Such institutions are permitted only one freestanding sign per street front. In addition, such institutions shall be permitted one wall sign (for identification purposes) per street frontage, so long as such sign exceeds no more than 100 square feet in area. A permit from the city shall be required for installation of all signs identifying churches and other institutions within residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(M)), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-145. - Signs on or over buildings restricted. 
    No sign shall be located on or project over a building, except for roof signs, as provided in section 90-173. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(N)), 7-9-2002) 
Sec. 90-146. - Freestanding on-premises signs. 
    Freestanding on-premises signs shall maintain a ten-foot front setback from the property line and a ten-foot side setback from any side abutting an A-1, R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3 or MH district. In all other cases, there shall be no side setback requirement for freestanding on-premises signs. Freestanding on-premises signs shall maintain a clearance from grade of nine feet, except if the sign is set back a minimum of ten feet from all front and side property lines and is not within the prohibited corner clearance triangle as set forth in article IV of chapter 58. A sign so situated does not need a minimum grade clearance. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(O)), 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 03-44, § I, 11-11-2003) 
Sec. 90-147. - Number of signs. 
    There shall be a maximum of two freestanding signs per 100 feet of frontage. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, § 7(154.31(P)), 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 03-44, § II, 11-11-2003) 
Secs. 90-148-90-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-161. - Contents. 
    This division contains the specific regulations pertaining to location, size, number, height, setback and spacing of signs. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32) 
Sec. 90-162. - A-frame signs. 
(a)  Location. A-frame signs shall be allowed in commercial and industrial districts. 
(b)  Size. A-frame signs shall be eight square feet per sign. 
(c)  Number. One A-frame sign shall be permitted per location, except two such signs shall be permitted per each corner location. 
(d)  Setback. A-frame signs shall be located behind the property line, a minimum of six feet behind the curb. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(A)) 
Sec. 90-163. - Back-to-back signs. 
    Back-to-back signs shall have the same regulations as set forth in section 90-164 for billboard signs. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(B)) 
Sec. 90-164. - Billboard signs. 
(a)  Location. Billboard signs shall be allowed in all commercial and industrial districts, unless specifically prohibited elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  Size. The maximum size of billboards shall not exceed 300 square feet unless the billboard is located along an interstate highway or state highway, whereupon the maximum size shall not exceed 400 square feet. 
(c)  Height. Billboard signs shall maintain a clearance from grade of nine feet, except for ground signs with the base of the sign within three feet of average grade. The maximum height of billboards shall not exceed 35 feet unless the billboard is located along an interstate highway or state highway, whereupon the maximum height shall not exceed 42 feet. 
(d)  Setback. 
(1)  Billboards shall have a front setback of not less than the greater of 35 feet from the property line or the greatest setback of all the front buildings on the lot on which the billboard is located, or if none, then that of the lots contiguous to the lot upon which the billboard is located. Billboards shall have a side setback of at least ten feet. 
(2)  No part of a billboard or its support structure may overhang the setback line. 
(3)  All billboards shall maintain a minimum setback distance of 150 feet from any residential district or agriculture district. 
(4)  Additionally, all billboards shall be setback from the following facilities as specified: 
a.  City parks: 1,000 feet from the park boundary; 
b.  Cultural facilities: 1,000 feet from the facility boundary; 
c.  Historic building or structure: 1,000 feet from the building or structure; 
d.  Universities: 1,000 feet from the campus area. 
(e)  Spacing. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not be erected along designated major thoroughfares closer than 1,000 feet apart along the same side of the street or road. 
(2)  A billboard will be considered to be "along" a street or road if the sign face is oriented so that the message can be read by drivers using the street or road, regardless of how far from the public right-of-way the sign is physically located. 
(f)  Electronic billboards. 
(1)  Electronic billboards shall be allowed subject to all the regulatory provisions contained herein governing signs and billboards in general. Should any provisions be in conflict, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(2)  A sign permit shall be required prior to constructing any new electronic billboard or modifying any legally conforming billboard to an electronic billboard, either of which shall be in compliance with the requirements set forth herein. A nonconforming billboard may not be modified to an electronic billboard. Prior to the issuance of a permit for an electronic message sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified in this division. 
(3)  In no case shall an electronic billboard be allowed in an area in which billboards are prohibited by current sign regulations. 
(4)  Electronic billboards shall not be erected within 1,000 feet of an existing billboard on the same side of the street or road; or within 1,500 feet of any other electronic billboard facing the same direction of travel. 
(5)  An electronic billboard shall be limited to a single-face viewed from any one direction. The use of a double-faced electronic billboard (either side-by-side or stacked) is prohibited. 
(6)  No external lighting shall be used to illuminate an electronic billboard. 
(7)  An electronic billboard: 
a.  Shall not contain, display, or be illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights; 
b.  Shall not contain or display animated, moving video or scrolling advertising; 
c.  Shall not consist of a static image projected upon a stationary object; 
d.  Shall not be a portable sign. 
(8)  An electronic billboard shall display static messages only. 
a.  The dwell or hold time of each message, defined as the interval between each message change, shall be at least eight seconds. 
b.  Each message change must be accomplished within two seconds or less and must occur simultaneously on the entire sign face. 
(9)  An electronic billboard shall not be configured to resemble or simulate a warning or danger signal or any official lights or signage used to control traffic. 
(10)  An electronic billboard may not display light of such intensity to cause glare, impair vision or otherwise result in a nuisance to the public. 
a.  The maximum luminous intensity of a billboard shall not exceed 5,000 nits during daylight hours or 500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the billboard's face. 
b.  The billboard must be equipped with both a dimmer control or other such electronic control and a photocell or other such automatic control, which will produce the required illumination change according to natural ambient conditions as provided in subsection (10)a., above. 
(11)  The city may order a sign's brightness reduced and/or its minimum display time increased if the city's division director of public works, or his designee, finds that it interferes with or poses a traffic safety hazard to the operation of vehicles. 
(12)  An electronic billboard shall contain a default mechanism that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
(13)  The City of Brownwood, through appropriate personnel, may protect public health, safety and welfare by requiring emergency information to be displayed on electronic billboards. 
a.  Upon notification by the city, the billboard operators shall display emergency information such as "Amber Alert Notices" or other public safety alerts. 
b.  Emergency information messages are to remain in rotation according to the protocols of the designated issuing agency. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(C); Ord. No. 02-31, § 8, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 03-44, § III, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 08-36, § V, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 90-165. - Canopy signs. 
    Signs on a freestanding canopy or detached accessory island canopy may be placed at any location on the canopy, provided that such signs shall not project beyond the width or length of the canopy. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(D)) 
Sec. 90-166. - Hanging signs. 
    All permanent signs shall be erected so as not to overhang any street or alley. 
(1)  Location. Signs may be hung perpendicular to, suspended from or attached to any building, wall or canopy in the area defined under section 90-140. Signs may also be suspended under a marquee. 
(2)  Height. Signs shall maintain a clear height of nine feet above the sidewalk grade and shall not extend more than two feet of the curbline. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(E)) 
Sec. 90-167. - Marquee signs. 
    Marquee signs not more than four feet tall, excluding any top ornament supported directly by the marquee or awning, may extend around three sides of a marquee or awning. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(F)) 
Sec. 90-168. - Political signs. 
    Political signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Size . Political signs in residential districts shall not exceed 36 square feet in area and shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Location . Political signs shall not be placed on a right-of-way, traffic sign or signal, utility pole, or city-owned public property in any district. Such signs may be placed on private real property only with the permission of the property owner. Political signs shall not be installed on private real property in any manner that create a potential safety hazard by restricting the line of sight for approaching traffic. 
(3)  Removal . Political signs shall be removed from all zoning districts within seven days following the election to which the sign pertains. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(G); Ord. No. 08-15, § I, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 18-04 , § I, 2-27-2018) 
Sec. 90-169. - Portable signs. 
    Portable (wheeled) signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial districts, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Portable signs shall be secured to the ground at a minimum of four separate points. 
(2)  Illuminated portable signs may be white or yellow, with a maximum illumination of 60 watts, and shall meet all requirements of chapter 78, article IX. 
(3)  Portable signs shall be set back ten feet from the curb or zero feet from the property line, whichever is greater. Any location not meeting such setback requirement will not be allowed to use a portable sign. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(H)) 
Sec. 90-170. - Projecting signs. 
    Projecting signs shall have the same requirements as set forth in section 9-166 for hanging signs. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(I)) 
Sec. 90-171. - Public information signs. 
(a)  Location. Public information signs shall be located subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Number. The number of public information signs allowed shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(c)  Size. Public information signs shall be a maximum of six square feet. 
(d)  Height. The bottom of a public information sign shall not exceed nine feet above the average grade. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(J)) 
Sec. 90-172. - Residential nameplate signs. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of residential nameplate signs are to indicate the address and/or name of occupants. 
(b)  Size. Residential nameplate signs shall not exceed two square feet per single-family and duplex structure, or one-half foot per each multifamily unit. 
(c)  Height. No part of a residential nameplate sign shall extend above eight feet from the average grade. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(K)) 
Sec. 90-173. - Roof signs. 
    Roof signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Roof signs shall be used for on-premises advertising only. 
(2)  Roof signs shall not exceed 32 feet in total height above the portion of the roof over which such signs are erected. 
(3)  All roof signs shall be constructed entirely of steel, including the upright supports and braces, except that only the ornamental molding and battens behind the steel facing and the decorative lattice work may be of wood construction, as provided in the building code adopted in section 78-31. 
(4)  All roof signs shall be set back a minimum of seven feet from the inside line of the exterior wall of the building, and such distance shall be measured at right angles to the line of the wall. 
(5)  An open space of not less than six feet shall be maintained below the bottom of the roof sign and the roof, except for necessary vertical supports. 
(6)  All metal parts of a roof sign shall be grounded as a protection against lightning. 
(7)  No roof sign shall be allowed to extend over a sidewalk, street or other public property. 
(8)  Sloping roof signs shall not project horizontally or vertically beyond the perimeters of the roof. Not more than 25 percent of any sloping roof area shall be devoted to such sign. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(L)) 
Sec. 90-174. - Traffic control signs. 
    All traffic control signs on private property shall be of a uniform design and shall conform to the overall sign program for the entire site. No traffic control sign shall contain advertising. Such signs may be freestanding or wall mounted, and if lighted, shall be indirect. 
(1)  Height. No part of a traffic control sign on private property shall extend above seven feet from the average grade. 
(2)  Size. Traffic control signs on private property shall be of uniform sizes as recommended in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(M)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
Sec. 90-175. - Wall signs. 
    Wall signs shall: 
(1)  Be attached, on-premises signs; 
(2)  Not project horizontally beyond the perimeters of the wall or extend more than three feet above the wall to which such signs are attached; 
(3)  Not project more than 12 inches from the wall. 
(Code 1995, § 154.32(N)) 
Sec. 90-176. - Electronic message sign. 
(a)  Electronic message signs shall be allowed subject to all the regulatory provisions contained herein governing signs and billboards in general, in addition to the specific provisions contained in this section. An electronic message sign, depending on what type of sign it is, i.e, freestanding, hanging, wall, portable or other type of sign, must meet all requirements applicable for that sign. Should any provisions be in conflict, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(b)  Electronic message signs shall have the following operational limitations: 
(1)  The display of a static message or image and the use of scroll/travel to display a message or image shall be permitted on all electronic message signs. 
(2)  The use of flashing and moving video shall be prohibited on all electronic message signs. 
(3)  The use of animation shall be prohibited on electronic message signs/large. 
(4)  The use of any other type of transition, such as dissolve/fade and frame effects, shall be prohibited on electronic message signs/large except in accordance with the following: 
a.  Each message or image must be displayed for a minimum of three seconds; and 
b.  The change of message or image must be accomplished within two seconds or less and must occur simultaneously on the entire sign face. 
(5)  The use of animation and other types of transition, such as dissolve/fade and frame effects shall be permitted on electronic message signs/small. 
(6)  An electronic message sign must be equipped with both a dimmer control or other such electronic control and a photocell or other such automatic control, which will produce the required illumination change according to natural ambient conditions as provided in subsection 90-136(c)(3). 
(c)  Each electronic message sign structure is limited to not more than two sides with one sign face per side. An electronic message sign shall be limited to a single-face viewed from any one direction. The use of a double-faced electronic message sign (either side-by-side or stacked) is prohibited. 
(d)  Only one electronic message sign structure shall be allowed per property, including properties that have multiple tenants. The maximum size of an electronic message sign face shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(e)  An electronic message sign shall not be located in any residential district, including, without limitation, MH districts. If an electronic message sign is located within 100 feet of a property with residential zoning, the sign must be oriented such that no portion of the electronic sign face is visible from a residentially zoned property or the brightness is reduced to no more than 250 nits from dusk to dawn. 
(f)  The city may order a sign's brightness reduced, its minimum display time increased or its use of animation and other transition effects decreased if the city's division director of public works, or his designee, finds that it interferes with or poses a traffic safety hazard to the operation of vehicles. 
(g)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for an electronic message sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 08-36, § V, 10-14-2008) 
Chapter 94 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Platting, § 9. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
    Building line means a line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street line. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Comprehensive master plan means the comprehensive plan of the city, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan, or parts thereof. 
    Crosswalk means a public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Easement means a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over or under private land. 
    Engineer means the city engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
    Floodprone area means a land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, ocean, bay or lake, which is likely to be flooded. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings. 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed on record. 
    Major thoroughfare plan means the part of the comprehensive master plan showing the location and dimensions of principal and secondary thoroughfares. 
    National Flood Insurance Program means the program established by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, 42 USC 4001-4127, which is administrated by the Federal Insurance Administrator. The provisions of such program have been adopted by the city. The definitions listed in the general provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program shall apply in like manner to this chapter. 
    Neighborhood means a complete distinct residential development designated in the comprehensive plan as a neighborhood unit. 
    Plat means the map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented, which he submits for approval and a copy of which he intends to record in final form. 
    Street means a public right-of-way which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, land, boulevard, road, place, drive, or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Cul-de-sac means a short minor street having only one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(2)  Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
(3)  Major street means a principal traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city, which is intended to connect remote parts of the city, or areas adjacent thereto, and acts as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways, and shall include each street designated as a thoroughfare on the thoroughfare plan, including all existing and proposed major streets shown on the major street plan adopted by the commission. 
(4)  Minor street and local street mean a street which is primarily intended to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts. 
(5)  Roadway and paving width mean the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic, and when curbs are laid, the portion between the face of the curbs. 
(6)  Secondary street and collector street mean a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system or arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and principal streets for circulation to schools, parks and other community facilities within a neighborhood. 
    Street width means the shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
    Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership, or any agent thereof, dividing, or proposing to divide, land so as to constitute a "subdivision," as such term is defined in this section. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, or land sought to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land, whether described as lots and blocks or by metes and bounds, into two or more lots or sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. Such term also includes resubdivision of land or lots. 
(Code 1995, § 156.06) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-2. - Interpretation; purpose. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be deemed to be minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards or requirements of any other applicable provision of ordinances of the city are higher or more restrictive, the latter shall control. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Achieve orderly urban development through land subdivision; 
(2)  Promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment in accordance with the comprehensive master plan of the city; 
(3)  Provide for adequate municipal services and safe streets; 
(4)  Allow freedom of creative expression on the part of developers; and 
(5)  Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1995, § 156.02) 
Sec. 94-3. - Adoption of legislative grant of power. 
    V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. is adopted, and the provisions of this chapter are adopted in the exercise of the power granted to municipalities by such statute, as provided in section 9 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1995, § 156.03) 
Sec. 94-4. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall create a subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, or within one mile thereof, without complying with the provisions of this chapter. All plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 156.04) 
Sec. 94-5. - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been duly recorded in the office of the county clerk, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless such lot is to be divided or replatted. 
(Code 1995, § 156.05) 
Secs. 94-6-94-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 94-41. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permits shall not be issued for the building or repair of any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved by the planning and zoning commission and duly recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  The city shall withhold all public improvements and services of any nature, including the maintenance of streets, sewerage facilities and water, gas and electric service, from all subdivisions which have not been approved in the manner prescribed in this chapter, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the city council. 
(c)  Any subdivision of land in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and appropriate officers of the city are hereby authorized to institute any action which may be necessary to restrain or abate such violation. 
(d)  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the planning and zoning commission and endorsed on the plat, in writing, unless such change, modification or revision is first submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1995, § 156.08) 
Sec. 94-42. - Serving and connecting utilities. 
    Unless and until a plat of a subdivision has been approved, and the subdivider has constructed the streets, curbs, paving, utilities and drainage facilities in the subdivision in the manner prescribed by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any official of the city to serve or connect any public utilities to any land, or part thereof, covered by such plat, or the owners or purchasers of such land, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 156.09) 
Sec. 94-43. - Dedication and maintenance of streets and alleys. 
    Disapproval of a plat shall be deemed a refusal to accept the offered dedications shown on such plat. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedication. It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to enter upon the streets and alleys in a subdivision for maintenance purposes, and the city will not accept or maintain such streets and alleys unless and until such streets and alleys have been constructed according to the requirements of this chapter, and the required utilities and drainage facilities have been installed, and such improvements have been accepted by the city as evidenced by the written certificate of the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 156.10) 
Sec. 94-44. - Large scale or neighborhood development. 
    The standards and requirements of the regulations set forth in this chapter may be modified by the planning and zoning commission, in the case of a plan and program for a new complete community or neighborhood unit or a mass housing project, which contains adequate provisions for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and equal to or better than the detailed requirements of this chapter, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to the plan. 
(Code 1995, § 156.11) 
Sec. 94-45. - Variances. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may authorize a variance from this chapter, without direct notice of a public hearing, when, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance with this chapter. In granting a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making the findings required in subsection (b) of this section, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted unless the planning and zoning commission finds that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the presentation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area. 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Such findings of the planning and zoning commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the planning and zoning commission's meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute an undue hardship. 
(Code 1995, § 156.07) 
Sec. 94-46. - Appeals. 
    Any subdivision aggrieved by a finding or action of the planning and zoning commission which is lawfully subject to review by the city council shall appeal to the city council within 90 days from the date of such finding or action, and not thereafter. Nothing in this section shall prevent a right of review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1995, § 156.12) 
Sec. 94-47. - Cost of public works improvements. 
(a)  The developer shall furnish all public works improvements required for normal neighborhood development within his subdivision, including minor and secondary streets and alleys and all utilities, sanitary sewer and drainage facilities required to serve the area within the subdivision. The city will participate in the construction of major thoroughfares and the cost of installing larger utility, sanitary sewer and drainage facilities designed to serve a contributing area larger than the subdivision under consideration, in accordance with policies established by the city council. 
(b)  In order to provide water and sewer services to land being developed, if the developer shall extend water and/or sewer lines from existing lines to his development, and in so doing, shall lay such lines on, over, across or in the general vicinity of land not owned by him, such developer may, at his option, enter into an agreement with the city whereby the developer will be able, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, to recover a portion of the cost of the laying of such lines, if other persons or entities seek to tap into such lines to provide service to an area not owned by the developer. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "developer" means any person or entity other than the city. 
(c)  In order to enter into such an agreement with the city, the developer shall provide the city with a sworn certification, signed and sworn to both by the developer, if the developer is an individual, or by a duly authorized officer or agent of the developer, in the case of a partnership or corporate developer, and by the contractor who installed the lines. Such sworn document shall state the actual cost, per linear foot, for the installation of the water and/or sewer lines. If the cost shown on the sworn statement is, in the opinion of the staff of the city, in excess of the then current market cost for laying such lines then, and in such event, the city, acting by its duly authorized officials, and the developer, shall seek to negotiate a mutually acceptable figure for the fair market cost of such installation. If the city and the developer cannot arrive at a mutually acceptable figure, the developer may, at his option, request that determination of such figure be submitted to binding arbitration. 
(d)  If the agreement contemplated in subsection (c) of this section is entered into by and between the city and developer, thereafter, any person who, within ten years from the date of the completion of the water and/or sewer lines as certified to by the developer and accepted by the city, desires to receive service from the sewer and/or water lines by tapping into such lines, shall reimburse the developer, or his assigns, for the cost of laying such line in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If the person seeking to receive service from such sewer and/or water lines desires to tap into the sewer and/or water line to provide service on lands located on both sides of the sewer and/or water line, such person desiring to tap into the lines shall repay the developer by paying to the city a sum equal to 25 percent of the cost, per linear foot, for the laying of such line for each linear foot of the line fronting upon property owned by the person seeking to tap into the lines. The 25 percent figure shall be applicable to the linear footage on each side of the line. 
(2)  If the person seeking to tap into the line shall only desire for the tap-in to serve an area located on one side of the line, such person shall reimburse the developer for the cost of the line by paying to the city a sum equal to 50 percent of the cost, per linear foot, for each linear foot of such line fronting along the property owned by the person seeking to tap into the line. 
(3)  The fees provided for in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section shall be assessed by the city and collected at the time a tap fee is collected from the person seeking to utilize such lines, and the city shall remit the fee collected to the original developer, or his assigns, within 30 days from the date of collection thereof by the city. The city shall not knowingly permit a tap of such line by any person other than the original developer unless the fees provided for in this subsection (d) to reimburse the developer for the cost of construction of such lines are paid to the city by the person seeking to tap the lines. 
(4)  If the person seeking to receive service from such water or sewer line to property which does not front such utility line, but is beyond or separated by other property from the line, such person shall reimburse the developer by paying to the city a sum equal to a pro rata percent of the cost, per linear foot, for the laying of such line to the point where such person taps the line, between the city main and end of the line extension. 
(Code 1995, § 156.13) 
Secs. 94-48-94-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Plat required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004. 

Sec. 94-81. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  Planning and zoning commission suggestions. Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may seek the advice of the planning and zoning commission as set forth in this chapter. Such step does not require formal application, fee or filing of any plat with the planning and zoning commission. At such meeting, the planning and zoning commission will be able to make any suggestions that would direct the proposed subdivision toward desirable objectives and possibly prevent unnecessary work if such objectives are not met. 
(b)  Forms and maps. Forms or maps needed for such planning and zoning commission meeting are described and shown in appendix B to this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 156.30) 
Sec. 94-82. - Preliminary plat conditional approval. 
(a)  Filing procedure. 
(1)  After reaching conclusions informally regarding his program and objectives, as described in section 94-81, the subdivider shall cause a preliminary plat to be prepared, together with other supplementary data as specified and shown in appendix B to this chapter, for formal submission to the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Four prints of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and filed with the city engineer not less than five days prior to the next meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the preliminary plat is to be considered. A certificate of filing shall be maintained by the city engineer and a copy of such certificate shall be given to the party filing the plat. 
(3)  A filing fee, per subdivision, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, plus a fee, per residential lot, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office, shall be paid by the subdivider. Where acreage is involved, such as, but not limited to, sites for industrial or commercial use, housing projects and shopping centers, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee, per acre, as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. In no case shall the filing fee involving acreage exceed $100.00. 
(b)  Approval or disapproval. The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove any preliminary plat within 30 days from the date the preliminary plat is filed. Approval of the preliminary plat as such shall not constitute final acceptance or approval of the subdivision. If no action by the planning and zoning commission to disapprove a preliminary plat is taken within the 30-day period from the date of filing, the preliminary plat is deemed to have been approved and a certificate showing such filing date and the failure to take action within 30 days from the filing date shall, on demand, be issued by the planning and zoning commission, and the certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval. 
(c)  Master preliminary of larger tract. Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider which he intends to subsequently divide as additional units of the same subdivision, the subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks and drainage for such area. The overall layout, if approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the city engineer and the planning and zoning commission. Thereafter, fractional final plats of subsequent units of such subdivision may be submitted without additional preliminary plat approval, and shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the planning and zoning commission. Where the subdivider does not agree to such change, the planning and zoning commission may change such approved overall layout only when it finds that adherence to the previously approved overall layout will: 
(1)  Hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or will be injurious to other property in the area. 
Each subsequent fractional plat submitted for approval shall be adjacent to a unit previously developed. 
(Code 1995, § 156.31) 
Sec. 94-83. - Final plat approval. 
(a)  After conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall cause a final plat to be prepared, together with supplementary data as specified and shown in appendix B to this chapter, and referenced in subsection (c)(3) of this section, for formal submission to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Six prints of the final plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission under the same procedure as set forth in section 94-82(a)(2). 
(c)  The subdivider shall submit the following data at the time of filing the preliminary plat: 
(1)  A tax certificate from the city, and other officials of taxing agencies within whose jurisdiction the proposed subdivision lies, to the effect that all ad valorem taxes have been paid on the land included within the subdivision. 
(2)  An utility certificate from the superintendent of the water and sewer departments approving the proposed utilities layout and indicating that adequate service is available to the subdivision. 
(3)  The following data, in duplicate, prepared and stamped by a registered engineer, which shall be presented to and approved by the city engineer before any subdivision, shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission: 
a.  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks and monuments (plans and profiles, with the data outlined in appendix A to this chapter); 
b.  Storm drainage data and proposed drainage structures (calculation, plans and profile using design data outlined in appendix A to this chapter); 
c.  Water and sewer data and proposed structures (calculation, plans and profile using design data outlined in appendix A to this chapter). 
(d)  All subdividers doing business in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be required to file with the city secretary a corporate surety bond, payable to the city, in the amount as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. The bond will be kept current while any subdivision work is being pursued by the subdivider and until improvements on areas submitted by the subdivider as offered to the general public for sale are certified complete by the city engineer and utility superintendent. Certification by the city engineer or utility superintendent of failure to execute improvements on areas identified by the subdivider as offered for sale to the general public to the standards required in this chapter shall constitute grounds to call on the bonding company for payment of the bond. No final plat shall be approved or recorded until the bond has been filed with the city secretary. When the bond is filed with the city, the city secretary shall issue a certificate to the subdivider identifying him as a bonded subdivider. 
(Code 1995, § 156.32) 
State Law reference- Requirements for recording the plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004. 
Sec. 94-84. - New subdivision short form procedure. 
    A short form procedure, omitting the filing of the preliminary plat, may be followed when the proposed subdivision or resubdivision meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision contains four lots or less, all fronting on a previously dedicated street of an adequate width, and situated so that no additional streets, alleys, easements or other public property are required in order to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The utilities and drainage facilities, as required in this chapter, are in place to serve each lot in the proposed subdivision and require no alterations, or satisfactory arrangements have been made to effect any necessary alterations. 
(3)  The proposed subdivision abuts property which has previously been subdivided. 
(Code 1995, § 156.33; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 94-85. - Resubdivision short form procedure. 
    A short form procedure for resubdivisions of existing platted and approved subdivisions, omitting the requirements for filing a preliminary plat, supporting data and exhibits, may be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its approval, when: 
(1)  The proposed resubdivision has been prepared by a registered engineer or a licensed surveyor; 
(2)  Staff review by the appropriate city departments confirms all engineering data remains accurate and that any other requirement of this chapter shall otherwise be complied with; 
(3)  The proposed resubdivision constitutes no change in the exterior configuration of more than one side of any block in the subdivision, as previously submitted; and 
(4)  The proposed resubdivision does not propose to change the existing zoning classification from a more restrictive classification to a less restrictive classification. 
(Code 1995, § 156.34) 
Sec. 94-86. - Administrative approval of certain plats or replats. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.0065, the City Council hereby delegates the approval of the following plats or replats to the City Engineer: 
(1)  Amending plats described by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.016; 
(2)  Minor plats or replats involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; and 
(3)  A replat under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.0145 that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All requirements of section 94-83 of the Code of Ordinances regarding final plats submittal requirements shall be applicable to plats submitted to the city engineer for administrative approval. 
(c)  Administrative approval of plats or replats. If the city engineer determines that the plat or replat complies with the requirements of this section, the plat or replat shall be certified by the required parties and filed of record. The city engineer shall act on a plat within 30 days after the date the plat or replat is filed with the city and has met all submittal requirements required by this section, including all applicable fees. 
(d)  Denial of plats or replats. If the city engineer determines that the plat or replat submitted to him for administrative approval does not comply with the requirements of this section, then the city engineer shall refer the plat or replat to the planning and zoning commission within 30 days after the plat or replat is filed and has met all submittal requirements required by this section, including all applicable fees. If the city engineer determines that he cannot approve the plat or replat and refers the plat or replat to the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall take action on the plat or replat within the time period specified in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.009, such time period to commence upon the City Engineer filing a written referral of the plat or replat to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(e)  Right to refer to planning and zoning commission. The city engineer may, for any reason, elect to present the plat or replat for approval to the planning and zoning commission within 30 days after the plat or replat is filed and has met all submittal requirements required by this section, including all applicable fees. Once the city engineer so elects and refers the plat or replat to the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall take action on the plat or replat within the time period specified in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.009, such time period to commence upon the city engineer filing a written referral of the plat or replat to the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 3-12-2013) 
Secs. 94-87-94-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 94-121. - General principles and objectives. 
(a)  Conformity with the comprehensive master plan. All subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive master plan for orderly and unified development of streets, utilities, neighborhood design and public land facilities. 
(b)  Achieving desirable neighborhood development. Residential subdivisions shall be designed to take advantage of the principles and general designs for neighborhood development as established by the comprehensive master plan and the planning and zoning commission in order to achieve the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood unit in which the subdivision is located. 
(c)  Provision for future subdivision. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow logical further subdivision and the opening of future streets. 
(d)  Standards for site improvements. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, utility installations and other site improvements required to be installed by the subdivider under the provisions of this article shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 156.50) 
Sec. 94-122. - Streets. 
(a)  Layout. The arrangement, extent, character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan and comprehensive master plan. Minor residential streets shall provide adequate circulation within the neighborhood, but shall discourage excessive through traffic. The street layout shall be arranged to achieve the most desirable development of the entire neighborhood unit, with appropriate consideration of creeks, drainage channels, wooded areas and other topographical features which lend themselves to special treatment. Streets forming the boundary line of a subdivision shall permit no setback from the property line. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining streets. Where appropriate to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and tied into the proposed street layout. The width and alignment of such streets shall be as determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Projection. When adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the proper projection of streets into the adjoining unsubdivided areas as will be required to complete the neighborhood pattern or conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Partial or half streets. In the case of minor streets, no new half streets shall be platted. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing half street, the remaining half of the street shall be platted. In the case of secondary streets and major thoroughfares, half streets may be platted, if necessary, in conformance with the comprehensive master plan. 
(e)  Dead-end streets and culs-de-sac. 
(1)  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs which are projected to be continued in future subdivisions in conformance with subsection (c) of this section, or when designed as culs-de-sac. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on projected streets until such time as such streets are extended. 
(2)  Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall have a turnaround of not less than 80 feet in diameter in single-family residential areas, 120 feet in multifamily areas and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. 
(f)  Alignment. The alignment of all major thoroughfares and secondary streets shall conform to the comprehensive master plan and the requirements of appendix A to this chapter. Minor street alignment shall meet the requirements of appendix A to this chapter, and in no case shall street jogs be offset more than 120 feet on the centerline. 
(g)  Intersections. All intersections on major thoroughfares and secondary streets shall be at least 90 degrees, except as shown on the comprehensive master plan or approved by the planning and zoning commission. The intersections of minor streets shall be as nearly to 90 degrees as practicable. The curb radii at street intersections in urban subdivisions shall conform to table 1 as set forth in appendix A to this chapter. 
(h)  Right-of-way and pavement widths. All street and pavement widths shall conform to the comprehensive master plan and the requirements of appendix A to this chapter, but in no case shall the right-of-way widths be less than the following: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares, 80 feet; 
(2)  Minor streets, 50 feet; 
(3)  Secondary streets, 60 feet. 
(i)  Names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate the names of existing streets within the county unless the new street is a continuation of such existing street. Street names shall be chosen to avoid similarity or confusion with existing street names. Names of all new streets shall be subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission, and coordinated on an areawide basis. 
(j)  Additional improvements. Additional improvements, such as streetlights and street signs, shall be installed at no cost to the developer. 
(k)  Construction. All street bases, surfacing, curbs, grades, horizontal curves and intersection curve radii shall be constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed in appendix A to this chapter. 
(l)  Temporary rights-of-way. When deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission, temporary rights-of-way shall be provided for certain uses or locations, such as the provision of turnarounds on projected streets. Such temporary rights-of-way shall revert to the abutting property owners when no longer required for its original purpose. 
(Code 1995, § 156.51) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
Sec. 94-123. - Alleys. 
(a)  Layout. Alleys shall be as nearly parallel to the street frontage as reasonably possible. Alleys forming the boundary of a subdivision shall permit no setback from the property line. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial districts. Paved alleys not less than 20 feet wide shall be provided in all commercial or industrial districts, except that the planning and zoning commission may waive such requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(c)  Residential areas. Alleys shall be provided in all residential areas. Such alleys shall not be less than 20 feet wide, with at least 16 feet of six-inch washing plant base material. The planning and zoning commission may waive such requirement when topography would dictate the loss of usable property, but the developer shall be required to make provisions for the current method of solid waste collection. 
(d)  Intersections and turns. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where two alleys intersect, or any alley turns at an angle sharper than 100 degrees, a cutoff shall be provided. The degree of the angle will determine the depth of the cutoff required. 
(e)  Dead ends. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if they are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities, as determined by the planning and zoning commission, and have no less than 32 feet improved width. 
(f)  Construction. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed in appendix A to this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 156.52) 
Sec. 94-124. - Easements. 
(a)  Public utilities. Utility easements shall be provided for installation of utilities or appurtenances where alleys are not feasible. In general, the rear easement shall be 20 feet wide, all from one tier of lots. Covenants shall be written into all deeds requiring 15-foot gates in all fences crossing easements. Additional requirements for public utility easements shall be determined by the engineer. 
(b)  Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and of sufficient width, as determined by the engineer, to accommodate further width or construction and allow access for maintenance. 
(Code 1995, § 156.53) 
Sec. 94-125. - Blocks. 
(a)  General layout. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements for lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Length. In general, block lengths along minor or secondary streets shall not exceed 1,400 feet or be less than 500 feet, and along major thoroughfares, block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 900 feet. 
(c)  Width. In general, blocks shall be platted of a sufficient width to contain two tiers of lots with an alley between them, except where lots are double fronted on major thoroughfares, railroads or drainage channels, or where overall neighborhood design justifies a different layout, or where a single tier of lots is platted to adjoin the rear of existing lots of unplatted tracts. 
(Code 1995, § 156.54) 
Sec. 94-126. - Lots. 
(a)  General layout. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located, and for the type of development and use contemplated in order to assure provision of proper open space and prevent overcrowding. 
(b)  Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall conform to chapter 98 of this Code, or the following requirements, if more restrictive: 
(1)  Residential lots, where not served by public or approved off-lot sewer, shall be at least 70 feet wide, 120 feet deep and have an area of at least 9,000 square feet. In addition, the planning and zoning commission shall request the city or county health office to cause a percolation test to be made, and shall require such lot areas as recommended by the health officer, but in no case less than 9,000 square feet. 
(2)  Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high pressure gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a depreciating effect on residential property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required, not to exceed a total of 150 feet. Where a lot sides to any such traffic artery or other disadvantageous land use, an appropriate additional width shall be required. A planting screen, no-access easement, of at least ten feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous land use. 
(c)  Orientation. Residential lots may be oriented to take advantage of topography and the best relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood, and to minimize the effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses. 
(1)  The placing of residential lots facing directly upon a major thoroughfare shall be avoided, unless lots face a marginal access street parallel to such major thoroughfare. Lots should side or back to major thoroughfares and other depreciating land uses. 
(2)  The placing of lots at right angles to each other, with rear and side lot lines adjacent, shall be avoided, when possible. 
(3)  Side lot lines shall be as nearly perpendicular as practicable to the street the lot faces, or radial to curved streets. 
(d)  Access. Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street, either by direct frontage on such street or by a public pedestrian accessway approved by the planning and zoning commission. Rear and/or side driveway access to major thoroughfares shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 156.55) 
Sec. 94-127. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  If a proposed park, school, playground or other public facility shown in the comprehensive master plan or official neighborhood plan is located, in whole or in part, in a subdivision, the subdivider may dedicate such land to public use, or shall cause such land to be held in reserve for a period of six months from the date the plat is recorded for purchase by the appropriate public agency. 
(b)  Where deemed essential by the planning and zoning commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and especially in large scale neighborhood unit developments not anticipated in the comprehensive master plan, the planning and zoning commission may require the reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by subdevelopment for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes. Such requirement shall be made by the appropriate public agency within six months, and, within 60 days of such notification, the public agency shall compensate the developer at a price mutually agreeable to both parties; however, such price shall not exceed the square foot price being asked for adjacent speculative lots. 
(Code 1995, § 156.56) 
Secs. 94-128-94-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 94-161. - Monuments. 
    There shall be one concrete monument per subdivision, inscribed with the elevation, and iron pins encased in concrete placed at angle points, points of curve, lot lines and all corners of boundary lines of the subdivision. 
(Code 1995, § 156.70) 
Sec. 94-162. - Street improvements. 
    All street improvements shall meet the requirements of the comprehensive master plan and appendix A to this article, but, in no case, shall such improvements be more minimal than specifications set forth in the following table: 
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
Classification Right-of-Way 
(feet) Pavement Standard 
(feet) Drainage Standard Expressway As required by the comprehensive plan, commission of department of highways Major thoroughfare As required by the comprehensive plan, commission of department of highways Secondary 
thoroughfare  60 42 Curb and gutter Minor street  50 36 Curb and gutter Cul-de-sac 100 D 80 D Curb and gutter  
(Code 1995, § 156.71) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
Sec. 94-163. - Water system. 
(a)  Furnishing and installing facilities. All water supply, treatment, storage and distribution facilities shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of appendix A of this article, the state department of health, state water development board and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Provision required. Every lot in a subdivision shall be provided with an approved supply of water, either by the construction of a distribution system connected to an adequate approved public water system or, if such public source is not available, by construction of a complete water system, including a safe, adequate water source, proper treatment facilities, pumps, storage facilities and distribution system, approved by the appropriate state and federal agencies. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. 
(1)  Fire hydrants must be approved by the American Water Works Association. Brands other than Mueller, Draling and M & H must meet the city's measuring requirements and be approved by the city engineer, fire chief and utility superintendent. 
(2)  Fire hydrants must have a tested working pressure of not less than 150 pounds hydrostatic test and must open against the water pressure. The diameter of the main valve seat should be 51/4 inches, and the length should be determined by the depth of the trench. All working parts, including the main valve assembly, shall be removable through the barrel, without excavation. Hydrant shoes must be a mechanical joint and must have automatically opening drains to dry up the barrel. The stuffing box must have O-ring seals and an oil bath holding no less than eight ounces of oil. All fire hydrants must be traffic model or breakaway. Fire plugs shall be located no further than 500 feet from any structure and such locations shall be submitted on the water map for approval by the developer. All water mains shall be looped in a manner to assure adequate water pressure at the fire hydrant. The fire chief and utility superintendent shall have approval of fireplug placement. 
(3)  Every urban subdivision shall be provided with standard fire hydrants as part of the water distribution system so that every lot is within 500 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(Code 1995, § 156.72) 
Sec. 94-164. - Sewerage systems. 
(a)  Furnishing and installing facilities. All facilities for the collection and disposal of sewage shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of appendix A of this article, the state department of health, state water development board and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot in all subdivisions where connection is to be made immediately to a community disposal system or to a public sewerage system. The parts of such systems which will lie in the portion of streets and alleys intended for vehicular traffic shall be installed before such street or alley is paved. 
(c)  Septic tanks. In any subdivision in which immediate connection to a sewerage system cannot be made, a septic tank of at least 500 gallons' capacity, with a drain field of at least 150 feet, shall be installed on a lot in accordance with the regulations of the appropriate health authorities. 
(Code 1995, § 156.73) 
Sec. 94-165. - Drainage. 
(a)  Adequate facilities required. No lot in any subdivision which is subject to flooding by rainfall shall be approved until drainage facilities which are adequate to carry off such rainfall have been provided, as determined by computations by the engineer. The system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on solid waste disposal sites. 
(b)  Installation. All necessary storm drainage facilities, including enclosed storm sewers, bridges, culverts and watercourse improvements, to carry off stormwater within the subdivision and to integrate such subdivision drainage with the overall urban drainage system shall be installed in accordance with appendix A of this article and official urban and county drainage plans. The planning and zoning commission may require a primarily underground system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. 
(c)  Roof drainage in commercial areas. In commercial areas, all roof drainage shall be piped directly into an underground storm sewer, where a storm sewer exists. 
(d)  Floodprone areas. If a section of a lot is in the floodprone areas, as designated by the National Flood Insurance Program, an approved type of floodproofing must be installed. 
(e)  Uses in floodplain areas. No use, including landfill, may be permitted within a floodplain area having special flood hazards unless the subdivider has demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point. 
(Code 1995, § 156.74) 
Secs. 94-166-94-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 94-201-94-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RANCHETTE SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 94-221. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and cited as the "City of Brownwood Ranchette Subdivision Ordinance." 
(Code 1995, § 157.01) 
Sec. 94-222. - Definitions. 
    The definitions adopted in this division shall be the definitions set forth in chapter 98 and section 94-1, and such definitions shall be made a part of this section, where applicable. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ranchette subdivision means a tract or parcel of land to be subdivided into smaller tracts of land upon which certain uses and activities described in this division may be permitted which would not otherwise be permissible under existing zoning laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 157.02) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-223. - Establishment. 
(a)  Prohibited classification. For the purpose of this division, ranchettes and ranchette subdivisions shall not be included in any of the existing land use classifications as set forth in chapter 98. 
(b)  Official zoning map. The location of ranchette subdivisions shall be noted upon the official zoning map as "ranchette subdivisions," together with any and all notations, references and other information, and any and all amendments to such map, and shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Approval procedure. The procedures of approving ranchette subdivision tracts shall be the same as pertains to appearance before the planning and zoning commission, rights of appeal and approval of the city council as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 157.03) 
Sec. 94-224. - Rentals and provisions of chapter applicable; exceptions; livestock. 
(a)  Applicability. The rentals and provisions of this chapter, adopted by the city, shall be applicable to ranchette subdivisions, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Each ranchette lot shall not be less than 21/2 acres in size, with a minimum width of 200 feet. 
(2)  Each developer of a ranchette subdivision shall provide water and sewer to each ranchette lot at no cost to the city. Additional utilities may be installed at the option of the developer. Developers or owners of ranchettes may provide such lots or tracts of land with septic tanks until sewer is available to the subdivision, the installation of which shall meet the minimum standards of the city, state and federal health authorities and regulations pertaining to the installation of such septic tanks. 
(3)  The developer shall install paved roads to serve each tract, at no cost to the city, and such paved roads shall be constructed according to the provisions of this chapter as to grade and curve, but no cement curbs or gutters shall be required in such areas. Bar-ditches must provide proper drainage in accordance with good engineering practices, and be approved by the city engineers. Driveways providing access shall have drainage horns installed which shall be sufficient to provide proper drainage as set forth in this subsection. 
(4)  Butane tanks shall only be allowed as a source of fuel if located outside the city limits, and all installations of service lines shall be installed to city and state codes as they pertain to liquefied gas. 
(5)  No more than two residences may be erected upon any 21/2-acre ranchette tract, and both residences must be served by the same water meter and be owned by one party, and no lot or tract in any ranchette subdivision may be further subdivided. 
(6)  Owners of ranchettes shall be allowed to keep domesticated livestock, including, but not limited to, horses, cattle, sheep and goats. The number of animals shall not exceed three adult animals, excluding offspring, per acre. Offspring shall be classified as adults upon obtaining the age of one year. No swine shall be allowed or permitted as domesticated livestock. No commercial livestock feeding or breeding operations shall be conducted on the ranchette. 
(Code 1995, § 157.04) 
Sec. 94-225. - Restrictive covenants. 
    Prior to approval of a ranchette subdivision, the planning and zoning commission may require restrictive covenants to be placed upon any of the land sought to be subdivided as a ranchette, and in conformance and harmony with the covenants set forth in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 157.05) 
Sec. 94-226. - Applicability of city codes. 
    All buildings built on ranchettes within the city limits shall meet all city electrical and plumbing codes and other requirements required by the city as to new buildings, and all necessary building permits must be obtained on new buildings, as required by the city. If the ranchette is outside the city limits and within one mile thereof, city plumbing codes are applicable when the ranchette is connected to city water and/or sewer system. 
(Code 1995, § 157.06) 
Sec. 94-227. - Height and area requirements. 
    Height and area requirements shall be in conformance with the zoning requirements set forth in chapter 98 for the R-1 district, except that the rear yard requirement shall be 25 feet. 
(Code 1995, § 157.07) 
Sec. 94-228. - Location restrictions. 
    Ranchette subdivisions may not be adopted contiguous to existing conventional city lots and in common with a property line on conventional city lots, unless separated by an alley, street, drainage easement or public utility easement. 
(Code 1995, § 157.08) 
Secs. 94-229-94-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- M-1 restricted industrial district, § 98-451 et seq.; M-2 industrial district, § 98-471 et seq. 

Sec. 94-251. - Established; conflicts. 
    There is hereby established for the city the Brownwood Industrial Park District Subdivision, Phase I, which shall consist of the area described in the legal description on file in the office of the city secretary and designated by the plat of Roy Pfingsten, registered public land surveyor, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. In addition to the regulations set out in this division, areas in the industrial park district shall be subject to the zoning regulations of chapter 98. In the event of conflict between the chapter 98 and the regulations and rules established by this division, the latter shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1995, § 157.20) 
Sec. 94-252. - District map. 
    The industrial park district map shall be prepared by the city engineer or his designee. The map shall include all of the area designated by this division as a part of the official industrial park district, but the map or plat may be prepared for phases of development of the subdivision, i.e., phase I, phase II, etc., and the city reserves the right to officially adopt plats or maps of the phased development, one phase at a time. Where a street is designated as the boundary of the district, the centerline of the street shall be taken as such boundary, in the absence of a provision to the contrary. Metes and bounds descriptions shall be clearly designated where no other designation if used. 
(Code 1995, § 157.21) 
Sec. 94-253. - Prohibited uses. 
    No part of the industrial park district, or any building or improvement located in such district, shall be used for any purpose, other than industrial, warehouse or commercial nonretail sales purposes. 
(Code 1995, § 157.28) 
Sec. 94-254. - Exterior of buildings and structures. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, permitted or placed within the industrial park district unless the exterior of the building or structure is of stone, brick, reinforced concrete, glass, equivalent masonry construction or a combination of such materials. Metal buildings are acceptable as long as the front (street-facing) of the building is faced to a level of not less than four feet from the ground elevation with the materials listed as acceptable in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 157.30) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 78. 
Sec. 94-255. - Dangerous or objectionable elements. 
(a)  No part of the industrial park district, or any building or improvement within the district, shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard, including a possible potential hazard, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other substance, condition or element (referred to in this section as "dangerous or objectionable elements"), in such a manner or amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises, provided that any use permitted or not expressly prohibited by this division may be undertaken and maintained if the use conforms to the regulations of this division limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the point of the determination of their existence. 
(b)  The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the elements and at any points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent. 
(Code 1995, § 157.22) 
Sec. 94-256. - Storage of inflammable and explosive materials; open burning prohibited; fire zone. 
    All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided, at any point, with adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices which are standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials and open fires shall be prohibited at any point. An adequate fire clear zone of 15-30 feet shall be maintained on at least two sides of the structure. The fire zone shall be maintained free and clear of any stored properties or vehicles for the utilization of fire equipment in the event of an emergency. 
(Code 1995, § 157.23) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 94-257. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which violate the requirements and standards of the radiation protection regulations of the state. 
(b)  Electrical disturbance. No electrical disturbance or any disturbance resulting from radio or television transmission shall be tolerated which adversely affects the operation, at any point, of any equipment, other than the equipment of the creator of such disturbance. 
(c)  Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement. 
(d)  Emissions. 
(1)  No emission of any smoke or other products of combustion violating any city, federal or state law shall be permitted. 
(2)  No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive at the points of measurement. 
(e)  Discharge into the sewage system. No discharge, at any point, into the sewage system serving the property shall be made, except in accordance with standards approved by the city or other applicable regulatory authority. 
(Code 1995, § 157.24) 
Sec. 94-258. - Pavement of parking and loading areas. 
    All parking and loading areas, whether public or private, shall be surfaced with a pavement of sufficient strength to support the vehicular loads on such areas and to provide a durable and dustless surface, graded and drained, to dispose of surface water, and properly marked and arranged to provide for orderly and safe maneuvering and storage of automobiles and trucks. 
(Code 1995, § 157.26) 
Sec. 94-259. - Lighting. 
    All public areas shall be appropriately lighted to provide for safe and orderly usage of such areas. 
(Code 1995, § 157.27) 
Sec. 94-260. - Building setback. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, permitted or placed within the industrial park district which shall have any part of such building or structure, including, but not limited to, any windows, eaves, steps, chimneys or other projections, closer than 30 feet from the nearest boundary line of any street or closer than 15 feet from any boundary line of such tract which does not border a street. 
(Code 1995, § 157.29) 
Sec. 94-261. - Excavations. 
    No excavations or excavating work shall be permitted on any part or portion of the industrial park district property, except excavations for the purpose of constructing buildings and tangible improvements within the district immediately prior to and during the construction of such buildings and tangible improvements. No soil, sand, gravel, minerals, aggregate or earth materials shall be removed from the district property, except as a part of such excavations made for the purpose of constructing buildings and tangible improvements on the real estate. 
(Code 1995, § 157.31) 
Sec. 94-262. - Landscaping. 
    All property within the industrial park district, and all buildings, structures, improvements and appurtenances relative to such district, shall be attractively landscaped, and all portions of the real estate not used for buildings, structures, parking areas, loading areas, driveways, streets and other landscaping shall be mowed and trimmed and maintained in an attractive and neat condition. Grass or other suitable ground cover may be planted. 
(Code 1995, § 157.32) 
Sec. 94-263. - Outside property maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner or tenant to maintain the outside property in a manner consistent with other adjacent property in the industrial park. Items of any nature which are permanently placed outside shall be properly stored and screened in a manner to make the storage area conform with other properties in the industrial park. 
(Code 1995, § 157.33) 
Sec. 94-264. - Fences. 
    No fences or other obstructions or restrictions shall be placed in any utility easement located on the industrial park property without the express written consent of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 157.34) 
Sec. 94-265. - Drainage. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the industrial park property to provide for adequate drainage to the industrial park's drainage facilities located within the industrial park district. 
(Code 1995, § 157.35) 
Sec. 94-266. - Signs. 
(a)  A maximum of three signs will be allowed zero feet from the property line. The allowed signs will be an entrance designation sign and exit designation sign. The two allowed signs shall be a maximum of six square feet in size. The third designated sign, which will be the company identification, will be a maximum of 36 square feet in size. All three signs may be lighted. 
(b)  There will be no other freestanding signs in the industrial park district. Signs on buildings will be no larger than 36 square feet, and the sign may be lighted. 
(c)  All signs within the industrial park will be common. The city will provide design specifications. 
(Code 1995, § 157.36) 
Sec. 94-267. - Utility easements. 
    Utility easements shown on the map or plat are reserved for the use of the grantor, its successors and assigns. Streets shown on the plat are dedicated to the use of owners of tracts of land in the subdivision, but shall be maintained by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 157.39) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
Sec. 94-268. - Building limitation within 100-year floodplain. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, permitted or placed upon any part of the industrial park district which is located within the 100-year floodplain. All properties sold which contain any part of the 100-year floodplain shall be subject to deed restrictions enforcing such building limitations. The city hereby creates a natural drainage easement within the district which shall be the portion of the 100-year floodplain located within the district. The 100-year floodplain shall be designated on all current and future subdivision plats of the district. 
(Code 1995, § 157.40) 
Sec. 94-269. - Restrictions and covenants. 
(a)  The restrictions and covenants set forth in this division are hereby declared to be covenants running with the land and shall be fully binding upon all persons acquiring property in the industrial park district, whether by descent, devise, purchase or otherwise, and any person, by the acceptance of title to any lot of the subdivision, shall thereby agree and covenant to abide by and fully perform the restrictions and covenants set forth in this division. 
(b)  The covenants set forth in this division are to run with the land and shall be binding for a period of 25 years from the date of such covenants. At the end of such period, the restrictions and covenants shall automatically be extended for a successive period of ten years unless, by a vote of a three-fourths majority of the owners of the lots in the subdivision (each lot having one vote), taken prior to the expiration of the 25-year period and filed of record in the county, it is agreed to amend or release the restrictions and covenants. 
(Code 1995, § 157.37) 
Sec. 94-270. - Rights of city. 
    The city expressly reserves the sole right to further dedicate, plat and adopt phase III of the industrial park district and to amend the rules, regulations and restrictions set forth in this division as to phase III without the joinder or acquiescence of any owner of other property within the subdivision. 
(Code 1995, § 157.38) 
Sec. 94-271. - Violations. 
(a)  If any person shall violate, or attempt to violate, any of the restrictions and covenants set forth in this division, it shall be lawful for any person owning any lot in the industrial park district to prosecute proceedings at law or in equity against the person violating, or attempting to violate, any such restriction and covenant, either to prevent such person from committing such violation or to correct such violation or to recover damages or other relief for such violation. 
(b)  Invalidation of any one or part of the restrictions set forth in this division by judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of the other provisions, or parts thereof, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1995, § 157.98) 
Secs. 94-272-94-300. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A. - SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 

§ 1. - General. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall comply with the specifications and design standards as outlined in this appendix A. 
(b)  Three copies of plans and profiles for streets, alleys, sidewalks and drainage easements, including the information required in this appendix A, shall be submitted within each subdivision plat. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 1) 
§ 2. - Streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
(a)  Plans. Plans shall include the following: 
(1)  Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and growth; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type, as required, location in relation to centerline and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines; the proposed street grading slopes for each of the different types of streets and alleys in the subdivision. 
(2)  Alignment of each street, alley, sidewalk and crosswalkway, showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street; the location of monuments. 
(3)  Location, description and elevation of benchmarks; the top of curb grade at each curb end, 50-foot station and the end of curb return; the centerline grade at each end and each 50-foot station of alleys; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the profiles of streets, alleys and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed centerline. 
(4)  Scale, north arrow and date. The plan and profile shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontally, and one inch equals five feet vertically. 
(b)  Design standards. Design standards shall include the following: 
(1)  At each street intersection, the curb shall be rounded with an R curve or radius, varying with the interior angle as specified in table 1 in § 6(a) of this appendix A. 
(2)  At each intersection, the property lines at each block corner shall be rounded with an R curve or radius, varying with the interior angle as specified in table 1 in § 6(a) of this appendix A. 
(3)  Street and alley grades shall, in general, conform to the terrain, and shall not exceed the grades specified in table 2 in § 6(b) of this appendix A. No street or alley grade shall be less than three-tenths of one percent unless otherwise specified by the engineer. 
(4)  Horizontal curve radii shall not be less than the radii specified in table 2 in § 6(b) of this appendix A. 
(c)  Construction requirements. The subdivider shall excavate, fill and grade all alleys and new streets within the subdivision, including sidewalk areas where required, so that pavements and sidewalks may be constructed along lines and grades approved by the engineer. In general, the grades of sidewalk areas shall be established so that no extreme or abrupt changes in grade are encountered within blocks, but variations may be allowed where, because of soil conditions, topography or valuable trees, the establishment of such grades would result in undue hardship. New streets and alleys shall be surfaced in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the engineer and constructed under his supervision. No street shall be surfaced or alley finished to specifications of this appendix A until the underground utilities which are to be installed in the portions of the streets or alleys intended for vehicular traffic have been installed and taps completed. New streets, including previously dedicated rights-of-way, and existing unpaved streets abutting both sides to a new subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of table 3 in § 6(c) of this appendix A and the following requirements: 
(1)  Subgrade preparation. Subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications of the engineer, and compacted to a standard proctor dry density of not less than 90 percent. When fill is required, it shall be placed in uniform lifts not to exceed six inches in depth prior with pneumatic rollers or eight inches prior to compaction with other types of rollers. Each lift shall be compacted to 90 percent standard proctor density before succeeding lifts are placed. Density tests shall be taken a minimum of one per city block or one every 600 feet if the block exceeds 600 feet in length. Developers shall provide proctor tests upon request of the engineer. 
(2)  Flexible base. When asphaltic pavement surfaces are used, the base shall be a compacted flexible base constructed to the specification of the engineer to the depth shown in table 3 in § 6(c) of this appendix A, with a standard proctor density of not less than 95 percent. 
(3)  Stabilized base. As alternate to the flexible base set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section, a compacted soil-cement base, with a standard proctor density of 95 percent, may be used, with a soil-cement ratio and thickness as approved by the engineer. 
(4)  Asphaltic pavement. The compacted surface course shall be applied at the rates specified in table 3 in § 6(c) of this appendix A. The paving mixture and construction methods shall conform to the specifications of the engineer for hot mix, hot laid asphaltic concrete, hot mix fold laid asphaltic concrete or cold mix limestone rock asphalt. 
(5)  Concrete pavement. All concrete pavement shall be Portland cement concrete of a depth and compressive strength specified in table 3 in § 6(c) of this appendix A, and constructed in accordance with the specifications of the engineer. Reinforcing steel shall be a six by six wire mesh or No. 3 round steel, 18 inches on center, both ways. 
(6)  Curbs and combined curb and gutter. Curbs or combined curb and gutter sections shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and installed in accordance with the specifications of the engineer on all streets within the subdivision along the lines and grades approved by the engineer. Curbs or combined curb and gutter shall be provided on both sides of all streets within subdivisions and on the side of boundary streets adjacent to the subdivision. Base material shall be placed and compacted beginning three inches behind the curb. 
(7)  Sidewalks and crosswalks. All sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete at least four inches thick and at least four feet wide, according to specifications of the engineer, and along the lines and grades approved by the engineer. 
(8)  Aggregate specifications. See table 12 in § 6(l) of this appendix A for aggregate specifications. 
(9)  Rear/alley drives/entrances. New subdivisions and replats of subdivisions with rear/alley drives/entrances will require the developer to have paved alleys included in the plans submitted for approval. Developers of new subdivisions abutting an existing subdivision will be required to pave the entire width of any alley being affected in existing subdivisions. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 2) 
§ 3. - Drainage and drainage structures. 
(a)  Plans. The required drainage and drainage structure plans shall show the following information: 
(1)  Construction details of all drainage structures, including dimensions, reinforcement and components such as grades and manhole covers. 
(2)  Alignment of drainage easements, showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another drainage easement; the location of each drainage structure; and the location and size of all storm sewers. 
(3)  The centerline grade at each end and each 50-foot station of drainage ditches; the direction of the storm drainage flow at each intersection; the flow line elevations of each drainage structure; the flow line elevation of each storm sewer at each point of change, each end and at the intervening gradients. 
(4)  All construction in floodprone areas require evidence of floodproofing as required by National Flood Insurance Law. 
(b)  Drainage computations. 
(1)  Runoff rates shall be computed as determined by the engineer. In all cases, runoff rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing runoff water to the proposed subdivision on the basis of concrete lined channels and streets carrying stormwater in the contributing area. 
(2)  Streets may be used to carry stormwater if the calculated flow does not exceed that required by the engineer, or the velocity does not exceed ten feet per second. Minor streets shall be designed on a five-year frequency. Where streets are not capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection, drainage structures shall be provided. Street widths shall not be widened beyond the width determined by street classification. 
(3)  Concrete and earth lined channels and storm sewers shall be designed on the basis of a 25-year frequency. 
(4)  Alleys shall be designed on the basis of a five-year frequency to carry stormwater only from the lots within the blocks abutting the alleys. 
(c)  Construction standards. 
(1)  All drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications and to the lines and grades approved by the engineer. 
(2)  All concrete used in drainage structures shall develop a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch (psi) in 28 days. All castings shall conform to the standard specifications for gray iron castings, ASTM Designation A-48, for class 2 gray cast iron. 
(d)  Drainage ditches. In concrete lined ditches, the lining shall extend one foot beyond the height of the design flow line. Between the top of the lining and the top of the ditch an earth sodded side slope, not steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, may be used. Vertical concrete walls shall not exceed two feet in height unless such walls are properly fenced or enclosed. Earth sodded channels shall be mulch sodded over the entire surface area of the channel, and the side slope shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 3) 
§ 4. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  All gravity sewers shall be vitrified clay, asbestos cement, cast iron, PVC SDR 35 with rubber gaskets and pushed together joints, or concrete sewer pipe with delta seal or equal coupling conforming to American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) standard, and installed in conformance with the specifications of the water and sewer superintendent. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral sewer mains in residential areas shall be six inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of two feet per second. 
(c)  All outfall mains shall be of a sufficient size to accommodate the maximum anticipated flow from the entire tributary to the line, as approved by the water and sewer superintendent. 
(d)  Lift stations shall be furnished, where necessary, and shall be of such size and design as determined by the water and sewer superintendent or engineer. 
(e)  All sewer lines must be bedded as follows: 
(1)  Soils without rock are to be bedded with No. 6 sand, pea gravel or crushed rock over the pipe and on top of the pipe. 
(2)  Where the soil in the trenches is wet, No. 6 crushed rock one inch to 11/2 inches in size over the pipe and No. 6 sand on top of the pipe shall be used. 
(3)  When trenches are rocky, No. 6 sand, pea gravel or small crushed rock over the pipe and No. 12 sand, pea gravel or crushed rock on top of pipe shall be used. 
(f)  All sewer lines, when completed, must be tested with water or air so that no water will infiltrate into the sewer system. 
(g)  All sewer lines installed in a subdivision or any sewer line that connects to the city sewer system must be inspected by a city inspector. 
(h)  When the sewer line is completed, all manholes and cleanouts must be set flush with the finished grade or paving. 
(i)  All sewer lines in a subdivision must have a manhole every 500 feet and at each change of direction of 45 degrees or greater. All cement work in the bottom of a manhole must be finished so there is no obstruction to the water flow. Joints and connections in the manhole must be watertight so that no water will infiltrate into the sewer system. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 4) 
§ 5. - Water mains. 
(a)  All water distribution mains shall be installed in conformance with the specifications of the water and sewer superintendent or engineer. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral water mains shall be six inches in diameter. 
(c)  All principal mains shall be of a sufficient size to meet all anticipated requirements of the system, as determined by the water and sewer superintendent or engineer. 
(d)  The layout of mains shall assure two-way flow at all points in the system, with the exception of extensions on culs-de-sac and other dead ends approved by the water and sewer superintendent or engineer. 
(e)  Water mains will be located in alleys, when at all possible. 
(f)  All water lines must be bedded as follows: 
(1)  Soils without rock shall be bedded with No. 6 sand, pea gravel or crushed rock over the pipe and on top of the pipe. 
(2)  Where the soil in the trenches is wet, No. 6 crushed rock one inch to 11/2 inches in size over the pipe and No. 6 sand on top of the pipe shall be used. 
(3)  When trenches are rocky, No. 6 sand, pea gravel or small crushed rock over the pipe and No. 12 sand, pea gravel or crushed rock on top of the pipe shall be used. 
(g)  Water mains must be pressure tested at a minimum of 100 pounds working pressure, and found to be tight. 
(h)  All water mains, when installed in a subdivision, must be inspected by a city inspector. 
(i)  When water mains are completed, all valves and valve boxes must be set flush with the finished grade or paving. 
(j)  All water mains size six inches and larger must be cement asbestos, class 150 SDR 18 AWWA C-900 PVC, with rubber gaskets and pushed together joints, or cast iron, cement lined. All joints must be mechanical or fluidtight. 
(k)  All water mains four inches or smaller must be cement asbestos, PVC class 160 or cast iron, cement lined, and be fluidtight or mechanical joint. 
(l)  All water fittings must be cement lined and fluidtight or mechanical joint. 
(m)  Before water mains are put into service, they must be treated with chlorine for 24 hours. After 24 hours of treatment, such water mains must have a chlorine residual of 50 parts per million (ppm). After the city inspector has approved the 50 ppm test, the water mains must be flushed out until the chlorine residual is down to a maximum of five ppm. 
(n)  All change of direction fittings, such as tees, bends and valves, must be blocked by pouring concrete between the fitting and a solid bank. 
(o)  Water mains and sewer mains must not be laid less than nine feet apart horizontally. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 5) 
§ 6. - Tables. 
(a)  Table 1. Curb and block corner returns. See the city engineer for curb and block corner return specifications. 
(b)  Table 2. Grades and horizontal curves. See the city engineer for grade and horizontal curve specifications. 
(c)  Table 3. Street and alley base and surface standards. 
STREET AND ALLEY BASE AND SURFACE STANDARDS Street Classification Base Surface Major thoroughfare 12? flexible class 1 base material 1.  Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, 200 lbs. per sq. yd. 
2.  6? reinforced concrete, 3,500 psi, with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent No. 3 steel Secondary thoroughfare 8? flexible class 1 base material 1.  Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, 125 lbs. per sq. yd. 
2.  6? reinforced concrete, 3,500 psi, with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent No. 3 steel 
3.  Double bituminous surface treatment Minor or frontage street 8? flexible class 1 base material 1.  Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid or hot mix cold laid, 125 lbs. per sq. yd. 
2.  Rock asphalt, 11/2? 
3.  Double bituminous surface treatment 
4.  6? unreinforced concrete, 3,500 psi Alley 6? washing plant base material  
Notes: 
1. Equal materials may be approved by the engineer for the requirements in this table. 
2. The engineer agrees to provide inspections within 24 hours after receipt of written notice from the subdivider. Failure of the engineer to meet the time requirement will relieve the subdivider of the inspection requirement. 
3. Where more than one surface is described, the subdivider may use the described surface of his choice for the street classification. 
4. For material specifications, see tables 5-10 in this appendix A. 
(d)  Table 4. Curb and gutter base material standards. 
CURB AND GUTTER BASE AND SURFACE STANDARDS Street Classification Required Curb Base Street Surface Types Major thoroughfare 18? flexible class 1 base material Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, 200 lbs. per sq. yd. 6? flexible class 1 base material 6? reinforced concrete, 3,500 psi, with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent No. 3 steel Secondary thoroughfare 3? flexible class 1 base material Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid, 125 lbs. per sq. yd. 3? flexible class 1 base material 6? reinforced concrete, 3,500 psi, with 6 × 6 mesh or equivalent No. 3 steel Minor or frontage street 3? flexible class 1 base material Asphalt, hot mix, hot laid or hot mix cold laid, 125 lbs. per sq. yd. 3? flexible class 1 base material Rock asphalt, 11/2? 2? flexible class 1 base material Double bituminous surface treatment 3? flexible class 1 base material 6? unreinforced concrete, 3,500 psi  
(e)  Table 5. Texas Department of Highways 1972 Standard Specifications For Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges; Item No. 242; Flexible Base (Class 1). 
(1)  Description. Flexible base (class 1) shall consist of a foundation course for the surface course or other base course; be composed of crusher-run broken stone; and be constructed in one or more courses as specified in this subsection (e). 
(2)  Material. The material shall be crushed, and shall consist of durable particles of stone mixed with approved binding materials. The material shall be stockpiled and must be approved by the engineer. 
(3)  Types. Types of flexible base material are identified as follows: 
a.  Type A. Type A flexible base shall consist of crushed material as described in subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
b.  Type B. Type B flexible base shall consist of crushed material as described in subsection (e)(2) of this section, and, prior to crushing, shall be screened, partially screened or otherwise manipulated in a manner satisfactory to the engineer, in order that all soil, clay and other objectionable material will be removed. 
(4)  Grades. The material shall conform to the requirements of either grade 1 or grade 2 as follows: 
a.  Grade 1. 
1.  After placement on the road, the base material shall be wetted and windrowed. Job control samples for testing gradation shall be taken prior to compaction operations. The flexible base material shall meet the following requirements: 
Retained on 13/4 sieve      0% Retained on 7/8 sieve  8-30% Retained on 3/8 sieve 30-50% Retained on No. 4 sieve 45-65% Retained on No. 40 sieve 70-85  
2.  Material passing the No. 40 sieve shall be known as soil binder, and shall meet the following requirements when prepared in accordance with the Tex-101-E test method procedure: 
The liquid limit shall not exceed 40 The plasticity index shall not exceed 12  
3.  The processed material shall be of such soundness that when it is tested in accordance with the Tex-116-E test method, the resulting soil binder content (material passing the No. 40 sieve) shall not exceed 40 percent by weight of the total sample tested and the increase in soil binder shall not exceed 20. 
4.  When tested in accordance with the Tex-117-E test method, the material shall conform to the requirements for a class 1 base material. 
5.  With the written permission of the engineer, additives may be used in order to meet the requirements of this subsection (e)(4)a. 
b.  Grade 2. The grading, soil constants and/or triaxial requirements and other specification data for grade 2 flexible base material shall be shown on the plans. 
(5)  Construction methods. 
a.  Preparation of subgrade. The roadbed shall be excavated and shaped in conformity with the typical sections shown on plans and to the lines and grades as established by the engineer. All unstable or otherwise objectionable material shall be removed from the subgrade and replaced with approved material. All holes, ruts and depressions shall be filled with approved material, and if required, the subgrade shall be thoroughly wetted with water and reshaped and rolled to the extent directed in order to place the subgrade in an acceptable condition to receive the base material. The surface of the subgrade shall be finished to line and grade as established and in conformity with the typical section shown on the plans, and any deviation in excess of one-half inch in cross section and a length of 16 feet measured longitudinally shall be corrected by loosening, adding or removing material, reshaping and recompacting by sprinkling and rolling. Sufficient subgrade shall be prepared in advance to ensure satisfactory prosecution of the work. Subgrade shall be density controlled. 
b.  First course. 
1.  Immediately before placing the base material, the subgrade shall be checked as to conformity with the grade and section. The material shall be delivered in approved vehicles of a uniform capacity, and it shall be the charge of the contractor that the required amount of specified material shall be delivered in each 100-foot station. Material deposited upon the subgrade shall be spread and shaped the same day unless otherwise directed, in writing, by the engineer. If inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstances render the spreading of the material impractical during the first 24-hour period, the material shall be scarified and spread as directed by the engineer. 
2.  The material shall be sprinkled, if required, and shall then be shaped to conform to typical sections as shown on the plans in such a manner that a uniformity in grading of the material in place will be obtained that will not vary at any point on the road on any of the screen sizes from the grading of the material as set forth in subsection (e)(4) of this section. All areas and nests of segregated coarse or fine material not meeting such requirement shall be corrected or removed if directed by the engineer, and replaced with material meeting such requirement. The course shall then be sprinkled as required and compacted to the extent necessary to provide not less than the percent density as specified under subsection (e)(5)d. of this section. In addition to the requirements specified for density in subsection (e)(5)d. of this section, the full depth of flexible base shown on the plans shall be compacted to the extent necessary to remain firm and stable under construction equipment. After each section of flexible base is completed, tests will be made by the engineer, as necessary. If the material fails to meet the density requirements, it shall be reworked, as necessary, to meet such requirements. Throughout the entire operation, the shape of the course shall be maintained by blading, and the surface, upon completion, shall be smooth and in conformity with the typical section shown on the plans and to the established lines and grades. In the area on which pavement is to be placed, any deviation in excess of one-fourth inch in cross section and a length of 16 feet measured longitudinally shall be corrected by loosening, adding or removing material, reshaping and recompacting by sprinkling and rolling. All irregularities, depressions or weak spots which develop shall be immediately corrected by scarifying the areas affected, adding suitable materials, as required, reshaping and recompacting by sprinkling and rolling. 
3.  Due to any reason or cause, should the base course lose the required stability, density or finish before the surfacing is complete, it shall be recompacted and refinished at the sole expense of the contractor. Excessive loss of moisture in the completed base shall be prevented by sprinkling. 
4.  Traffic shall be controlled so that the repetitious application of heavy loads on unfinished base will be held to the absolute minimum. 
5.  During the period traffic is being directed over the course, the surface shall be satisfactorily maintained by the use of a sufficient number of approved blades, drags and such other equipment as is required. 
c.  Succeeding courses. Construction methods for succeeding courses shall be the same as prescribed for the first course. Prior to placing the surfacing on the completed base, the final course of the base shall be dry cured to the extent directed by the engineer. 
d.  Density. Each course of flexible base shall be compacted to the percent density stated in the requirements. The testing will be as outlined in the Tex-114-E test method. Field density determination shall be made in accordance with approved methods. 
(f)  Table 6. Texas Highway Department 1972 Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges; Item No. 300. 
ASPHALTS, OILS AND EMULSIONS Type-Grade Application and Mixing Heating and Storage Maximum Recommended Range, F Recommended Allowable, F AC-3, 5, 10, 20, 40, OA-175 275-325 350 400 OA-30 400-500 500 500 OA-400 220-300 350 350 RC-1 100-150 175 175 RC-2 125-180 200 200 RC-250 150-200 210 210 RC-3 160-210 230 230 RC-4 180-240 270 270 RC-5 215-270 285 285 MC-30  70-150 175 175 MC-70 125-170 200 200 MC-250 125-210 240 240 MC-800 175-260 275 275 MC-3000 225-275 290 290 RO-3 160-210 250 250 RO-4 100-150 200 200 RO-95 230-300 325 325 RO-Special 160-220 260 260 Cracked fuel oil 160-220 260 260 Crude oil 100-150 175 175 EA-10S, EA-11M, EA-CSS-1, EA-HVMS-90, EA-CRS02, EA-CRS-2h, EA-CMS-2, EA-CMS-2h 100-150 160 160 Cat. brown asph. 425-275 500 Special precoat material 125-250 275 275  
(g)  Table 7. Aggregate for surface treatments (class A); Item No. 301. 
AGGREGATE FOR SURFACE TREATMENTS (CLASS A) Percent by Weight Grade 1: Retained on 7/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 3/4? sieve  0-5 Retained on 5/8 ? sieve 85-100 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 2: Retained on 3/4? sieve 0 Retained on 5/8 ? sieve  0-5 Retained on 1/2? sieve 85-100 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 3: Retained on 5/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 1/2? sieve  0-5 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 85-100 Retained on 1/4? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 4: Retained on 1/2? sieve 0 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve  0-5 Retained on 1/4? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 5: Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 1/4? sieve  0-5 Retained on No. 4 sieve 50-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100  
Note: The aggregate shall not contain more than 1% by weight of fine dust, clay-like particles and/or silt present when tested. 
(h)  Table 8. Aggregate for surface treatments (precoated) (class B); Item No. 304. 
AGGREGATE FOR SURFACE TREATMENTS (PRECOATED) 

(CLASS B) Percent by Weight Grade 1: Retained on 1? sieve 0 Retained on 7/8 ? sieve  0-2 Retained on 3/4? sieve 20-35 Retained on 5/8 ? sieve 85-100 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 2: Retained on 7/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 3/4? sieve  0-2 Retained on 5/8 ? sieve  20-35 Retained on 1/2? sieve 85-100 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 3: Retained on 3/4? sieve 0 Retained on 5/8 ? sieve  0-2 Retained on 1/2? sieve 20-35 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 85-100 Retained on 1/4? sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 4: Retained on 5/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 1/2? sieve  0-2 Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 20-35 Retained on No. 4 sieve 95-100 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100 Grade 5: Retained on 3/8 ? sieve 0 Retained on 1/4? sieve 0-5 Retained on No. 10 sieve 99-100  
(i)  Table 9. Texas Highway Department 1972 Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges, Two-Course Surface Treatment; Item No. 322. 
(1)  Description. 
a.  This item shall consist of a wearing surface composed of two applications of asphaltic material, each covered with aggregate, constructed on the prepared base course or surface in accordance with the specifications set forth in this subsection (i). 
b.  Two-course surface treatment shall not be applied when the air temperature is below 60 degrees Fahrenheit and is falling, but it may be applied when the air temperature is above 50 degrees Fahrenheit and rising. Air temperature shall be taken in the shade and away from artificial heat. Asphaltic material shall not be placed when general weather conditions are not suitable, in the opinion of the engineer. 
(2)  Materials. 
a.  Asphaltic materials. The asphaltic materials used shall be one or more of the materials described in table 6 in subsection (f) of this section, entitled "asphalts, oils and emulsions," whichever are called for on the plans. 
b.  Aggregate. The aggregate used shall be of the types and grades as noted on the plans and selected from the types and grades prescribed in the items, table 7 in subsection (g) of this section, entitled "aggregate for surface treatments," table 8 in subsection (h) of this section, entitled "aggregates for surface treatments (precoated)," or in the item titled "aggregate for surface treatments (lightweight)." 
c.  Aggregate (stockpiled). When plans include the item entitled "aggregate (stockpiled)," aggregate of the type and grade specified for the surface treatment shall be stockpiled within the limits of the project at sites designated by the engineer. Stockpile sites shall be leveled, if required, and prepared as specified in this subsection (i). 
(3)  Construction methods. 
a.  The area to be treated shall be cleaned of dirt, dust or other deleterious matter by sweeping or other approved methods. If it is found necessary by the engineer, the surface shall be lightly sprinkled just prior to the first application of asphaltic material. 
b.  Asphaltic material of the type and grade shown on the plans for the first course shall be applied on the clean surface by an approved type of self-propelled pressure distributor operated so as to distribute the material, evenly and smoothly, in the quantity specified, under a pressure necessary for proper distribution. The contractor shall provide all necessary facilities for determining the temperature of the asphaltic material in all of the heating equipment and the distributor, for determining the rate at which it is applied, and for securing uniformity at the junction of two distributor loads. The distributor shall have been recently calibrated, and the engineer shall be furnished, an accurate and satisfactory record of such calibration. After beginning the work, should the yield on the asphaltic material appear to be in error, the distributor shall be calibrated in a manner satisfactory to the engineer before proceeding with the work. 
c.  Asphaltic material for each course may be applied for the full width of the surface treatment in one application unless the width exceeds 26 feet. No traffic or hauling will be permitted over the freshly applied asphaltic material. Asphaltic material shall not be applied until immediate coverage is assured. 
d.  Aggregate, of the type and grade shown on the plans for the first course, shall be immediately and uniformly applied and spread by an approved self-propelled continuous feed aggregate spreader unless otherwise authorized by the engineer, in writing. The aggregate shall be applied at the approximate rates directed by the engineer. The contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of the surface of the first course until the second course is applied. 
e.  The entire surface shall then be broomed, bladed or raked, as required by the engineer, and shall be thoroughly rolled with the types of rollers specified on the plans. Rolling equipment used shall meet the governing specifications for the item entitled "rolling." 
f.  The second course shall consist of asphaltic material and aggregate of the type and grade indicated on the plans for the second course. The asphaltic material and aggregate for the second course shall be applied and covered in the manner specified for the first application. The surface shall then be broomed, bladed or raked, as required by the engineer, and thoroughly rolled as specified for the first course. Asphaltic materials and aggregates for both courses shall be applied at the approximate rates indicated on the plans and as directed by the engineer. 
g.  The contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of the surface until the work is accepted by the engineer. 
h.  Temporary stockpiling of aggregates on the roadway will be permitted, provided, the stockpiles are spaced not less than 1,000 feet apart, and are placed so that they neither obstruct traffic nor interfere with roadway drainage. The contractor shall be responsible for the proper preparation of all stockpile areas before aggregates are placed thereon, including leveling and cleaning of debris necessary for protection of the aggregate to prevent any contamination thereof. 
i.  All storage tanks, piping, retorts, booster tanks and distributors used in storing or handling asphaltic materials shall be kept clean and in good operating condition, at all times, and they shall be operated in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the asphaltic material with foreign material. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to provide and maintain in good working order a recording thermometer at the storage heating unit, at all times. 
j.  The engineer will select the temperature of the application based on the temperature-viscosity relationship that will permit application of the asphalt within the limits recommended in table 6 contained in subsection (f) of this section, entitled "asphalts, oils and emulsions." The recommended range for the viscosity of the asphalt is 50-60 seconds, saybolt furol. The contractor shall apply the asphalt at a temperature within 15 degrees Fahrenheit of the temperature selected. 
(j)  Table 10. Texas Highway Department 1972 Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges, Specifications For Paving of Streets in the Brownwood City Limits by Double Penetration Method. 
(1)  Base course (Item No. 242). 
a.  As per existing specifications. 
b.  Finish by slush rolling, finish blading and flat-wheel roller finish. 
(2)  Prime oil coat (Item No. 310). 
a.  Thoroughly broom and remove dust and debris from the surface of the base to remove prime. 
b.  Dampen the surface slightly immediately prior to applying the prime coat, if needed. 
c.  Prime coat shall be MC-30 prime oil, at a rate of 0.25 gallon per square yard during the summer months, and MC-0 during the winter months, at a rate of 0.20 gallon per square yard. 
d.  The application procedure shall be as per Texas Highway Department Item No. 310, with an approved asphalt distributor. 
e.  The prime coat must be protected and allowed to stay exposed for a minimum of three days, a maximum of seven days or until the prime oil has completely penetrated. 
(3)  Two-course penetration (Item No. 300). 
a.  Asphalts shall be in accordance with the Texas Highway Department Item No. 300 (1972). 
1.  Summer months, AC-5 asphalt to be used. 
i.  First course at 0.3 gallon per square yard. 
ii.  Second course at 0.3 gallon per square yard. 
2.  Winter months, A-230 asphalt to be used. 
i.  First course at 0.35 gallon per square yard. 
ii.  Second course at 0.25 gallon per square yard. 
b.  Aggregate shall be in accordance with the Texas Highway Department Item No. 304. 
1.  First course shall be precoated aggregate (PB-3), at a rate of 100 square yards coverage per cubic yard. 
2.  Second course shall be precoated aggregate (PB-5), at a rate of 110 square yards coverage per cubic yard. 
c.  All work methods and equipment shall be in complete accordance with the Texas Highway Department Item No. 322 (1972), using a self-propelled aggregate spreader. 
(4)  Oil application and rock distribution. Oil application and rock distribution shall be subject to change on approval of the engineer. 
(5)  Performance of work. All work shall be as per the specifications set forth in this subsection (j), and shall be to the complete satisfaction of the engineer or his duly appointed representative. 
(k)  Table 11. Texas Highway Department 1972 standard specifications for construction of highways, streets and bridges, hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement, Item No. 340. 
(1)  Description. 
a.  This item shall consist of a base course, a leveling-up course, a surface course, or any combination of such courses as shown on the plans, each to be composed of a compacted mixture of mineral aggregate and asphaltic material. It is the intent of the specification set forth in this subsection to produce a mixture which, when designed and tested in accordance with approved laboratory procedures, shall have the following density and stability: 
Density ..... Minimum = 95 Maximum = 99 Optimum = 97 Stability ..... Not less than 30, except when otherwise shown on plans  
b.  If the mixture produced does not have the specified qualities, it shall be changed until it does. The pavement shall be constructed on the previously completed and approved subgrade and base as specified in subsection (k)(1)a. of this section, and in accordance with the details shown on the plans. 
(2)  Materials. 
a.  Mineral aggregate. The mineral aggregate shall be composed of a coarse aggregate and fine aggregate. Samples of coarse aggregate and fine aggregate shall be submitted and approval of both materials and sources must be obtained from the engineer prior to delivery. 
1.  Coarse aggregate. The coarse aggregate shall be the part of the aggregate retained on a No. 10 mesh sieve; shall consist of clean, tough, durable fragments of stone or gravel; and shall be practically free of clay, organic material or other injurious matter occurring either free or as a coating on the aggregate. Material removed by decantation shall not be more than two percent, except when the plasticity index of the removed material is less than six, the amount may be as much as four percent. The coarse aggregate shall have an abrasion of not more than 40 when subjected to the Los Angeles Abrasion Test (AASHO T-96). 
2.  Fine aggregate. The fine aggregate shall be the part of the aggregate passing the No. 10 sieve, and shall consist of sand or stone screenings. Sand shall be composed of durable stone particles, free from injurious foreign matter. Screenings shall be of the same or similar material as specified for coarse aggregate. 
3.  Mineral filler. The mineral filler shall consist of thoroughly dry stone dust, slate dust, Portland cement or other mineral dust approved by the engineer. The mineral filler shall be free from foreign and other injurious matter. When tested by standard laboratory methods, it shall meet the following grading requirements: 
Passing a 30-mesh sieve ..... 100% Passing a 200-mesh sieve ..... Not less than 55%  
b.  Asphaltic material. 
1.  Paving mixture. The type and grade of asphalt shall be as designated by the engineer after design tests have been made using the mineral aggregates that are to be used in the project and the various grades of asphalt. 
2.  Tack coat. The asphaltic material for the tack coat shall meet the requirements of cub-back asphalt RC-2, or emulsified asphalt EA-11M. 
(3)  Paving mixtures. The paving mixture shall consist of a uniform mixture of coarse aggregate, fine aggregate and asphaltic material. The grading of each constituent of the mineral aggregate shall be such that, when tested by standard laboratory methods, the mixture will conform to the limitations for master grading for the type specified in the following table: 
Type D (Fine Graded Surface Course) Passing 1/2 sieve ..... 100 Passing 3/8 sieve ..... 95-100 Passing 3/8 sieve, retained on No. 4 sieve ..... 20-50 Passing No. 4 sieve, retained on No. 10 sieve ..... 10-30 Total retained on No. 10 sieve ..... 50-70 Passing No. 10 sieve, retained on No. 40 sieve .....  0-30 Passing No. 40 sieve, retained on No. 80 sieve .....  4-25 Passing No. 80 sieve, retained on No. 200 sieve .....  3-25 Passing No. 200 sieve .....  0-6  
Note: The asphaltic material shall form from four percent to eight percent of the mixture, by weight. 
(4)  Construction methods. The prime coat, tack coat or the asphaltic mixture when placed with a spreading and finishing machine shall not be placed when the air temperature is below 50 degrees Fahrenheit and is falling, but it may be placed when the air temperature is above 40 degrees Fahrenheit and is rising. The asphaltic mixture, when placed with a motor grader, shall not be placed when the air temperature is below 60 degrees Fahrenheit and is falling, but may be placed when the air temperature is above 50 degrees Fahrenheit and is rising. The air temperature shall be taken in the shade away from artificial heat. It is further provided that the prime coat, tack coat or asphaltic mixture shall be placed only when the humidity, general weather conditions and temperature and moisture condition of the base are suitable, in the opinion of the engineer. If the temperature of the asphaltic mixture of a load, or any part of a load, becomes 50 degrees Fahrenheit or more less than the temperature selected by the engineer after being dumped from the mixer and prior to placing while passing through the lay-down machine, all or any part of the load may be rejected and payment will not be made for the rejected material. 
a.  Prime coat. If a prime coat is required, it shall be applied when the surface on which the prime coat is to be placed is approved by the engineer. The tack coat or asphaltic concrete shall not be applied on a previously primed flexible base until the primed base has completely cured to the satisfaction of the engineer. 
b.  Tack coat. Before the asphaltic mixture is laid, the surface upon which the tack coat is to be placed shall be cleaned thoroughly to the satisfaction of the engineer. The surface shall be given a uniform application of tack coat using asphaltic materials of the specification set forth in this subsection (k). The tack coat shall be applied, as directed by the engineer, with an approved sprayer, at a rate not to exceed 0.05 gallon per square yard of surface. Where the mixture will adhere to the surface on which it is to be placed without the use of a tack coat, the tack coat may be eliminated by the engineer. All contact surfaces of curbs and structures and all joints shall be painted with a thin uniform coat of the asphaltic material meeting the requirements for the tack coat. The tack coat shall be rolled with a pneumatic tire roller, when directed by the engineer. 
c.  Transporting asphaltic concrete. The asphaltic mixture, prepared as specified in this subsection (k), shall be hauled to the worksite in tight vehicles, previously cleaned of all foreign material. The dispatching of the vehicles shall be arranged so that all material delivered may be placed, and all rolling shall be completed, during daylight hours. The inside of the truck body may be given a light coating of oil, lime slurry or other material satisfactory to the engineer, if necessary, to prevent mixture from adhering to the body. 
d.  Compacting. The pavement shall be compressed thoroughly and uniformly with the specified rollers as directed by the engineer. 
(l)  Table 12. Cement concrete curb and gutter. 
(1)  Description. This item shall consist of Portland cement combined concrete curb and gutter or separate concrete gutter, with or without reinforcing steel, as required, constructed on an approved subgrade in accordance with the specifications set forth in this subsection (l), in conformity with the lines and grades established by the engineer, and details shown on the accepted drawings. 
(2)  Materials. 
a.  Cement. Standard Portland cement (type 1) or high early strength Portland cement (type 3) shall meet the requirements of current federal specifications SS-C-192 or AASHO standard specifications M134. 
b.  Mixing water. Water for use with cement shall be reasonably clean and free from injurious amounts of oil, acid, alkali, salt, organic matter or other deleterious substances. Water which is suitable for drinking or for ordinary household use may be accepted for use without being tested. 
c.  Coarse aggregate. 
1.  Coarse aggregate shall consist of gravel or crushed stone. It shall be of clean, hard, tough, durable pieces of reasonably uniform quality throughout, and shall be free from an excess of salt, alkali, vegetable matter or other objectionable material, either free or as an adherent coating on the aggregate. 
2.  When tested by approved methods, coarse aggregate shall conform to the following grading requirements: 
11/2 Maximum Size Aggregate Retained on 2 screen .....  0% Retained on 11/2 screen .....  0-5% Retained on 3/4 screen ..... 25-60% Retained on 1/4 screen ..... 95-100% Loss by decantation .....  0-1%  
d.  Fine aggregate. 
1.  Fine aggregate shall consist of sand, a combination and not more than 50 percent, by weight, of stone screenings and/or a combination of sand and mineral filler. The fine aggregate shall be free from an excess of salt, alkali or vegetable matter, and shall not contain more than 0.005 percent, by weight, of clay lumps. 
2.  When tested by approved methods, fine aggregate shall conform to the following grading requirements: 
Retained on 3/8 screen .....  0% Retained on 1/2 screen .....  0-5% Retained on No. 20 sieve ..... 15-50% Retained on No. 100 sieve ..... 85-100%  
e.  Proportions. Concrete shall contain five bags of cement per cubic yard, and shall be proportioned as follows: 
Quantity of water ..... 6 gallons Fine aggregate ..... 188 lbs. per bag of cement Coarse aggregate ..... 345 lbs. per bag of cement (Approximate 1:2:4 mix) (Weight of aggregate based on specific gravity of 2.65)  
(3)  Construction methods. 
a.  The subgrade shall be excavated and shaped to line, grade and cross section and, if considered necessary, hand tamped and sprinkled. If dry, the subgrade shall be sprinkled lightly before concrete is deposited thereon. 
b.  Forms shall be of wood or metal, of a section satisfactory to the engineer, straight, free of warp and of a depth equal to the depth of the curb. The forms shall be securely staked to the line and grade and maintained in a true position during the depositing of concrete. 
c.  Expansion joints will be placed every 50 feet along the length of each section of curb and gutter, except in the case of machine laid curb and gutter. Expansion joint material shall be prepared asphalt filler, one-half inch thick. In the case of machine laid curb and gutter, the expansion material shall be one inch thick and shall be placed every 200 feet. At the intersection of drives and sidewalks, a one-half inch expansion joint shall be required. 
d.  Contraction joints will be placed ten feet apart along the length of each section. The joint shall be cut across the curb and gutter and shall extend one-half inch below the surface of the gutter. 
e.  Concrete for the curb shall be mixed in a satisfactory manner and shall be placed in sections of the length indicated on the plans, and each section shall be separated by an expansion joint specified for the curb, and of the thickness indicated in subsection (l)(3)c. of this section. 
f.  After the concrete has been struck off and has become sufficiently set, the exposed surfaces shall be thoroughly worked with a float. The exposed edges shall then be rounded by the use of an edging tool to the radius as indicated on the drawings. When the concrete in the curb has been sufficiently set, the inside form shall be carefully removed and all the surface exposed shall be pointed up where necessary, and wetted and rubbed with a wooden block to remove all form marks and other irregularities, producing a finish similar in appearance to that previously finished. All curb finishing shall be performed prior to the initial set of the concrete and mortar surfacing and will not be permitted after the concrete has set. 
g.  No curb shall be laid down at intersections so as to permit vehicular traffic across corners. An island and curb return must be maintained in order to provide pedestrian safety. Corner curb returns may be tear-shaped if such shape is first approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Protection from traffic. The work shall be protected from vehicular traffic for at least seven days. The curb and gutter shall be backfilled immediately after the removal of the forms. No heavy equipment will be permitted on any concrete work for ten days after the day of pouring. The curb and gutter shall be backfilled to the full height of the concrete. 
(5)  Cleaning up. During construction, all gutters shall be kept open. Material stored on pavements shall be boxed in. Upon completion of the work, all building material and accumulated debris shall be removed and the job left in a presentable condition. 
(6)  Work to be supervised by the engineer. All work shall be done under the supervision and subject to the direction and approval of the engineer, whose decision shall be final. 
(7)  Lights and barricades. During the construction, the contractor shall erect barricades where needed, and ensure that necessary red lanterns or flares are placed so that pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall not be injured, in any manner. 
(8)  Contractor to preserve stakes. All stakes set by the engineer must be carefully preserved by the contractor. All grade stakes that must be replaced may be charged against the contractor at a rate of $0.50 per stake, except when such stakes were disturbed by a city crew. No charge will be made for remarking guard stakes. 
(9)  Inspections. All curb and gutter forms shall be inspected by the engineer prior to the pouring of concrete. After each inspection, one copy of the inspection report form will be given to the contractor, and another copy will be placed on file in the office of the engineer. The inspection report will state whether or not the forms pass inspection. The contractor shall not pour concrete in forms which have not been inspected or approved by the engineer. To get inspections from the engineering department, the contractor shall call in not later than 8:30 a.m. for morning inspections, and not later than 1:30 p.m. for afternoon inspections. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. A, § 6) 
APPENDIX B. - SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR PLATS AND SUBDIVISION DOCUMENTS 

§ 1. - Preapplication plans and data. 
    The following information should be furnished by the subdivider at the preapplication conference: 
(1)  General subdivision information. A description of existing conditions of the site and the proposed development, data on existing zoning and covenants, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, information describing the proposed number and size or lots, price range, business areas, public areas, proposed protective covenants and physical improvements. 
(2)  Location map. A sketch map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities within a one-mile radius, including shopping centers, public schools, parks, playgrounds and the development name and location, scale, north arrow, name and address of the developer, and the date. 
(3)  Sketch plan. A sketch showing the proposed layout of the streets, lots and other features, which may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. B, § 1) 
§ 2. - Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. 
    The preliminary plat shall include the following information and other pertinent data, as required, to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
(1)  Topographic data. 
a.  Existing boundary lines, bearings and distances, monument location and acreage of the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent properties, as shown by the official records of the county clerk, with adequate ties to well established points or league survey corners. 
c.  Location, size and centerline of all existing utilities, drainage structures, watercourses, railroads and other physical features affecting the proposed development. 
d.  Location, name, type and width of surfacing of all streets and alleys on or adjoining the proposed development. 
e.  Location, size and purpose of all easements and public areas on or adjoining the proposed development. 
f.  Existing zoning use classifications. 
g.  Topographic information, including existing and proposed contours, at intervals of not more than two feet or grades up to five percent, and not more than five feet for grades over five percent, and based on city standard datum or USGS datum, which shall be specified on the plat. 
h.  Information concerning other conditions on the site, such as marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, buildings and other significant features may be required by the engineer or planning and zoning commission, when deemed necessary. 
i.  Information concerning other conditions on adjacent land, such as the direction and gradient of the ground slope, buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nonresidential land uses of an adverse nature may be required by the engineer or planning and zoning commission, when deemed necessary. 
j.  In areas designated by the National Flood Insurance Agency as floodprone, the boundary lines and elevations of the floodprone designation shall be recorded on the plat. 
k.  The developer will furnish evidence of floodproofing in floodprone areas designated by the National Flood Insurance Agency. 
(2)  Title and certificate. 
a.  Present tract designation of record at the office of the county clerk. 
b.  New city or county block number, if any. 
c.  Title under which the new subdivision is to be recorded. 
d.  Notation stating the acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, benchmarks and date of the survey. 
(3)  Draft of protective covenants. A draft of the protective covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(4)  Drawings. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring 22 inches by 34 inches, at a scale of 100 feet to the inch, or larger, and shall show the following: 
a.  Existing conditions required in subsection (1) of this section. 
b.  Proposed streets, with names, right-of-way widths, roadway widths and types, central angles of street intersections, approximate grades and gradients, and similar information for alleys and other right-of-way easements. 
c.  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers. 
d.  Any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, utility facilities or other public use. 
e.  Any sites for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, industries, churches or other nonpublic uses, exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
f.  Building setback lines. 
g.  Topographic information, including existing and proposed contours, at intervals of not more than two feet for grades up to five percent, and not more than five feet for grades over five percent, and based on city standard datum or USGS datum, which shall be specified on the plat. 
h.  Information concerning other conditions on the site, such as marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, buildings and other significant features may be required by the engineer or planning and zoning commission, when deemed necessary. 
i.  Information concerning other conditions on adjacent land, such as the direction and gradient of the ground slope, buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nonresidential land uses of an adverse nature may be required by the engineer or planning and zoning commission, when deemed necessary. 
j.  In areas designated by the National Flood Insurance Agency as floodprone, the boundary lines and elevations of the floodprone designation shall be recorded on the plat. 
k.  The developer will furnish evidence of floodproofing in floodprone areas designated by the National Flood Insurance Agency. 
l.  Title, north arrow, scale and date. 
m.  Key map, drawn at a satisfactory scale to show the relation of the property to adjacent existing streets and identifying features for a distance of at least one-half mile. 
n.  Index sheet, if the plat is drawn on more than one sheet, showing the entire subdivision, at a suitable scale. 
o.  Name and address of the developer. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. B, § 2) 
§ 3. - Final plats. 
    The final plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Data. 
a.  Primary control points, approved by the engineer, or a description and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and all other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves. 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Locations, dimensions and purposes of all easements. 
e.  Number to identify each lot, site and block. 
f.  Purpose for which all sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments. 
i.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining public lands by the recorded name, date and number. 
j.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent unplatted land. 
(2)  Titles and certificates. 
a.  Certification of registered professional engineer or registered state land surveyor, certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat. 
b.  Certification of the title, showing that the subdivider is the landowner. 
c.  Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and all sites for public uses, as required by this appendix B. 
(3)  Protective covenants. Protective covenants, in a form for recording. 
(4)  Drawings. The final plat shall be drawn in ink, on 0.003 polyester film, measuring 22 inches by 34 inches, at a scale of 100 feet to the inch, or larger. If more than one sheet is necessary, the plat shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. In the case of large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively, in continuous sections, satisfactory to the engineer or planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. B, § 3) 
§ 4. - Documents. 
    The wording of the various documents needed to accompany and substantiate subdivision plat submission will depend on local practices and conditions and should be legal instruments drawn up by the city attorney. It is recommended that the following documents be included as a part of this appendix B: 
(1)  Standard dedication forms. Standard dedication forms for individuals, corporations and lienholders, to include: 
a.  Dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and easements to the public forever. 
b.  Building purpose of lots. 
c.  Minimum lot sizes, with and without public sewers. 
d.  Temporary right-of-way for a temporary turnaround, access or other purpose. 
e.  Conditions affecting partial or half streets, and utility easements in such streets. 
f.  Adjusting of pipelines and utilities, where necessary, without cost to the public. 
g.  Establishment of building lines, alleys and easements on adjacent property. 
h.  Restricting side and rear lot access to certain streets. 
i.  Aerial and special drainage easements. 
j.  Drainage structures under private driveways (rural). 
k.  Drainage of septic tanks or sewage into public ditches, streets, roads or alleys prohibited. 
(2)  Certificates. 
a.  Payment of taxes. 
b.  Engineer's or land surveyor's certificate. 
c.  Engineer's certificate that public works improvements meet all requirements and are either constructed and installed, or satisfactory performance on deposit made therefor. 
d.  County clerk's certification of filing and recording. 
(3)  Approvals. 
a.  Approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
b.  Any other restrictions, acknowledgements, certificates and approvals needed to properly document the design, submittal, approval and recording of the subdivision. 
(Code 1995, ch. 156, app. B, § 4) 
Chapter 98 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt and modify the zoning plan, § 20. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-81 et seq.; sexually oriented businesses, § 10-91 et seq.; code enforcement, ch. 26; environment, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; buildings and building regulations, ch. 78; floods, ch. 82; manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86; signs, ch. 90; subdivisions, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Brownwood Zoning Code." 
(Code 1995, § 158.01) 
Sec. 98-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-1 agriculture district means the district which is intended to provide a location for land situated on the fringe of an urban area and used for agricultural purposes, but then may become an urban area in the future. Generally, the A-1 agricultural districts will be near development; therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in the district should not be detrimental to urban land uses. The types of uses and the area and intensity of uses permitted in the district shall encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made. 
    Accessory structures shall mean any permanent structure, building, carport, screened rooms, or any other type of improvement erected on a recreational vehicle space other than the primary eligible recreational vehicle and approved accompanying vehicles. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building. 
    Alley means a way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Amusement park means any lot, tract or parcel of land, or any improvement thereon, either temporary or permanent, used in whole or in part for the operation and maintenance of any game of skill or chance, circus, carnival, riding devices, stationary or mobile, or any combination thereof, any of which is operated for profit or nonprofit purposes. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms intended, designed or used as a residence by a single family. 
    Apartment hotel means a building designed for or containing both apartments and individual guest rooms or suites or rooms and apartments, and in which may be furnished services ordinarily furnished in hotels. 
    Apartment house. See the definition of "Dwelling, multifamily." 
    Art gallery means any building or room used for the exhibit and/or commercial sale of works of art. 
    Basement means a story having part, but not more than one-half, of its height above grade, and used for storage, garages for use of the occupants of the building, janitor or watchman quarters or other utilities common for the rest of the building. A basement used for such purposes shall not be counted as a story. 
    Boardinghouse and roominghouse mean a dwelling unit or group home where lodging is provided: 
(1)  For compensation; 
(2)  By prearrangement; 
(3)  In rooms with kitchen facilities; 
(4)  For five or more roomers or boarders; 
(5)  For periods of one week or longer; and 
(6)  With or without meals. 
    Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body, other than in an individual's earlobe, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
    Body piercing studio means a facility in which body piercing is performed. 
    Building and structure mean a building or structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deckline of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Campus means the grounds and buildings of a university, college or school, and the grassy area in the central part of the grounds. 
    Clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a physician or group of physicians. 
    Club means a building, or portion thereof, or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association or person for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    College means an independent institution of higher learning offering a course of general studies leading to a bachelor's degree. 
    Commercial office (CO) district means a district the regulations of which are intended to encourage office development of high character in a generally noncommercial environment. The selected business and/or professional offices allowed in a CO district have relatively low traffic generation requirements, handle little or no products, and require limited identification by signs or other such devices. 
    Convenience store means a retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery and dairy products, and similar items, primarily for off-premises consumption. A convenience store will be considered to contain 2,000 square feet or less of floor area. A convenience store may or may not have self-service gasoline pumps in connection with the operation thereof. 
    Cosmetic tattoo establishment means an establishment where trained personnel apply microinjections of pigment to the dermal layer of the skin so that facial cosmetics are applied on a permanent basis. This does not include a tattoo parlor. 
    Detention facility means a facility for the detention or incarceration of people, including, but not limited to, residential facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and under the supervision of sworn officers, i.e., a halfway house. 
    Disability and disabled person, for the purpose of determining who is eligible for residency in a community home allowed as household living, means a person whose ability to care for himself, perform manual tasks, learn, work, walk, see, hear, speak or breathe is substantially limited because the person has: 
(1)  An orthopedic, visual, speech or hearing impairment; 
(2)  Alzheimer's disease; 
(3)  Presenile dementia; 
(4)  Cerebral palsy; 
(5)  Epilepsy; 
(6)  Muscular dystrophy; 
(7)  Multiple sclerosis; 
(8)  Cancer; 
(9)  Heart disease; 
(10)  Diabetes; 
(11)  Mental retardation; 
(12)  Emotional illness. 
    District means any section of the city for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Dormitory means a space in a unit where group sleeping accommodations are provided, with or without meals, for persons not members of the same family group, in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, such as in college dormitories, military barracks and ski lodges. 
    Dwelling means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, three or more families. Such term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, etc. For the purpose of this chapter, regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental periods of less than one week shall be considered a hotel. 
    Dwelling, patio home, means a single-family dwelling unit constructed with either minimum five-foot side yards on both sides of the dwelling unit as a detached unit on an individual lot or as a zero lot line dwelling within one foot of one side lot line with open yards required on all remaining sides, and constructed as a detached unit on an individual lot. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one family. 
    Dwelling, twinhome means a single-family dwelling unit constructed as a two-unit structure, with each unit located on a separate lot and separated by a vertical lot line wall. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, two families. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single-family housekeeping unit and doing their own cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse or hotel, as defined in this section. 
    Filling station means any building, structure or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuel, oil or accessory, including lubrication of automobiles and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories, but not including major repair work, such as motor replacement, body and fender repair or spray painting. 
    Frontage means all of the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street or, if the street is a dead-end street, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles which are owned and used by the occupants of the building to which such building is an accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two tons' capacity. 
    Garage, public, means a building, or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Garage, storage or parking means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for term storage, by prearrangement, of motor-driven vehicles, as distinguished from daily storage furnished to transients, and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold, but no motor-driven vehicles are equipped, repaired, hired or sold. 
    Grade means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets. 
(3)  For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by the city engineer. 
    Group home and group living facility mean a facility or dwelling unit housing more than four persons who are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, and that operates under a housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. Also, see the definition of "Boardinghouse" and "roominghouse." 
    Group living means residential occupancy that does not meet the definition of "Household living." 
    Home occupation. See the definition of "Conditional uses." 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging, or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge, at all hours. As a hotel, such establishment is open to the public in contradistinction to a "boardinghouse," "lodginghouse" or "apartment," which terms are separately defined in this section. 
    Household and housekeeping unit mean: 
(1)  One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in a dwelling unit; 
(2)  A group of not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit; or 
(3)  Two unrelated persons and their children, living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Household living means residential occupancy of a dwelling by a household. 
    HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on the site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term "HUD-code manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle," as that term is defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
State Law reference- Similar definition, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1201.003. 
    Institution means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or establishment for public use. 
    Junkyard means a place where waste or discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment. 
    Kennel means any place where more than four cats or dogs, or any combination of cats and dogs when the total exceeds four animals, over the age of ten weeks are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept. 
    Laundromat means an establishment providing home type washing, drying or ironing machines for hire, to be used by customers on the premises. 
    Livestock means domestic animals, other than dogs, cats or other household pets, typically raised for human consumption, fiber and/or labor and shall include, but not be limited to, horses, cows, mules, burros, cows, sheep, goats, llamas, alpacas, any hybrid of these or any other four-legged animal. 
    Loading space means a space within the main building, or on the same lot with the main building, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and having a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended for occupancy, by a use permitted in this chapter, including one main building, together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street or an officially approved place. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk, or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Major thoroughfare means a principal traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city, which is intended to connect remote parts of the city, or areas adjacent thereto, and to act as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways. The term shall include each street designated as a thoroughfare on the thoroughfare plan, including all existing and proposed major streets shown on the major street plan adopted by the planning and zoning commission. 
    Manufactured house and manufactured home means a HUD-code manufactured home or mobile home, and collectively mean and refer to both such homes. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on the site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term "mobile home" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Travel trailers, pickup coaches, motorhomes, camping trailers or other recreational vehicles. 
(2)  Modular homes. 
    Mobile home park means a unified development of no less than ten mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single-person ownership, meeting all requirements of chapter 86. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision named as such by the city council for the development of mobile home residences, regardless of ownership. 
    Motor court and motel mean a building, or group of buildings, used for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers. 
    Nonconforming use means the use of land or a building, or portion thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Nursing or convalescent home means any premises where more than three persons are lodged and furnished meals and nursing care. 
    Park shall mean a recreational vehicle park. 
    Parking area means an open, unoccupied space used or required for use for parking of automobiles exclusively, and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are charged. 
    Parking space means a surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles. 
    Parkway means the portion of a street right-of-way between the property line and the curbline. 
    Place means an open, unoccupied space or a public or private thoroughfare, other than a street or alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Private club means any corporation, association, club or organization, incorporated or unincorporated, required to be licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (See chapter 6 of this Code.) 
    Recovery facility, alcohol and drug, means residential programs, including third stage recovery programs and other programs dedicated to the assistance of persons with psychiatric, alcohol and/or drug problems, that may provide care, training, treatment for psychiatric, alcohol or drug problems, or that may simply provide a residential setting, with or without counseling services, for persons with psychiatric, alcohol and/or drug problems, including, but not limited to, any boardinghouse or group home used and established for residential purposes for persons with psychiatric, alcohol and/or drug problems. 
    RR Residential rural district. This district and its regulations are intended to provide for compatible land, building and structures oriented primarily towards low-density residential and select agricultural uses. The RR district serves as a transitional element between agricultural activities, including the keeping of livestock, and those of higher density development. Agricultural uses in the RR district should not be detrimental to urban land uses. 
    Recreational vehicle shall mean any licensed camp trailer, travel trailer, motor home or fifth wheel designed to provide temporary living quarters for travel and recreational and vacation uses. Such vehicles shall not exceed eight and one-half feet in width and 46 feet in length and shall be constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by motor vehicle; and shall also include pick-up campers, converted buses and pop-up tent trailers. 
    Recreational vehicle park shall mean any contiguous lot, tract or parcel of land upon which accommodation is provided for two or more recreational vehicles for the parking of recreational vehicles occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for any length of time and is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    Riding academy. See the definition of "Stable." 
    Secondhand merchandise store means a store which specializes in the sale of used merchandise, including surplus stores and rummage shops. 
    Space shall mean a plot of ground within the park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle together with such open space as required by this section. This term shall also include the terms lot, stand and site. 
    Special education-rehabilitation center means any facility in which persons live while receiving therapy, training and/or counseling, on-premises or off-premises, for the following purposes: 
(1)  To assist such persons in recuperating from the affects of drugs or alcohol. 
(2)  Housing under supervision as an alternative to institutionalization, including, but not limited to, prerelease, work release and probationary programs. 
    Spot zoning means zoning changes involving only small parcels. Such term amends the basic zoning ordinance, reclassifying one or more tracts or lots for a use prohibited by the original zoning ordinance and out of harmony with such ordinance. ( Note: Spot zoning is criticized as being discriminatory, and is considered an illegal practice. Spot zoning can do much to defeat the purpose and objectives of a good land use plan; however, it should be emphasized that determining the exact size of a spot zone is difficult. Not all amendments to this chapter constitute spot zoning. Validity depends on the particular circumstances of each individual case.) 
    Stable means a private facility, confined area or structure with a capacity for more than four horses or mules. 
    Stockyard and commercial feedlot mean confined areas for the feeding or holding of certain animals, such as cattle, swine, sheep and goats. 
    Story means the portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four feet above the floor of the story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor, caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed to be a full story. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
    Structural alteration means any change which would modify a supporting member of a structure, such as a bearing wall, column, beam or girder. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limiting the generality thereof, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, and arbors. 
    Tattoo parlor means an establishment where trained personnel apply microinjections of pigment to the dermal layer of the skin, not including establishments that provide cosmetic makeup application. 
    Tourist, automobile trailer or house car means any vehicle used as sleeping or living quarters, mounted on wheels, or intended to be mounted on wheels, for transportation. 
    Tourist, automobile trailer or house car park or camp means any plot of ground where accommodation is provided for one or more automobile trailers or house cars used as living or sleeping quarters. 
    Tourist home means a building, other than a hotel, where lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation for not more than 20 individuals and open to transient guests, with which there is used only one sign not more than two square feet in area, the lighting of which shall be regulated by the building official. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of not less than three, nor more than six, contiguous units. 
    University means an institution of higher learning, providing facilities for teaching and research, and authorized to grant academic degrees, and specifically made up of an undergraduate division which confers bachelors' degrees and a graduate division which comprises a graduate school and professional schools each of which may confer masters' degrees and doctorate degrees. 
    Yard means an open space, at grade, between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building, or any projections thereof, other than the projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building, or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On all lots, the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building, or any projections thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 158.02; Ord. No. 00-07, § I, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 00-45, § I, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 01-32, § I, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 01-38, § I, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 04-12, § I, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 10-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-27, § I, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1.0, 3-10-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-3. - Interpretation. 
    Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Code 1995, § 158.77) 
Sec. 98-4. - Effect upon existing permits, agreements, rights, etc. 
(a)  Existing permits and private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any: 
(1)  Permits issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or 
(2)  More restrictive covenant, condition or agreement evidenced by a private agreement. 
(b)  Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. By the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless, specifically, the use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use; otherwise, the use shall remain a nonconforming use where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but that prosecutions and suits for offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted, or causes presently pending be proceeded with, in all respects, as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(c)  Completion of existing buildings. 
(1)  Nothing in this chapter, nor any amendments to this chapter, which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided that the building either was actually under construction at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or was authorized by a building permit before the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and further, provided that construction shall have been started within 90 days from passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Commitments, with reference to the construction of public utility buildings necessary for proposed expansion of the city, made prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be observed. 
(Code 1995, § 158.74(A)-(C)) 
Sec. 98-5. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    Except as specifically provided in this chapter: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the land is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height and area limits established in this chapter for the district in which the building is located, nor be used except for a use permitted in the district in which the building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided in this chapter, except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(4)  The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or for any building erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which the lot is located. 
(5)  Every building erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and except as provided in this chapter, there shall not be more than one main building on one lot. 
(6)  Temporary campus buildings will be subject to all regulations enforced in the building code of the city, per approval of compliance of such code and other city ordinances from the building official/electrical inspector, plumbing/mechanical inspector and fire marshal. Final decisions rest with the city council. 
(7)  Manufactured housing must be properly tied down in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and procedures. If no such specifications and procedures are available, reference shall be made to the building code of the city. 
(8)  The use of manufactured housing, as defined in section 98-1 and V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1201 as a temporary office/commercial building, is allowed, provided that all commercial building criteria is met, including accessibility standards. The use of manufactured housing for a temporary office/commercial building shall be limited to construction sites when site development for permanent buildings has been approved. 
(Code 1995, § 158.03) 
Sec. 98-6. - Remedies. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the general law or terms of this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided for in section 98-8, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate the violation; to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the land. The definition of any violation of the terms of this chapter as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking civil remedies given to the city by law in such cases, but such remedies shall be cumulative of, and in addition to, the penalties prescribed for such violation. 
(Code 1995, § 158.78) 
Sec. 98-7. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any requirements thereof, or who shall erect or alter any building, or who shall commence to erect or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted or approved under this chapter, shall, for each and every violation or noncompliance, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as set forth in section 98-8. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection with the building, structure or premises, or part thereof, who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 98-8. 
(Code 1995, § 158.98) 
Sec. 98-8. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section 1-14, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1995, § 158.99) 
Secs. 98-9-98-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-41-98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Zoning Board of Adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq. 

Sec. 98-61. - Created; organization; power of subpoena, etc. 
(a)  Created. A board of adjustment is created, consisting of five citizens of the city, each to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, for the terms of three years, respectively, provided that when the first board of adjustment shall be appointed under this section, one member shall be appointed for one year, two for two years and two for three years. At least one member of the board of adjustment shall be a member of the planning and zoning commission, and his term shall expire at the same time as his term on the planning and zoning commission. A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term. In the absence of a board of adjustment, the city council shall perform all functions of a board of adjustment. 
(b)  Organization. 
(1)  The hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public; however, the board of adjustment may go into executive session for discussion, but not for vote, on any case before it. The board of adjustment shall organize annually and elect a president, vice president and secretary. The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official of the city, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to approve any special exception or variance. From time to time, the board of adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter and shall furnish a copy of such rules and regulations to the building official, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of the resolutions and orders of the board of adjustment shall be in accordance with such rules and regulations. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall hear the intervention of any owner of any property adjacent to, in the rear of or across the street from a lot as to which the granting of any building permit is pending and shall also hear any other parties in interest. 
(c)  Power of subpoena, etc. The board of adjustment shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and punish for contempt, and may require the production of documents under such regulations as it may establish. 
(Code 1995, §§ 31.42, 31.52, 158.55; Ord. No. 02-21, §§ IIA, IIB(158.55), 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
Sec. 98-62. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Special exceptions. To hear and decide upon applications for special exceptions, when such use or development is specifically authorized under this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship, and the granting of the variance would provide substantial justice conforming with the spirit and intent thereof. 
(3)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any decision or determination made by any administrative official of the city in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-63. - Requests for special exceptions. 
(a)  Application. The owner of the land for which a special exception is requested, or his duly authorized agent, shall complete the appropriate form, supplying all information prescribed in the form, and deliver such form to the planning department of the city, unless the special exception requested is specifically authorized by this division. If the proposed use requiring a special exception is also required to comply with conditions specified in article V, division 3 of this chapter, or as otherwise specified in this chapter, the applicant shall also indicate, by plans or other documents, that such applicable conditions will be met. 
(b)  Fee. The application fee shall be paid by the proponent in accordance with the city's fee ordinance, which is approved on an annual basis. The request shall not be placed upon the agenda of the board of adjustment until the fee has been paid. 
(c)  Schedule of hearing. After receipt of the properly executed request from the owner or his agent and receipt of the application fee, the planning department shall schedule the request for a hearing by the board of adjustment by placing it upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of adjustment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the written request form and all attachments must be delivered to the planning department and all fees paid at least 20 days prior to the public hearing. The proponent or his agent shall be present at the hearing. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing on a special exception shall be as provided in section 98-67. 
(e)  Action. The board of adjustment shall deny a request for a special exception unless it determines that: 
(1)  The requested special exception will establish only the uses permitted under the section of this chapter pertaining to the zoning district involved or as is specifically set forth in subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  The requested special exception will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent property, either as filed or subject to such requirements as the board of adjustment finds to be necessary to protect and maintain the stability of adjacent properties. 
(3)  The requested special exception will place no undue burden on public facilities. Public facilities to be considered shall include, but are not limited to, streets and alleys, water and sewer utilities, schools, parks and public agencies. 
(4)  The location of the proposed activities and improvements are clearly defined on the site plan filed by the applicant, where required. 
(5)  Approval of the special exception is clearly in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter, and provides for substantial justice. 
(f)  Safeguards and conditions. In approving any special exception, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this section. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under sections 97-8 and 98-8. 
(g)  Authorization. In hearing and deciding special exceptions, the board of adjustment may, after public notice and hearing and subject to the safeguards and conditions contained in this section, authorize special exceptions to this chapter, as follows: 
(1)  Permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in a single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the maps fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of this chapter, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on such maps. 
(3)  Permit the erection and/or use of a building or the use of premises for railroads or public utility services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing railroads and utilities may continue to be operated and maintained in dwelling and commercial districts, but no new railroad or utility structure, other than the usual poles, wires and underground utilities, shall be established in the districts, except when authorized by the board of adjustment. 
(4)  Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied as a nonconforming use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the board of adjustment may not permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or public enemy to the extent of more than 60 percent of its fair market value unless the board of adjustment finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly. 
(5)  Permit the extension of a nonconforming use in a building upon a lot occupied as a nonconforming use. 
(6)  Permit the use of temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work in any district for only the period of time that the construction work is in progress. 
(7)  Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make necessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(8)  Permit land within 300 feet of a multiple dwelling to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multiple dwelling, but only when there is positive assurance that the land will be used for that purpose during the existence of the multiple dwelling. 
(9)  Determine whether an industry should be permitted within the M-1 restricted industrial district and the M-2 industrial district because of the methods by which it would be operated and its effect upon uses within surrounding zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.1), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-64. - Requests for variances. 
(a)  Application. The owner of the land for which a variance is requested, or his duly authorized agent, shall complete the appropriate application form, supplying all information prescribed in the form, and deliver such form to the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan for which the variance is requested. The application and all attachments must be delivered to the planning department and all fees shall be paid at least 20 days prior to the public hearing. 
(b)  Fee. The application fee shall be paid by the proponent in accordance with the city's fee ordinance, which is approved on an annual basis. The request shall not be placed upon the agenda of the board of adjustment until the fee has been paid. 
(c)  Schedule of hearing. After receipt of the properly executed request from the owner or his agent and receipt of the application fee, the planning department shall schedule the request for a hearing by the board of adjustment by placing it upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of adjustment. The proponent or his agent shall be present at the hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the written request form and all attachments must be delivered to the planning department and all fees paid at least 20 days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing on a variance shall be as provided in section 98-67. 
(e)  Action. The purpose of granting a variance is to modify the application of this chapter as it applies to a specific piece of property which, because of peculiar circumstances applicable only to the property, prevent the property from being used on the same basis as other property in the same zoning district. In reaching its decision to grant a variance, the board of adjustment shall determine that all of the following conditions are present: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land or improvement in question and which are not applicable to other land or buildings in the same zoning district. Such conditions or circumstances shall not be the result of actions taken by the applicant. 
(2)  Due to special conditions and peculiarities of the land or improvements in question, literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship, other than financial, to the owner of the land and prohibit reasonable use of the land. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest. Evidence shall be made that granting a variance is consistent with the intent of this chapter, is in harmony with this chapter and will not be injurious to neighboring properties or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not allow activities in any district which are prohibited by the provisions of the district. This chapter is declared to be a definition of the public interest regarding land use and structural arrangement. Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted which permits a use not generally or by special exception is permitted in a zoning district by the terms of this chapter. 
(5)  The granting of the variance will not permit a lower degree of flood protection than the flood protection elevation specified for the particular area, except as otherwise allowed under stormwater management regulations. 
(6)  The granting of the variance will not permit standards lower than the standards required by state law. 
(7)  By comparison with the general good served by literal enforcement of this chapter, the hardship, other than financial, which would be alleviated by granting the request for the variance is of a greater significance. 
(8)  Nonconforming uses of neighboring land or improvements to such land in the same district, as well as permitted use of land or improvements thereto in other districts, are not considered grounds for issuance of a variance. 
(f)  Safeguards and conditions. In approving any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this section. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under sections 97-8 and 98-8. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.2), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-65. - Administrative review. 
    Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or any department or board of the city affected by any decision of an administrative official of the city in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(1)  Application. An appeal shall be taken by filing a notice with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment within no more than 15 days after the decision in question has been rendered by the administrative official. 
a.  Such notice shall be taken on the appropriate application form provided by the planning department, specifying the grounds for the appeal. 
b.  If an appeal is made from a determination by the building official that no special exception of the nature requested is authorized by this division, a request for the special exception in question shall be taken and processed concurrently with the appeal of the proponent. 
(2)  Fee. The application fee shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with the city's fee ordinance, which is approved on an annual basis. The request shall not be placed on the agenda of the board of adjustment until the fee has been paid. 
(3)  Schedule of hearing. After receipt of the properly executed appeal from the applicant, the planning department shall schedule the request for a hearing by the board of adjustment by placing it on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of adjustment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the written request form and all attachments must be delivered to the planning department and all fees shall be paid at least 20 days prior to the public hearing. 
(4)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing on an appeal shall be as provided in section 98-67. 
(5)  Presentation of findings. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed was taken. At the time of the public hearing, the planning department's representative shall present the basis for the appeal by the proponent by stating the sections of this chapter which sets forth the requirements. 
(6)  Burden of proof. The applicant or his agent shall be present at the hearing. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action by the board of adjustment. 
(7)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or a court of record on application to the officer from whom the appeal or application is taken and on due cause shown. In the case of a concurrent request for a special exception or variance where the proponent is already in violation of the terms of this chapter, proceedings shall be stayed as in the case of an appeal. In either case, if the board of adjustment shall deny the appeal or application, the stay shall remain in effect for ten days following the decision of the board of adjustment. 
(8)  Action for administrative review. In exercising its power, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the laws of the state, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision or determination appealed from and make such decision or determination as should be made, and shall have all of the powers of the officer or board from whom the appeal or application is taken. The board of adjustment shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. If the appeal shall be from the refusal of the planning department to accept a request for a special exception or a variance, and the board of adjustment shall find that the request shall have been accepted, the board of adjustment shall then proceed to hear the request which shall have been forwarded with the appeal after the giving of due notice. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.3), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-66. - Application fees. 
(a)  Upon filing an appeal or application for a variance or special exception, the applicant shall pay a filing fee to the city in accordance with the city's fee ordinance, which is approved on an annual basis. Such fees shall be applied to costs of processing applications required by this division and applicable state laws. Should the application be withdrawn or tabled at the request of the applicant, an additional application fee will be paid to the city to be applied to reprocessing before the item will be considered on a subsequent agenda. Filing fees, which shall accompany each application, shall in no way be refundable to the applicant. No building permit which may first require granting of a variance or special exception shall be issued unless and until such fees shall have been paid in full. 
(b)  The fees and charges for services furnished by the city shall be determined by the city council from time to time and placed on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.4), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-67. - Public hearings; notices. 
    The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all appeals or applications made. Written notice of such public hearing shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the appeal or application is made, except for requested variances from separation requirements for liquor stores, in which case, written notice shall be provided to persons who are owners of real property lying within 300 feet of the property on which the application is made. At a public hearing for any appeal or application, any interested party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on the city tax roll. Notice may be served by letter, properly addressed and with postage paid, deposited in the U.S. mail. Alternately, in locations where city tax rolls do not provide sufficient indication of property ownership, notice may be given by publishing the required information in a local daily newspaper at least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.5), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-68. - Vote required for favorable decision. 
    The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to decide in favor of an application on any matter upon which the board of adjustment is required to act under the terms of this division. Likewise, the concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any decision or determination of any administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.6), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-69. - Time limit on authorization. 
    Any special exception or variance granted by the board of adjustment under the provisions of this division shall authorize the issuance of the building permit for a period of 180 days from the date of favorable action by the board of adjustment unless the board of adjustment shall have approved a longer period of time and has shown such specific longer period of time in the minutes of its action. If the building permit shall not have been applied for within such 180-day period or such extended period of time as the board of adjustment may have specifically granted, then the special exception or variance shall be deemed to have been waived, and all rights under such special exception or variance terminated, as of the expiration of the 180 days. Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal, and such subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulation and requirement for a hearing as specified in this division for the original appeal. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.7), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-70. - Appeals from decisions. 
    Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any officer, department or board of the city may present a duly verified petition to a court of record, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the date of the decision by the board of adjustment, and not after such time. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.8), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-71. - Limitation on reapplications. 
    When the board of adjustment has denied a proposal, no new application of a similar nature shall be scheduled for hearing before the board of adjustment for 12 months after the date of the board of adjustment's denial unless the board of adjustment consents to the hearing. Applications which have been withdrawn at or before the board of adjustment's meeting may be resubmitted at any time for a hearing before the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 02-21, § IIB(158.56.9), 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 98-72-98-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 98-91. - Authority. 
    From time to time, the city council may amend, supplement or change, by ordinance, the boundaries of a district or the regulations established in this chapter as provided by the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(A), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-92. - Request to change boundaries or regulations. 
    Any person or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property may initiate proceedings to consider a change in zoning on such property, or the planning and zoning commission or city council may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings to consider a change in zoning on any property. Any person may petition the city council for a change or amendment to the provisions of this chapter, or the planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or on request from the city council, institute a study and propose changes and amendments, in the public interest. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(B), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-93. - Application for zoning change. 
    Each application for zoning or an amendment or change to the existing provisions of this chapter shall be made, in writing, on a form suitable to the zoning administrator, and shall be filed with the city planning department (hereinafter referred to as the "planning staff"), and shall be accompanied by the payment of the appropriate fee to be charged by the city for administering the zoning application. The zoning application shall contain sufficient information relative to the amendment requested, including, but not limited to, a key map showing all existing zoning within 200 feet of the subject property. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the planning staff is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a list of specific requirements for zoning applications. Upon periodic review, the planning staff shall have the authority to update such requirements for zoning application details. Upon receipt of a complete written application for zoning or a change or amendment to an existing provision of this chapter, the planning staff will set a date for a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. Prior to the issuance of the notice of the public hearing, the applicant may, by written notice, withdraw the application or request rescheduling of the public hearing to a later regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission. After public notice is given, the applicant may withdraw the application or reschedule the public hearing only with the approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(C), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-94. - Action by planning and zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission may reject a request to withdraw a zoning application or reschedule the public hearing, and conduct the public hearing as notified, and take action as appropriate, within the context of the public notice provided. Notice of a public hearing shall meet or exceed the requirements of the general laws of the state. Before the 20th day before the hearing date, written notice of each public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on a proposed change in a zoning classification shall be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit within the city in the United States mail, properly addressed with postage paid. If the property within 200 feet of the property on which the change is proposed is located in territory annexed to the city and is not included on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, the notice shall be given before the 20th day before the date of the hearing, and notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or newspaper of general circulation in the city. When any amendment relates to a change of a zoning regulation or the general text of this chapter, notice of the public hearing of the planning and zoning commission shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without the necessity of notifying property owners by mail. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time shall not be earlier than 20 days from the date of such publication. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any amendment or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city council. The planning and zoning commission may establish such regulations and restrictions regarding the presentation of a zoning case at the public hearing as they may deem necessary. Following the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission may vote to approve, approve with amendments and conditions, table or deny, in whole or in part, the application. If the applicant accepts the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, subsequent public notice shall be written as approved. If the applicant does not accept the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may continue his original request and subsequent public notice shall be written as originally submitted; however, any part of the request not conforming to the planning and zoning commission's recommendations shall be presumed to have been denied by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may table for study any zoning case for up to 90 days. When an application is denied by the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission should offer reasons to the applicant for such denial. When the planning and zoning commission denies a zoning application, it may deny the application with or without prejudice. If the planning and zoning commission shall deny the application and fail to clearly state the application is being denied with prejudice, then it shall be deemed that such application is denied without prejudice against refiling. If an application is denied with prejudice, no application may be filed for all or a part of the subject tract of land for a period of two years from the date of denial by the planning and zoning commission. If it is determined by the planning and zoning commission that there has been a sufficient change in circumstances regarding the property or in the zoning application itself, it may waive the two-year waiting period and grant a new hearing. The planning and zoning commission may deny, in whole or in part, a zoning application. The effect of denial, as defined by this division, shall only apply to the part of the request which is denied. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(D), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-95. - Action by city council. 
    After a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the city secretary and city council shall be notified of any action taken by the planning and zoning commission on the application, and if the application is approved, including denials in part, by the planning and zoning commission, the city secretary shall automatically schedule a public hearing regarding the application to be held before the city council, giving notice as required by the general laws of the state. However, if the application is denied by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may, upon his own motion within 30 days, file with the planning staff a written request that a public hearing be scheduled and held before the city council regarding the application. Upon receipt of the written request, a public hearing on the application shall be scheduled to be held before the city council, giving notice as required by the general laws of the state. A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. The public hearing may be held jointly with the public hearing conducted by the planning and zoning commission. If the city council decides to conduct a joint public hearing with the planning and zoning commission, then notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 20 days from the date of publication. Prior to the opening of the public hearing, the applicant may request withdrawal of the application or tabling of the request to a specified future city council meeting. The city council may approve the request or open the public hearing, and following its closing, take appropriate action within the context of the public notice provided. After a public hearing is held before the city council regarding the zoning application, the city council may approve a change in zoning, as appropriate, within the context of the public notice provided. The city council may deny, in whole or in part, table or refer the application back to the planning and zoning commission for further study. If the application has been denied by the planning and zoning commission, or if a protest against the application has been filed, as more fully described in this section, then such application shall not be approved, except by a concurrence of four members of the city council. In considering a motion or upon voting to deny a zoning application, the city council may further consider whether the application shall be denied with or without prejudice against refiling. If the city council shall deny the application and fail to clearly state the application as being denied with prejudice, then it shall be deemed that such application is denied without prejudice against refiling. If the city council denies the application with prejudice, no application may be filed for all or part of the subject tract of land for a period of two years from the date of action by the city council. A zoning application denied without prejudice may be filed by the applicant or other qualified person at any time following the denial. If it is determined there has been sufficient change in the circumstances regarding the property or in the zoning application itself to permit the granting of a new hearing, the two-year waiting period may be waived by the planning and zoning commission or, on appeal, the city council. If the planning and zoning commission has, wholly or partially, denied a proposed amendment, supplement or change, or if a written protest is submitted against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from the area, such amendment shall not become effective, except by the favorable vote of four members of the city council. The area of streets and alleys shall be included in such calculation and unincorporated areas are excluded from the calculation. Approval of any zoning change, amendment or supplement by the city council at the scheduled public hearing shall constitute instruction to the city staff to prepare the appropriate ordinance for final formal passage at a subsequent time. If the zoning change, amendment or supplement is finally approved by the required number of votes, the ordinance shall be executed by the mayor. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(E), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-96. - Limitation on reapplication; exclusions. 
(a)  After holding a public hearing, if a zoning change, amendment or supplement is approved by the city council, no further application may be considered for all or part of the subject tract of land for a period of two years from the date of the city council's action, unless it is determined that there are substantive reasons to permit the waiving of the two-year waiting period and the granting of a new hearing. Such determination shall be made by the planning and zoning commission or, on appeal, the city council. Substantive reasons for waiving the two-year period include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Correction of an error; 
(2)  Change of conditions affecting the property, which were not known at the time of zoning; and 
(3)  Change in public plans or policies as it affects the property. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to general text changes in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(F), 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 98-97. - Automatic expiration of zoning applications. 
    Any pending zoning application shall automatically expire if no action of any kind has been taken on the application by the planning and zoning commission or city council for a period of one year. If no ordinance granting zoning in accordance with this division has been adopted within six months of the date on which the city council voted approval of a zoning change, such zoning change shall be automatically placed on the city council agenda for further consideration. 
(Code 1995, § 158.76; Ord. No. 01-32, § V(G), 10-23-2001) 
Secs. 98-98-98-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMUNITY UNIT PLANS 

Sec. 98-121. - Recommendations. 
    When the planning and zoning commission is petitioned by an agency of the city, county, state, federal government or the owner of a tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten acres applies for a change in zoning from an existing residential or apartment classification to a more intense use, and whereby the provisions for off-street parking facilities, screening walls, fences or planting and open space would create a protective transition between a lesser and more restricted district, the planning and zoning commission may, within its discretion, make the following recommendations: 
(1)  Recommend against the change in zoning. 
(2)  Recommend a change in zoning. 
(3)  Recommend that a community unit plan for the area be reviewed and, after public hearing as prescribed in division 3 of this article, grant a change in zoning subject to the conformance with an approved site plan setting forth the planning and zoning commission's recommendations as to the requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks; means of ingress and egress to the public streets; provisions for drainage, parking spaces and street layouts; and screenings and open spaces. 
(Code 1995, § 158.46(D); Ord. No. 02-21, § IB(1)(A), 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 98-122. - Special permits. 
    A special permit granted under the provisions of section 98-121 shall be considered as an amendment to this chapter as applicable to the property. In granting the permit, the city council may impose conditions, which shall be complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued for the use of the building or the property pursuant to the special permit, and the conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the special permit or the change in zoning of the property, but shall be considered a precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1995, § 158.46(E); Ord. No. 02-21, § IB(1)(B), 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 98-123-98-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-141. - Building official to enforce provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city or other duly authorized person. 
(Code 1995, § 158.70) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 78. 
Sec. 98-142. - Authority to enter premises. 
    The building official or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises, at any reasonable time, prior to the completion of the building for the purpose of making inspections of the building or premises which are necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 158.71) 
Sec. 98-143. - Stop work orders. 
    Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building official may order the work stopped, by notice, in writing, served on the owner or contractor doing the work, or causing the work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1995, § 158.72) 
Sec. 98-144. - Plot plans to accompany applications for building permits. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location on the lot of the building and any accessory building then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered; the existing and intended use of each building, or part thereof; the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. One copy of the plot plans will be returned to the owner when the plans have been approved. An inspection period of as much as two weeks shall be allowed for inspection of the plans before a permit shall be issued. 
(b)  All dimensions shown on the plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey, and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is begun. 
(Code 1995, § 158.73) 
Sec. 98-145. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Required. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following, and no occupancy and use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official: 
(1)  Change in the use of a building erected or structurally altered. 
(2)  Change in the use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
(3)  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
(4)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
(b)  New or existing buildings. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or an existing building which has been altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. The certificate shall be issued within three days after a written request for the certificate has been made to the building official or his agent after the erection or alteration of such building, or part thereof, has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Use of vacant land; change in uses. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or a change in the use of land or a building, or a change in a nonconforming use, as provided in this section, shall be made to the building official, and if the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within three days after the application for such certificate has been made. The fee for the certificate of occupancy shall be as established by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office. 
(d)  Contents; records. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building, or the proposed use of a building or land, complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official or his agent, and copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(e)  Nonconforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this chapter. Application for a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the building official by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by the nonconforming use within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It shall be the duty of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, but failure to apply for the certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use, or refusal of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use, shall be evidence that the nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1995, § 158.75) 
Secs. 98-146-98-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 78. 

Sec. 98-181. - Continuance of use. 
    Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time, subject to such regulations as the board of adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property and the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. However, if a continuous operation is not carried on in such nonconforming use during a continuous period of one year, the building, other structure or tract of land where the nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active operation shall not affect the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(A)) 
Sec. 98-182. - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of nonconforming use without the prior approval of the board of adjustment, which may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, provided that the use is within the same or higher classification as the original nonconforming use, and provided that the change will not prolong and continue the nonconforming use. A nonconforming use, once changed from a lower to a higher classification use, shall not be changed thereafter to a lower classification use, and the prior lower classification use shall be considered to be abandoned. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(B)) 
Sec. 98-183. - Damage and destruction. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding 50 percent of its value, the building official shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If such destruction is greater than 50 percent and less than total, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair after a public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of public welfare and the character of the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(C)) 
Sec. 98-184. - Enlargement and extension. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, except upon authorization of the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(D)) 
Sec. 98-185. - Normal maintenance. 
    Normal maintenance of a building or a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the nonconforming use. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(E)) 
Sec. 98-186. - Structural alterations. 
    No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except when required by law. 
(Code 1995, § 158.47(F)) 
Secs. 98-187-98-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-221. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The official zoning map of the city shall be kept in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep the official zoning map current, and the copies of such map as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, by entering any changes on such maps which the city council may, from time to time, order by amendments to this chapter and the map. 
(c)  Upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the city secretary shall affix a certificate in the office of the city secretary identifying the map as the official zoning map of the city. The city secretary shall likewise officially identify the copies to be kept by the planning and zoning commission and other city officials. 
(Code 1995, § 158.17) 
Sec. 98-222. - Establishment of districts and boundaries. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into 16 districts as follows: 
(1)  R-1 Single-family residential district. 
(2)  R-1a Single-family residential district. 
(3)  R-1b Patio home residential district. 
(4)  R-2 Two-family residential district. 
(5)  R-3 Multifamily residential district. 
(6)  RR Residential rural district. 
(7)  MH Manufactured home/mobile home district. 
(8)  CN Neighborhood commercial district. 
(9)  C-1 Local business district. 
(10)  C-2 General business district. 
(11)  C-2a Downtown business district. 
(12)  M-1 Restricted industrial district. 
(13)  M-2 Industrial district. 
(14)  CU College and university district. 
(15)  A-1 Agriculture district. 
(16)  CO Commercial office district. 
(b)  The location and boundaries of the districts established in this section are shown upon the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into this chapter. The zoning map, together with all notations, references, other information shown on the map, and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described in this section, and which zoning district map, properly attested, is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 158.15; Ord. No. 00-07, § I, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 00-45, § II, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 01-32, § II, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 03-45, § II, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 12-27, § II, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 98-223. - Rules for interpretation of boundaries. 
    The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts established in section 98-222 as shown on the zoning map: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, the centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are indicated so that they approximately follow the lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated so that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets or the centerlines of right-of-way lines of highways, the district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to and at the distance from such lines as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale on the zoning map. 
(4)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(5)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the less restricted district. 
(6)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then be subject to all regulations of the extended district. 
(7)  In the case of a district line which encompasses a campus, the streets remain in the care and ownership of the city, unless decreed otherwise by the city council, and are not excluded from general traffic guidelines for the safety and welfare of all persons. All alley rights-of-way and utility easements shall also be kept, without exception. Ingress and egress must remain unobstructed for emergency vehicle access. The chief of police and fire marshal will approve a designated fire lane. 
(Code 1995, § 158.16) 
Sec. 98-224. - Temporary zoning; new subdivisions; annexed areas. 
(a)  Permanent zoning required for plat and subdivision approval. The planning and zoning commission shall not approve any plat or subdivision within the city limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the city council. 
(b)  Temporary zoning classification for new territory annexation; waiver of fees. 
(1)  All new territory annexed to the city shall be temporarily classified as an R-1 single-family residential district only until such territory is permanently zoned by the city council, except that any ordinance annexing new territory to the city may include, as a part of such ordinance, a map or plat showing the permanent zoning classification for the area being annexed. 
(2)  The city council shall waive any applicable city filing fees for permanently zoning annexed property, subject to the following: 
a.  The waiver of the city filing fees shall be limited to the owner of the property at the time the property is brought into the city limits; 
b.  The waiver is nonassignable; and 
c.  The waiver shall be a one-time waiver of fees, applicable only to one permanent zoning application requesting that temporarily zoned property be permanently annexed. 
Otherwise, all applicable fees shall be paid by the applicant for a permanent zoning request. 
(c)  Permits in areas temporarily zoned. In an area temporarily classified as a R-1 single-family residential district, no permit for the construction of a building, other than types of buildings allowed in the district under this chapter, shall be issued by the zoning administrator until the permit has been specifically authorized by the city council after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. Prior to permanent zoning, permits for the construction of buildings in a newly annexed territory may be authorized if an application for any use is made to the zoning administrator, showing the use contemplated, and a plat shall be submitted showing the size and type of buildings to be constructed, and if the application is for a building other than a building allowed in the R-1 single-family residential district, it shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation to the city council, which shall grant or deny the permit, provided that a concurrence of four members of the city council shall be required if the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission is not followed. 
(Code 1995, § 158.74(D); Ord. No. 01-32, § IV, 10-23-2001) 
Secs. 98-225-98-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-251. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the R-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the R-1 district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-1 district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.30) 
Secs. 98-252-98-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-271. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the R-1A single-family residential district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the R-1A district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the R-1A district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-1A district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.31) 
Secs. 98-272-98-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1B PATIO HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-291. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the R-1B patio home residential district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the R-1B district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-1A single-family residential district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the R-1B district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-1B district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000) 
Secs. 98-292-98-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-311. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the R-2 two-family residential district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the R-2 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1, R-1A or R-1B district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the R-2 district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-2 district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.32; Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000) 
Secs. 98-312-98-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-3 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-331. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the R-3 multifamily residential district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the R-3 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 two-family residential district. 
(2)  Multiple dwellings. 
(3)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the R-3 district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-3 district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.33) 
DIVISION 6A. - RR RESIDENTIAL RURAL DISTRICT 

Sec 98-332. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the RR residential rural district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(2)  See the chart of permitted uses for a complete listing of uses in the district (See section 98-561). 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in section 98-611 shall be observed. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses. (See section 98-611). 
(Ord. No. 12-27, § III, 10-23-2012) 
Secs. 98-333-98-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MH MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes and parks, ch. 86. 

Sec. 98-351. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the MH manufactured home/mobile home district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the MH district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1, R-1A or R-1B district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the MH district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the MH district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.34; Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000) 
Secs. 98-352-98-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CN NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 98-371. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the CN neighborhood commercial district. The regulations of the CN district are designed to provide for office and limited business activities which may be located adjoining or abutting residential neighborhoods and will fit harmoniously into, and have no adverse effects upon, the adjacent residential areas. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the CN district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-3 multifamily residential district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the CN district and, in addition, every building, or portion thereof, used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area per family requirements of the R-3 multifamily district. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the CN district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.35) 
Secs. 98-372-98-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 98-391. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-1 local business district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the C-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-3 multifamily residential district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(3)  Any other local business use supplying the everyday shopping needs of the immediate neighborhood, and subject to the following: 
a.  It shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
b.  Required yards shall not be used for display, sale or storage of merchandise, equipment, containers or waste material. 
c.  Such use shall not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration, presence of vermin or rodents, or a similar nuisance. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the C-1 district and, in addition, every building, or portion thereof, used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area per family requirements of the R-3 multifamily district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the C-1 district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.36) 
Secs. 98-392-98-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 98-411. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-2 general business district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the C-2 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-1 local business district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(3)  Any similar uses, as determined by the board of adjustment, which are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or other objectionable influence than the minimum amount normally resulting from other uses permitted, such as, generally, the wholesale and retail trade, service industries and light industries that manufacture, process, store and distribute goods and materials, and are, in general dependent, on raw materials. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. 
(1)  The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the C-2 district and, in addition, every building, or portion thereof, used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area per family requirements of the R-3 multifamily district. 
(2)  Lot area per family requirements shall not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities, clubs, hotels or apartment hotels where no cooking facilities are provided in individual rooms or apartments 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the C-2 district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.37) 
Secs. 98-412-98-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - C-2A DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 98-431. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-2A downtown business district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the C-2A district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-2 general business district. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Parking and loading regulations. Existing businesses, as of the effective date of amendment, or successor businesses of a like, comparable use, are exempt from off-street parking and loading space requirements set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(d)  New construction. Proposals for new construction within the exemption area set forth in subsection (c) of this section, which do not meet all of the minimum off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561, shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, § I, 2-22-2000) 
Secs. 98-432-98-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - M-1 RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; industrial park district, § 94-251 et seq. 

Sec. 98-451. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the M-1 restricted industrial district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the M-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-2 general business district, except that whenever 90 percent or more of a block or tract of land in the M-1 district is vacant or occupied by structures that are of a nonresidential use, then no new residential units may be permitted within such block or tract. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the M-1 district and, in addition, any building that may be used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area per family regulations of the R-3 multifamily residential district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces in the M-1 district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.38) 
Secs. 98-452-98-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; industrial park district, § 94-251 et seq. 

Sec. 98-471. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the M-2 industrial district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the M-2 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(2)  Any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the M-2 district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces in the M-2 district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.39) 
Secs. 98-472-98-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - C-U COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-491. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the C-U college and university district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the C-U district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(2)  Any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the C-U district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces in the C-U district shall be the responsibility of the college or university. 
(Code 1995, § 158.40) 
Secs. 98-492-98-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - A-1 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-511. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the A-1 agriculture district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises in the A-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(2)  Any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter shall be observed in the A-1 district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking spaces in the A-1 district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Ord. No. 01-32, § III, 10-23-2001) 
Secs. 98-512-98-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - CO COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 98-521. - Established. 
(a)  Scope of provisions. The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the CO commercial office district. 
(b)  Use regulations. A building or premises within the CO commercial office district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Offices and professional uses. 
(2)  The purposes set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations within the CO commercial office district shall be as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in the chart of permitted uses in section 98-561. 
(Ord. No. 03-45, § III(158.34.01), 11-11-2003) 
Secs. 98-522-98-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-541-98-560. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 98-561. - Established. 
(a)  Uses permitted in each zoning district are shown by means of symbols in the permitted use chart below. The chart is divided into ten categories of uses. These are: 
(1)  Residential; 
(2)  Accessory and incidental; 
(3)  Cultural and recreational; 
(4)  Governmental, health, safety and welfare; 
(5)  Educational and religious; 
(6)  Services (office-type); 
(7)  Services (other than office-type); 
(8)  Retail trade; 
(9)  Wholesale trade; 
(10)  Transportation, communications, utilities; 
(11)  Manufacturing. 
(b)  Land and buildings in each of the zoning districts may be used for any of the listed uses, but no land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or converted, which is designed or used for other than the uses specified as permitted uses in the district in which it is located in accordance with the use chart. 
Chart of Permitted Uses Permitted Uses Parking 
Requirements R-1 R-1a R-1b R-2 R-3 RR M-H CO C-N C-U C-1 C-2 C-2a M-1 M-2 A-1 Residential Condominiums 3/2 dwelling units X X X X X X X X Dormitories To be provided by the University in accordance with state and federal laws X X X X X X Hotels/Bed & Breakfast 1/3 sleeping rooms + 1/200 sq. ft. commercial area X X X X X X Mobile homes 
(prior to 1976) 2/dwelling units (off-street) C Group Living 1/guest 1/staff member C(1) C(1) C(1) C(1) C C(1) C C C C C C C C C HUD-code manufactured homes (see mobile home park ordinance) 2/dwelling units (off-street) X Motels 1/unit X X X X X X Multi-family dwelling 2/dwelling unit X X X X X X X X Patio home dwelling and/or twinhome dwelling X X X X X X X X X X Sinlge-family dwelling 2/dwelling unit X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Townhouses 2/dwelling unit X X X X X X X X Two-family dwelling 2/dwelling unit X X X X X X X X X Recreational vehicle parks C C C C C C Accessory and Incidental Uses Accessory building C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Church bulletin board C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Contractor's yard X X Farming and truck gardening C C C C C C C C C C C C C Fences, walls, hedges, shrubbery C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Home occupation C C C C C C X X X X X X X Livestock C C C C C C Offices and office buildings 3 = 1/400 sq. ft. floor area over 1,000 X X X X X X X Public bulletin board C C C C C C C C C C C C C Storage garage X X X X X X X X Swimming pool (private) C C C C C C C C C C C C C Tennis courts (private) C C C C C C C C C C C C C Cultural and Recreational Uses Amusement parks 1/200 sq.ft. lot area C C C C C Art gallery 10 + 1/300 sq. ft. in excess of 2,000 sq. ft. X X X X X X X Bowling lanes 5/alley X X X X X X Carnival or circus 1/200 sq. ft. lot area C C C C C Civic or social club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge 1/5 members C X X X X X X X X Community centers 1/4 seats in auditorium C C C C C C C C C X X C X X Country club 1/3 design capacity SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE X X X X X Drag strip or commercial racing, motorcycle track 1/4 seating capacity C/SE C/SE C/SE Drive-in movie 1/employee maximum shift + 1/speakder X X Go-cart or mini-bike track 1/2 carts 1/2 mini-bikes C/SE C/SE C/SE Golf (miniature) 1/2 holes C C C C C Golf course (except miniature or commercial driving tee) 25/9 holes SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE X X X X X X Library 1/300 sq. ft. floor area C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE X C/SE X X X X X X Museum 1/800 sq. ft. floor area C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE X C/SE X X X X X X Park or playground C C C C C C/ C C X X X X X X X Riding academy or stable 1/2 horses C C Rodeo grounds 1/4 seating capacity X C Skating rink 1/4 per person capacity X X X X X Tennis court (public) 1/design capacity C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Theaters and playhouses (see also drive-in movie) 1/5 seats X X X X X X Government, Health, Safety, and Welfare Uses: Clinics (charitable) 3/examing room X X X X X X X Detention facilities 1/guest 1 staff member C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE Fire Stations X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Funeral Home 1/3 seats in largest chapel X X X X X Hospitals (except criminal, mental, or animal) 1/2 beds + 1/2 staff members X X X X X Medical and dental clinics (office or laboratory) 3/examining room SE X X X X X X X X Mental health clinic 1-1/2 employee SE SE X X X X X Nursing or convalescent home 1/6 beds SE SE SE X X X X X SE Police station X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Recovery facility - Alcohol and drug 1 guest 1 staff member C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE Sanitarium (except criminal, mental, or animal) 1/2 beds + 1/2 staff members X X X X X Sanitary landfill (garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping) 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C C Education and Religious Uses: Business or commercial schools 1/class + 1/4 students C X X X X X X Church, Sunday school, or other place of worship 1 for each 3-1/2 seats in sanctuary C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Dancing or music academy 1/2 employees + 1/5 students C X X X X X X X Denominational school 1/classroom + 1/4 seats in auditorium C C C C C C C C C C C C C C X Kindergarten 1/5 employees C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Public or Private school 1/classroom + 1/4 seats in auditorium C C C C C C C C C C C C C C X Testing and research laboratories 1/employee + 2 C X X Services (office-type Uses): Accounting, Auditing, Tax and Bookkeeping services 1/300 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Adjustment and Collection services 1/employee X X X X X X X X Advertising services 1/employee X X X X X X X X Appraisal services 1/employee + 1/100 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Architectural and Planning services 1/400 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Business Associations 1/employee + 1/500 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Consumer and Mercantile Credit Reporting services 1/employee + 1/500 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Detective services 1/2 employees X X X X X X X X Employment services 2/ employees X X X X X X X X Engineering Services 1/400 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Education and Scientific Research Offices 1.25/employee X X X X X X X X Government Administration Offices 1/5 employee5 X X X X X X X X Insurance Agents, Carriers, and Brokers 1/employee X X X X X X X X Legal services 1/300 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Medical or Dental Office or Clinic 1/200 sq. ft. floor area or 3/ exam room X X X X X X X X Office Space (general/unspecified) 1/300 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Protective and Security services 1/ employee + 2 X X X X X X X X Real Estate Agent, Brokers Management 1/ employee X X X X X X X X Security and Commodity Brokers Dealers, Exchanges 1/200 sq. ft. floor area + 1/2 employee X X X X X X X X Social Service Organization Office 2/3 employees area X X X X X X X X Stenographic, Duplicating and Mailing services 1/400 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Telephone Answering 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Title Abstractors 1/employee + 1/1000 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X X Services (other than office-type): Ambulance service 1/employee X X X X X Appliance repair (household) 1/employee + 2 X X X X X Artist studios 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Auto repair, painting, body work 1/200 sq. ft. floor area C C C C C Auto servicing, seat covers 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X Banks 3 spaces + 1/400 sq. ft. floor area over 1000 sq. ft. X X X X X X X Barber or beauty shops 2/employee X X X X X X X Body Piercing Studios 1/200 sq. ft. floor area = 1/employee C C C C C C C C Carpenter shop 1/employee + 2 per maximum shift C C C C C C Catering services 1/employee + 2 C C C C C C Cleaning and dyeing plants 1/employee + 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X Cosmetic tattoo establishment 1/200 sq. ft. floor area = 1/employee X X X X X X X X Day care centers or day nursery 1-1/2 per employee C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE C/SE X X X X X Dry cleaning establishment and/or receiving station 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X Dyeing and cleaning establishment or laundry 1/employee + 2 X X X X X Engraving 1/employee + 2 X X X X Exterminating and fumigating services 1/2 employees X X X X X Frozen food locker 1/employee + 2 X X X X X General service and repair 1/employee + 2 X X X X X Grain storage elevator 1/employee + 2 X X Kennel 1/500 sq. ft. floor area X X C/SE Laundromat (self-service laundry and dry cleaning) 1/200 sq. ft. floor AREA X X X X X X X Machine shop 1/employee + 2 X X X X X Messenger service 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Mini-storage warehouses 1/employee X X X X X Painting shops 1/employee + 2 C C C C C Photographic studies 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Plumbing shops 1/employee + 2 C C X C C Printing (commercial) 1/employee + 2 per maximum shift X X X X X Radio and TV repair service 1/employee + 2 X X X X X X X Shoe repair shop 2 spaces + 1/300 sq. ft. over 1,000 sq. ft. X X X X X X X Tattoo Parlors 1/200 sq. ft. floor area + 1/employee C C C C C C C C Tinsmithing shop 1/employee + 2 C C C C Tire sales and service including vulcanizing 1/employee + 2 X X X X X Upholstery and furniture repair shops 1/employee + 2 C C C C C C C Veterinarian or animal hospital 1/500 sq. ft. floor area C/SE C/SE C/SE X X C/SE Warehouses 1/2 employees maximum shift + space for all vehicles X X X X Trades- Retail: Auto wrecking yard, salvage yard and junkyard C Automobile or trailer sales and display rooms 1/600 sq. ft. floor area + 2/employee X X X X X Bakery products (on-premises sales only) 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X Convenience stores 1/100 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Farm implement display and sales 1/600 sq. ft. floor area + 2/employee SE SE X X SE Florist shop or retail greenhouse 1/300 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Lumber and building materials 1/500 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X Mobile homes, camping and travel trailer sales 2/employee SE X X X X X Newspaper office 1/200 sq. ft. floor area + 1/2 employee X X X X X Private club 1/4 seats X X X X X Renovated Railroad cars 2/employee X X Restaurants and cafeterias 1/100 sq. ft. floor area C C C C C C Restaurants (drive-in) 2/employee C C C C C Retail stores 1/300 sq. ft. floor area + 1/employee C C C C C C C Secondhand merchandise store 1/300 sq. ft. floor area + 1/employee C C C C C Service station 1/pump + 1/bay X X X X X X X Stockyard or slaughter of animals 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Tailor or dressmaking shop 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X X X Tire shop 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X X Used car sales and storage lot 2/employee X X X X X Trades- Wholesale: Creamery 1/200 sq.ft. floor area X X X X Dairy products 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X X X Display room 1/100 sq. ft. floor area C C C X X Lumber and building materials 1/200 sq. ft. floor area X X X X Petroleum storage 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C C Wholesale establishment 1/employee + 2 X X X X Transportation, Communication, and Utilites: Automobile parking lot or garage X X X X X X X Carting, express, hauling or storage yard 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Public utilities substation 1/employee X X X X C/SE Radio broadcasting station or studio (with tower) 1/employee SE SE SE X X C/SE Radio broadcasting station (without tower or transmitter) 1/employee X X X X X X Taxicab service 1/taxi X X X X X Wireless Telecommunications Towers 1/location SE SE SE SE SE SE X X C/SE Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (Commercial/non-Tower) None SE SE SE SE SE SE SE X X X X X X X X C/SE Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (Non-commercial/non-Tower) None X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Television broadcasting studio/Television Cable Franchise (with tower) 2/employee SE SE SE SE X X SE Television broadcasting Studio/Television Cable Franchise (without tower) 2/employee X X X X X X SE Manufacturing: Acid manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Bakery products (wholesale distribution) 1/employee maximum shift + 2 X X Bottling works 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Candy manufacture 1/emloyee maximum SHIFT X X X X Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Coal, coke or wood yard 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Cosmetic manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Distillation of bones 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Electronic products assembly 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Explosives manufacture or storage 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Fat rendering 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Fertilizer manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Fur goods manufacture (not including tanning or dye) 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Garment manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Glass products (from previously manufactured glass) 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Glue manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Household appliance products assembly and manufacture 1-1/2/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Ice cream manufacture 1-1/2/employee maximum shift + truck space X X X X Ice plants 1-1/2/employee maximum shift + truck space X X X X Industrial and manufacturing plants 1-1/2/employee maximum shift + truck space X X Jewelry manufacture 1/employee maximum shift X X X X Mobile homes 1/employee maximum shift X X Musical instruments assembly and manufacture 1/employee maximum shift X X Petroleum or petroleum products refining 1/employee maximum shift C Plastic products manufacture (not including processing of raw materials) 1/employee maximum shift X X Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores and other metals 1/employee maximum shift + truck space C Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture 1/employee maximum shift + truck space X X  
Symbols found in this chart of permitted uses have the following meanings: 
X Permitted as a right of use. C Permitted as a right of use subject to special conditions outlined in division 3 of this article. A building permit may not be issued until these conditions havebeen met. SE Permitted as a special exception subject to the obtaining of a special permit from the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures outlined in section 98-63. (1) Community homes may be located in these zones so long as such facility conforms to all applicable standards established for such facility in this ordinance and in accordance with all applicable state and/or federal laws.  
(Code 1995, § 158.41(B); Ord. No. 00-22, § IV(B), 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 01-32, § III, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 01-38, § II, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 02-21, § IA, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 03-45, § III, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 04-12, § II, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 12-19, § 2, 10-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-27, § III, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1.0, 3-10-2011) 
Secs. 98-562-98-580. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 98-581. - General standards. 
(a)  This division sets forth special provisions applicable to certain uses in certain zoning districts. No conditional use shall be permitted without a permit for such conditional use having been issued by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be furnished satisfactory proof that all applicable conditions, as set forth in this division, will be met. Any decision of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Where a use is required to meet such conditions and a special exception is also required, the applicant shall furnish proof to the board of adjustment, by plans or other documents, that the applicable conditions have or shall be met. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the applicable conditions for a conditional use, any other applicable ordinance, law or regulation, or the terms of any conditional permit or special exception shall automatically terminate the right to continue the conditional use and such use shall thereafter be unlawful unless a new permit is granted in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(A)) 
Sec. 98-582. - Residential uses. 
(a)  Recreational vehicle parks . Recreational vehicle parks are prohibited along (i) the entire length of Commerce Street; (ii) Coggin Avenue, from Highway 377 to Austin Avenue; (iii) Main Street, from the intersection of Commerce Street (Hwy 67/84), and extending along Highway 377 to the south city limits; and (iv) on Austin A venue beginning at the south city limits and extending to Market Place Boulevard. Subject to the foregoing, recreational vehicle parks shall be permitted in all commercial and industrial districts, except CN neighborhood commercial districts and CO commercial office districts, subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Buffer. A recreational vehicle park shall not be located less than 150 feet from any residential district. 
(2)  Park size. All recreational vehicle parks shall contain a minimum contiguous area of two acres. 
(3)  Minimum recreational vehicle space. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide recreational vehicle parking spaces and each such space shall be clearly defined and must provide convenient access for the placement of a recreational vehicle. Only one recreational vehicle is permitted per recreational vehicle space. Each individual space within the recreational vehicle park shall have an area of not less than 3,000 square feet to provide adequate space for a recreational vehicle. 
(4)  Separation of recreational vehicles. Pads for recreational vehicles shall be separated by a minimum of 15 feet and each recreational vehicle shall be separated from each other by a minimum of 15 feet. 
(5)  Use of each space. Each space shall only be allowed for the parking of one recreational vehicle. No business shall be operated from any space. No accessory structures may be erected on any recreational vehicle space. No permanent fencing or screening of any kind shall be allowed on a space. Fireworks are expressly prohibited. No tents or mobile and/or manufactured homes are allowed in the park. No animals, livestock or poultry of any kind shall be raised, bred or kept on a space and/or in the park, except for household pets such as cats and dogs, provided that they are not kept, bred or maintained for commercial purposes. No utility trailers may be parked on a space except on an approved parking surface as set forth herein. No clothes lines are permitted in the park. 
(6)  Permanent residence prohibited. No recreational vehicle park or recreational vehicle located therein shall be used as a permanent residence for any period of time, except for permanent full-time employees of the park. No more than one space shall be allowed for use as a permanent residence for full-time employees. Occupancy or parking of a recreational vehicle within the recreational vehicle park extending beyond 90 days shall be presumed permanent occupancy and is hereby prohibited, except as provided below. A recreational vehicle may not return to the park for a period of 15 days after a 90 day stay. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a recreational vehicle park owner may designate up to 50 percent of the spaces in the park for extended occupancy. "Extended occupancy" is defined as occupancy or parking of a recreational vehicle in the park for a period of time not to exceed 180 days. A recreational vehicle may not return to the park for a period of 15 days after an extended occupancy stay. The occupancy periods provided above may not be stacked or added together. No guest may stay for a period of time greater than 180 consecutive days. The owner and/or park manager of the recreational vehicle park shall be responsible for enforcing this requirement and shall keep occupancy records of the park which shall be subject to inspection upon request by the city. 
(7)  Pad sites for each space. Each space shall have a pad site constructed of concrete and/or asphalt of sufficient size, width and strength to park the recreational vehicle. The pad site must be contiguous with concrete and/or asphalt drives or roads so that the recreational vehicle is not travelling across the required green space as provided in paragraph (9). Recreational vehicles may only park on a pad site. The concrete and/or asphalt pad shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum standards for concrete and/or asphalt established by applicable city standards, including, without limitation, the specifications and design standards for public works improvements in chapter 94 of the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended, and shall be constructed of sufficient strength to support the weight of a recreational vehicle and to not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the recreational vehicle due to frost, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure. The design plans for all concrete and/or asphalt surfaces shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and/or his designee. 
(8)  Parking surface for each space. Each space shall provide parking for two vehicles. No more than two vehicles shall park on each space. All parking spots shall be constructed of an approved parking surface which shall either be concrete and/or asphalt. All vehicles parked on a space must be parked on an approved parking surface. The concrete and/or asphalt parking surface shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards set forth in paragraph (7) above and shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and/or his designee. 
(9)  Landscaping for each space; cleanliness of space and/or park. Each space shall contain a minimum of 25 percent of green space which shall be covered with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. The park owner shall be responsible for installing and maintaining the required landscaping for each space. The park owner shall maintain and keep all spaces and/or the park free of weeds and/or tall grass and shall keep all spaces clean, neat, safe and free of all trash, debris or other materials that are unsightly and/or unsanitary. No parking of any vehicle, utility trailer or other vehicle shall be allowed on the green space area. 
(10)  Drainage. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded and equipped to insure rapid drainage and to be free from stagnant pools of water. The condition of the soil, ground water, drainage and topography shall be such that it shall not create a hazard to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. 
(11)  Streets, internal circulation, parking and park entrance. 
a.  All streets providing access to a recreational vehicle park shall be developed and maintained in good condition by the owner of the park in accordance with the following: 
1.  All public streets shall include grading the full width of right-of-way, construction of integral curbs and gutters, base and pavement, constructed in accordance with city standards. All public streets shall be maintained by the city. 
2.  All private streets shall provide adequate right-of-way to permit access to the recreational vehicle park. All private streets shall be maintained by the owner of the park. 
b.  All streets providing access to individual spaces or sites in the recreational vehicle parks shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
1.  All public streets shall include grading the full width of right-of-way, construction of integral curbs and gutters, base and concrete or asphalt pavement, constructed in accordance with city standards and subject to the review and approval of the city engineer and/or his designee. 
2.  All private streets shall provide adequate paving width, with a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic or ten feet for one-way traffic, consisting of base and concrete or asphalt pavement, constructed in accordance with city standards and subject to the review and approval of the city engineer and/or his designee. 
3.  On-street parking shall be prohibited on all streets within the park unless additional paving of adequate width, i.e., at least a minimum of eight feet, is provided, and the plans for the park shall provide for two off-street parking spaces for each recreational vehicle space as provided in paragraph (8) above. 
c.  The entrance to the park shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. 
(11)  Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). The park shall comply with all state and federal standards for accessibility for the mobility impaired. The applicant shall show proof of compliance. 
(12)  Recreational vehicles must be self-contained; utilities provided. All recreational vehicles must be self-contained and have state or federally-approved connections for electricity, water and sewer. Each recreational vehicle space shall be equipped with water, sewer and electrical hookups which shall conform to all applicable state and city codes and/or ordinances of the city. 
(13)  Sewage disposal. An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage to the city's sewer system. The sewer system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with city codes. All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the city engineer and/or his designee. Septic systems shall not be allowed. 
(14)  Electricity. All electrical service shall be installed in accordance with all applicable codes. 
(15)  Garbage receptacles. 
a.  Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with adequate facilities for the collection and removal of refuse and garbage. All garbage receptacles shall be subject to approval by the city engineer or his designee. 
b.  Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to cleaning around them. 
c.  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the recreational vehicle park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards. 
(17)  Fuel . All state and local regulations, including all city ordinances and codes shall apply to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil and must be complied with. 
(18)  Fire protection . 
a.  Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size, and number and so located within the park as to satisfy the fire code and other applicable regulations of the city. 
b.  No open fires shall be permitted, except that this shall not be construed to prevent barbecuing with charcoal in an approved pit or grill. 
c.  In parks in which gasoline, fuel oil, or other flammable liquids are stored or dispensed their handling and storage shall comply with the City fire code. 
d.  Approaches to all recreational vehicle spaces shall be kept clear for firefighting personnel and equipment. 
e.  The park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire. 
f.  Water supply facilities for fire department operations. 
1.  Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city public water supply system. 
2.  The park owner shall provide standard city approved fire hydrants in accordance with applicable city codes and laws. 
g.  The park owner shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(19)  Building permits. Prior to construction of a recreational vehicle park, the owner of the recreational vehicle park or his designee shall obtain all applicable City building permits. To obtain a building permit, the owner or his designee must present a written site plan to the city engineer for his review and approval. 
(20)  Park supervision. 
a.  Each park shall have a park manager. 
b.  The park manager shall operate the park in compliance with this section and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and its equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
c.  The park manager shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this section and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this section. 
d.  The park manager shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  name and address of park occupants, 
2.  license number of recreational vehicle and/or tow vehicle, 
3.  location of each recreational vehicle within the park by space or lot number, and 
4.  dates of arrival and departure. 
e.  A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year and the old register is retired, but the old register shall be retained on the premises for at least one year following the retirement. 
f.  Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(21)  Inspection . 
a.  The city manager, code enforcement officer, the fire chief, and the police chief and other designated city employees (hereinafter "Authorized City employees") are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
b.  Authorized city employees shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this section. 
c.  Authorized city employees shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the park. 
(22)  Applicability of ordinance; exceptions . This section shall apply to any recreational vehicle park located within the city limits of Brownwood, Texas. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of this section shall not apply to any recreational vehicle park owned by a governmental entity and to any recreational vehicle parks existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(b)  Mobile homes constructed before June 15, 1976. Mobile homes constructed before June 15, 1976, shall be permitted in MH districts, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A notarized statement shall be provided from a licensed electrician stating that the mobile home meets the requirements of the electrical code; and 
(2)  The mobile home shall comply with the building code adopted in section 78-31 regulating smoke detectors. 
(c)  Group living. 
(1)  Characteristics. Group living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of the term "household living," as set forth in section 98-1. The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly basis, or longer. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period of time are not considered to be residential, but are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see the definitions of the terms "hotel" and "motor court and motel," as set forth in section 98-1). Generally, group living structures may often, but are not required to, have a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training or treatment. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses commonly associated with group living are recreational facilities and parking of vehicles for occupants and staff. 
(3)  Examples. Examples of group living include: 
a.  Dormitories; 
b.  Fraternities and sororities; 
c.  Monasteries and convents; 
d.  Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
e.  Assisted living facilities for elderly residents; 
f.  Nursing and convalescent homes; 
g.  Some group homes for the physically or developmentally disabled, or mentally or emotionally disturbed. 
(4)  Exceptions. Exceptions to group living include: 
a.  Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than 30 days, which shall be considered a hotel or motel use. 
b.  Lodging where the residents meet the definition of the term "household," as set forth in section 98-1, and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or a longer period of time, and shall be classified as household living. 
c.  Facilities for the rehabilitation of residents with alcohol- or drug-related dependencies, which shall be considered to be recovery facilities. 
d.  Facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and under the supervision of sworn officers, and such facilities are included in the detention facilities category. 
(5)  Community homes. A community home for occupancy by as many as six disabled persons and two supervisors may be classified as either household living or group living as long as such facility conforms to all applicable standards set forth in this subsection (c). To qualify as a community home allowable as either household living or group living, a resident must conform to all of the following standards: 
a.  A community home must be a: 
1.  Community-based residential home operated by the state department of mental health and mental retardation, a community center organized under subchapter A of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 534.001-534.040, that provides services to persons with disabilities, an entity subject to the Texas Nonprofit Corporation Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1396-1.01 et seq.), or an entity certified by the state department of human services as a provider under the medical assistance program servicing persons in intermediate care facilities for persons with mental retardation; or 
2.  Personal care facility licensed under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 247, provided that the exterior structure retains compatibility with surrounding residential buildings. (See V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 123.004.) 
b.  A community home shall provide all of the following services to persons with disabilities who reside in the home: 
1.  Food and shelter; 
2.  Personal guidance; 
3.  Care; 
4.  Habitation services; and 
5.  Supervision. 
c.  Not more than six persons with disabilities and two supervisors may reside in a community home at the same time. The limitation or number of persons with disabilities applies regardless of the legal relationship of such persons to one another. 
d.  A community home must meet all applicable licensing requirements. 
e.  A community home shall not be established within one-half mile of an existing community home. 
f.  The residents of a community home shall not keep for the use of residents of the home, either on the premises or on a public right-of-way adjacent to the home, motor vehicles in numbers exceeding the number of bedrooms in the home. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(B); Ord. No. 01-38, § IIB(158.42), 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 03-43, § I, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1.0, 3-10-2014) 
Sec. 98-583. - Accessory and incidental uses. 
(a)  Accessory buildings. 
(1)  In residential districts, an accessory building shall be used only for such uses as are consistent with the primary use of the land and shall not be used for the conduct of business or rental and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street. 
b.  Thirty percent and unenclosed parking spaces may occupy not more than 90 percent of the area of a required rear yard. 
c.  No accessory building shall be closer than ten feet to the main building, nor closer than three feet to any rear lot line. 
(2)  In nonresidential districts, an accessory building shall be subject to the same conditions which are applicable to an accessory building in a residential district. 
(b)  Keeping of livestock and other animals. 
(1)  No livestock shall be permitted to be kept, harbored or maintained within the following zoning districts of the city: R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, MH, CN, C-2A, C-U AND CO, excluding ranchette subdivisions established under chapter 94, article VI, division 2 of this Code. Livestock may be permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts of the city: RR, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and A-1. 
(2)  In zoning districts where livestock are permitted, except A-1 and ranchette subdivision as described below, the number of livestock kept on a given lot shall not exceed the ratio of one animal unit, per one free roaming acre, with an animal unit identified as follows: 
1 cow = 1 animal unit 
1 horse = 1 animal unit 
1 mule = 1 animal unit 
1 burro = 1 animal unit 
2 sheep = 1 animal unit 
2 goats = 1 animal unit 
2 llamas = 1 animal unit 
2 alpacas = 1 animal unit 
For any other livestock not specifically listed, the animal unit equivalency will depend on the size of the typical adult animal of the species. If the animal is similar in size to a cow, horse, mule or burro then it will equal one animal unit. If the animal is similar in size to a sheep, goat, llama or alpaca, then two of those animals will equal one animal unit. 
Offspring shall be exempt from the animal limitation until reaching the age of 12 months. Any acreage designated for livestock shall be "free roaming acres" such that the livestock has unrestricted access to the entirety of the acreage. For purposes of determining the amount of "free roaming acres" available to keep livestock, any area on the site designated for the keeping of livestock shall exclude structures, dwellings or houses (except structures used for shelter by the livestock), any lakes, tanks, ponds or other bodies of water and/or any unenclosed or unfenced area. In ranchette subdivisions established under chapter 94, article VI, division 2 of this Code, and in A-1 districts, the site for the keeping of livestock shall contain a minimum of one, free roaming acre per three animal units quartered. Offspring shall be exempt from the animal limitation until reaching the age of 12 months. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no swine or emu shall be allowed or permitted to be kept in the city, except swine as provided by chapter 14, article IV, subsection 14-223(b)(5). Poultry may be allowed, subject to the restrictions as set forth in subsections (b)(5) and (b)(7) of this section. 
(4)  Adequate shelter shall be provided for each animal. The shelter must be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position. Any structure, pen, shelter, enclosure or other means used to restrain an animal, including, without limitation, a rope, shall be located not less than 75 feet from any street right-of-way or lot line. 
(5)  Fences for pens, corral fences or similar enclosures must be of a sufficient height and strength to retain animals. All poultry shall be properly penned and contained. There shall be a minimum space for pens, coops and yards of 100 square feet (ten feet by ten feet) for each bird, excluding chicks under six months of age. Each additional animal of this type must be given an additional 100 square feet (ten feet by ten feet). Barbed-wire fences are not permitted in any zoning districts, except A-1 districts as set forth in subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(6)  Manure and droppings shall be removed from the property, including any of the pens, stables, sheds or other enclosures, regularly, based on the size and number of animals. This waste matter shall be disposed of in such a way and with such frequency so as to keep the property free from any nuisance. 
(7)  The keeping of livestock in the zones indicated in subsection (b)(1) above, may only be permitted so long as such use does not cause a hazard to health by reason of unsanitary conditions, and are not offensive by reason of odors, dust, fumes, noise or vibration, and are not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(c)  Church or public bulletin board. Any church or public bulletin board shall not exceed ten square feet in area. 
(d)  Farming and truck gardening. All general and special agricultural, farming and other related uses shall be permitted as long as such uses do not cause a hazard to health by reason of unsanitary conditions, and are not offensive by reason of odors, dust, fumes, noise or vibration, and are not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(e)  Fences, walls, shrubbery and hedges. 
(1)  Fences, walls, shrubbery and hedges, extending closer than 25 feet to the front property line, shall not exceed a height of four feet above the walk grade, except on corner lots. 
(2)  Any fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery on a corner lot and situated within 20 feet of the intersection of two street lines shall not exceed a height of three feet above the street gutter flow line. 
(3)  Solid fences or enclosure walls are permitted in the required side and rear yards, provided that they do not exceed a height of eight feet. 
(4)  Ornamental fences exceeding eight feet in height shall have a ratio of solid portion to open portion not in excess of one to four. 
(5)  In A-1 districts, barbwire fences may be used, provided that a necessity can be shown for the use of the wire, such as keeping livestock contained on the property. 
(6)  Any fence or enclosure wall must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. 
(f)  Home occupations. Home occupations shall include the use of the premises by a physician, dentist, lawyer, clergyman or other professional person for consultation or emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of such person's profession. A home occupation is additionally, any occupation or activity which, or for which: 
(1)  Is carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(2)  No sign is used, other than a nameplate not more than one square foot in area. 
(3)  There is no display that indicates from the exterior that the building is being utilized, in part, for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. 
(4)  There is no commodity sold upon the premises. 
(5)  No person is employed, other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(6)  No mechanical equipment is used, except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. 
(g)  Private swimming pools and tennis courts, accessory to single-family residences. Private swimming pools or tennis courts which are accessory to single-family residences shall be located: 
(1)  At least ten feet from the nearest property line. 
(2)  Within a fenced yard, or shall be screened by a masonry wall or solid fence at least six feet in height. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(C); Ord. No. 01-32, § III, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 02-61, § 1, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 10-15, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 12-19, § 2, 10-9-2012) 
Sec. 98-584. - Cultural and recreational uses. 
(a)  Amusement parks, carnivals, circuses, drag strips, commercial racing, motorcycle tracks, go-carts and minibike tracks. Amusement enterprises shall have no facilities located closer than 500 feet to a residential district. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights and traffic from becoming a nuisance to uses on adjacent properties. 
(b)  Civic and social clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges. Civil and social clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges shall be permitted in R-3 districts, provided that the chief activity of the clubs, lodges, fraternities or sororities is not a service carried on as a business. 
(c)  Community centers. In residential districts, any community center building shall be located not less than 25 feet from any side lot line. 
(d)  Golf, miniature. A solid screening wall or fence, not less than six feet in height, shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district, even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. 
(e)  Libraries and museums. In residential districts, any library or museum building shall be located not less than 25 feet from any side lot line. 
(f)  Parks and playgrounds. In residential districts, any park or playground building shall be located not less than 25 feet from any side lot line. 
(g)  Riding academies and stables. Riding academies or stables shall be permitted in A-1, M-1 and M-2 districts, provided, any structure or enclosure for the shelter of animals shall be located not less than 150 feet from any residential or MH district. 
(h)  Tennis courts, public. Tennis courts which are not accessory to a residential use shall be located: 
(1)  Not less than ten feet from the nearest residential property line. 
(2)  Within a fenced area, and the fence shall be not less than 15 feet in height. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(D); Ord. No. 01-32, § III, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 98-585. - Government, health, safety and welfare. 
(a)  Sanitary landfills. Sanitary landfills Shall be permitted as regulated by applicable state laws and as permitted by the state department of health or other agency as designated by state law. 
(b)  Recovery facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics and requirements. Recovery facilities are characterized by programs that provide care and training or treatment for psychiatric, alcohol or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, but where patients are not supervised by sworn officers. The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Generally, recovery facilities may often, but are not required to, have a common eating area for residents. The residents may also receive care, training or treatment. A license, if required, to operate the facility must be obtained from the appropriate federal, state or other governmental agency. Depending on the type of the facility, professional staff must be in residence, at all times. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "professional staff" means an individual who has, either by experience or training, knowledge in the appropriate rehabilitative field. 
(2)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses common associated with recovery facilities are recreational facilities and parking of vehicles for occupants and staff. 
(c)  Examples. Examples of recovery facilities include psychiatric, alcohol or drug-dependency or rehabilitation centers. 
(d)  Exceptions. Facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and under the supervision of sworn officers are included in the detention facilities category. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(E); Ord. No. 01-38, § II, 11-27-2001) 
Sec. 98-586. - Educational and religious facilities. 
(a)  Churches, Sunday schools and other places of worship. Churches, Sunday schools or other places of worship shall be permitted in all zoning districts, except M-2 industrial, provided that any such building shall be located not less than 20 feet from any side line. 
(b)  Denominational public and private schools, and public school kindergartens. Denominational public and private schools or public school kindergartens, including private schools having a curriculum comparable to that offered in public schools, shall be permitted in all zoning districts, except M-2 industrial, provided that: 
(1)  Any building shall be located not less than 40 feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(2)  The minimum lot area shall not be less than two acres. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(F)) 
Sec. 98-587. - Office-type uses. 
(a)  No retail sales of merchandise shall be allowed in CO commercial office districts. Accessory uses that may be permissible in CO districts may include sundry shops, cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities intended primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
(b)  Offices that are a part of and located with a principal use in another category are considered accessory to the firm's primary activity. Headquarter offices, when located on the same premises as or adjacent to a principal use in another category are considered part of the other category. 
(c)  Offices for construction contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the CO district category if equipment and materials are not stored on the office site and fabrication, services, or similar work is not carried on at the office site. 
(Ord. No. 03-45, § III(158.42(F.1)), 11-11-2003) 
Sec. 98-588. - Services. 
(a)  Automobile repair, painting and body work. 
(1)  Automobile repair, painting and body work shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(2)  Open storage of merchandise, equipment, containers, waste material, disassembled vehicles or vehicle parts is prohibited, except when enclosed by a solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height. The solid screening wall or fence shall be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. 
(b)  Carpentry, painting, tinsmithing, plumbing, upholstery and furniture repair shops. 
(1)  Carpentry, painting, tinsmithing, plumbing, upholstery and furniture repair shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(2)  Open storage of merchandise, equipment, containers and waste material is prohibited, except when enclosed by a solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height. Screening material shall consist of wood, masonry or other material approved by the city building official. 
(c)  Catering services. A solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district. 
(d)  Day care centers and day nurseries. Day care centers and day nurseries for more than six children may be permitted in all R, MH and CN districts as a special exception, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A solid screening wall or fence at least six feet in height shall be provided between any play area and any adjacent residential property. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. 
(2)  Ingress and egress shall be designed to eliminate interference with traffic or adjacent streets. 
(3)  Such uses shall meet state minimum standards for day care centers. 
(e)  Veterinarian and animal hospitals. No veterinarian or animal hospital building, kennel or exercise runway shall be closer than 150 feet to any R or MH district. 
(f)  Tatoo parlors and body piercing studios. 
(1)  Tattoo parlors and body piercing studios shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from a R-1 district, school, church or day care facility. 
(2)  Tattoo parlors and body piercing studios shall not be located in the development area created by the city in Ordinance No. 99-37. 
(g)  Applicable to all service businesses. A solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district (except for day care centers or day nurseries). The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to adjacent residential properties. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(G); Ord. No. 01-38, § II, 11-27-2001; Ord. No. 04-12, § II, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-20, § I, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 98-589. - Retail trade. 
(a)  Automobile wrecking yards, salvage yards and junkyards. 
(1)  Automobile wrecking yards, salvage yards or junkyards shall be permitted in M-2 districts with the approval of the city council after a report by the city manager and fire marshal. 
(2)  The premises must be wholly enclosed within a building or by a metal, masonry or wooden fence not less than eight feet in height, and in which any openings or cracks are less than 15 percent of the total area. 
(b)  Cafeterias, restaurants and drive-in restaurants. A solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. 
(c)  Retail stores. The slaughtering of animals or poultry on the premises of any retail store shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Secondhand merchandise stores. All merchandise of a secondhand merchandise store which is not located within a closed structure shall be enclosed by a solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height, constructed of wood, masonry or other material approved by the city building official. 
(e)  Stockyards and slaughter of animals. Stockyards or the slaughter of animals shall be permitted in M-2 districts with the approval of the city council after a report by the city manager and fire marshal. 
(f)  Applicable to all retail businesses. A solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to adjacent residential properties. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(H); Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 98-590. - Wholesale trade. 
(a)  Display rooms. Display rooms for merchandise to be sold at wholesale shall be permitted in C districts, provided that the merchandise is stored elsewhere. 
(b)  Petroleum storage. Petroleum storage shall be permitted in all M districts, provided that the location and treatment of the premises have been approved by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Applicable to all wholesale businesses. A solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to adjacent residential properties. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(I); Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 98-591. - Manufacturing. 
(a)  No manufacturing building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered for residential purposes, except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises, and provided that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of the use shall have been approved by the city council after a report by the city manager and fire marshal: 
(1)  Acid manufacture. 
(2)  Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture. 
(3)  Distillation of bones and glue manufacture. 
(4)  Explosives manufacture or storage. 
(5)  Fat rendering. 
(6)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(7)  Refining of petroleum or its products. 
(8)  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores, and other metals. 
(b)  Industrial and manufacturing plants, including the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment, shall be permitted in M-2 districts, provided, the process of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that only a nominal amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke or noise is emitted and not more than ten percent of the lot or tract is used for the open storage of products, materials or equipment. 
(c)  For all manufacturing businesses, a solid screening wall or fence not less than six feet in height shall be provided on any boundary or lot line adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district. The screening wall or fence must be made of wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city building inspector. For purposes of this section, a boundary or lot line shall be adjacent to or abutting upon any residential district even if the boundary or lot line is separated from the residential district by an alley or street. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to adjacent residential properties. 
(Code 1995, § 158.42(J); Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 5-23-2006) 
Secs. 98-592-98-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 98-611. - Established. 
    Height and area requirements shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Maximum Height Minimum Lot Yard District Stories Feet Area Width Depth Front Rear Either Side Aggregates of Side yards 
R-1 21/2 35' 7,000 50' 100' 25' 6' 14' 
R-1A  21/2 35' 9,000 70' 120' 25' 5' 12' 
R-1B  21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
R-2 - - 6,000 50' 100' 
R-2 21/2 35' 6,000 50' 100' 25' 5' 12' 
R-2 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
R-3 - - 6,000 50' 100' 
R-3 3 45'(1) 6,000 50' 100' 25' 5' 12' 
R-3 - - 2,000 per unit 50' 100' 
R-3 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
RR 21/2 35' Minimum one acre 25' 6' 14' 
MH Mobile home residential (see also chapter 86 of this Code) 5,000 50' 100' 15' 10' 7.5' 15' 
MH Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
CO Commercial office 3 45' None None None 25' 10' 6' 14' 
CN  3 45' See R-3 25' 
CN Neighborhood commercial None 25' None None 
CN Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
C-1 3 45'(1) See R-3 25' 5' 12' Local business None 25' None(3) (2) None 
C-1 Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
C-2  - - See R-3 - - 25' 20% 5' 12' 
C-2 General business 10 125'(5) None None(4) (3) (2) None 
C-2 Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
C-2A  (1) See R-3 25' 20% 5' 12' 
C-2A General business 10 125'(5) None None(4) (3) (2) None 
C-2A Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
M-1 - - See R-3 25' 20% 5' 12' 
M1 8 100'(6) None None (3) None 
M-2 Industrial 8 100'(6) None None (3) (2) None Residential use restricted 
C-U College/university (8) (8) None (9) (9) (9) 25'(9) (9)(3) (9)(2) None (9) 
C-U Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings 21/2 35' 4,000 40' 100' 15'(10) 10' 5'(11) 10'(11) 
A-1 Residential 21/2 35' 7,000(12) 50'(12) 100' 25'(12) 6' 14' 
Agricultural 3 45' None None None None (3) (2) None  
(1) A building may be erected to a height of eight stories and 100 feet if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each additional height of 45 feet. (2) No side yard shall be required except that a side yard of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. (3) No rear yard required, except that a rear yard of not less than 15 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting upon a residential district. (4) No front yard or setback is required except where a lot adjoins a residential district, in which instance the front yard in the residential district shall be provided for a distance of not less than 25 feet from the boundary of the residential district. (5) Buildings may exceed ten stories or 125 feet if set back one foot for every two feet of height above 125 feet but in no case shall the height of a building exceed the total of the street width on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard. (6) Whenever a building in an M-1 or M-2 District adjoins or abuts a residential district, the building shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet in height, unless it sets back one foot from the required side and rear yard lines for each foot of additional height above 45 feet. (7) No front yard shall be less than 25 feet or less than the minimum required by the building line setbacks in an existing subdivision ordinance. (8) Refer to Standard Building Code. (9) Any mobile home shall comply with the mobile home park ordinance and setback lines. (10) Patio home dwellings and/or twinhome dwellings require a minimum 15 foot front yard, except on arterial streets, where the minimum front yard shall be 25 feet. (11) Twinhome units generally require a minimum five-foot side yard on both sides; patio home dwellings require either a minimum five-foot side yard on both sides or one side yard of at least ten feet, and the other side may be reduced to zero feet, but may not exceed more than one foot. (12) In the event that septic tanks are being used on the property, larger lots may be required so as to comply with all applicable state and federal laws.  
(Code 1995, § 158.43; Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 03-45, § III, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 12-27, § III, 10-23-2012) 
Sec. 98-612. - Exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Height. 
(1)  The height regulations prescribed in section 98-611 shall not apply to television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors and flagpoles. 
(2)  Public or semipublic service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when the required side and rear yards are each increased by one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
(3)  The limitation in section 98-611 on the number of stories shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for storage purposes, provided that the buildings do not exceed the height, in feet, permitted in the district in which they are located. 
(b)  Front yards. 
(1)  All front yards, including both street fronts of a corner lot, may be adjusted to less than the building setback requirements to be in line with the average building setback line of existing main buildings on the same side of the same block; however, in no case shall any front yard be less than 15 feet. 
(2)  On corner lots, the required setback from the property line on the side street shall be a minimum of 15 feet; provided, however, that any side yard fronting on a major thoroughfare shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(3)  In a residential district, no structure, fence or planting higher than three feet above the street gutter flow line shall be maintained within 20 feet of any street intersection. 
(4)  An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance of not more than ten feet, but shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
(5)  Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located within a required yard, provided that they are not less than 15 feet from any property line and not less than 50 feet from the boundary of any residential district. 
(6)  Off-street parking facilities may be located within the required front yard of any C or M district, but shall not be closer than 50 feet to any R district. 
(c)  Side yards. 
(1)  On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than 15 feet on the street; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 32 feet. 
(2)  Where dwelling units are erected above commercial establishments, no side yard is required, except when a side yard is required for the commercial building on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. 
(3)  A porte cochere or canopy may project into a required side yard, provided that every part of the porte cochere or canopy is unenclosed and not less than five feet from any side lot line. 
(4)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(5)  Where a lot of record, at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, is less than 40 feet in width, the required side yard may be reduced to ten percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than three feet. (See subsection (e) of this section.) 
(d)  Rear yards. 
(1)  Where a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as part of the required rear yard. 
(2)  The ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features may extend into a required yard a distance not to exceed 18 inches. 
(3)  Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard may be permitted by the building official for a distance not to exceed five feet when placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(e)  Lot area per family. Where a lot of record, at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, has less area or width than required in section 98-611 in the district in which it is located, and the owner of the lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, the lot may be used for a one-family dwelling or for any nondwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located. (See subsection (c)(5) of this section.) 
(Code 1995, § 158.44; Ord. No. 00-12, § 158-44, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 11-30, § 4.E, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 98-613-98-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing, parking, § 66-41 et seq. 

Sec. 98-631. - Parking spaces required. 
    In all districts, except as provided in section 98-632(4), there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth in the chart of permitted uses as set forth in section 98-561. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45(A)) 
Sec. 98-632. - Computation of number of parking spaces. 
    In computing the number of required parking spaces, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Floor area means the gross floor area of the specific use. 
(2)  Fractional spaces. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number. 
(3)  Uses not enumerated. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned in this division shall be the same as required for a use of a similar nature. 
(4)  Change of use. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, the parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, the building or use shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in this division. 
(5)  Mixed uses. The parking spaces required for mixed uses shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45(B)) 
Sec. 98-633. - Parking space standards. 
(a)  All parking spaces required in this division shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of parking spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required parking spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
(b)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dancehalls, nightclubs or cafes, and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as theaters, bowling alleys, dancehalls, nightclubs, cafes, or church or school auditoriums; provided, however, that a written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such parking spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement assuring the retention of such parking spaces for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved by the city attorney as to form, and filed with the application for a building permit. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45(C)) 
Sec. 98-634. - Loading spaces. 
    Every building, or part thereof, erected or occupied for a retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution, by vehicles, of materials or merchandise shall provide and maintain on the same premises the following loading spaces: 
(1)  In the C-1 and C-2 business commercial and M-1 and M-2 manufacturing Districts, one loading space for each 10,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
(2)  In the C business district, one loading space for the first 5,000 to 15,000 square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45(D)) 
Sec. 98-635. - Minimum dimensions of off-street parking. 
(a)  Ninety-degree parking. Each 90-degree parking space shall not be less than eight feet wide, nor less than 17 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall not be less than 23 feet in length. 
(b)  Sixty-degree angle parking. Each 60-degree angle parking space shall not be less than eight feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle, nor less than 18 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall not be less than 18 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(c)  Forty-five-degree angle parking. Each 45-degree angle parking space shall not be less than eight feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle, nor less than 17 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall not be less than 15 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(d)  Location adjacent to public alleys and rights-of-way. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of the alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public right-of-way, the parkway may be assumed to be a portion of the parking length requirement. 
(e)  Private walks adjacent to business buildings. A private walk, if provided adjacent to a business building, shall not be less than five feet in width, and shall be in addition to the minimum requirement for parking and maneuvering space required in this division. 
(f)  Provision in excess of minimum requirements and where not required. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts specified in this division, or are provided but are not required by this division, off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space specified in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45(E); Ord. No. 00-45, § III, 12-19-2000) 
Sec. 98-636. - Additional patio home dwelling standards. 
(a)  Development of a patio home dwelling shall occur only on a lot that has been specifically platted in accordance with chapter 94 to accommodate such use. 
(b)  Side yards on lots with a patio home dwelling shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All patio home dwellings may be set back either five feet from both side boundaries, or for zero lot line patio home dwellings, from one side boundary as few as zero feet, up to a maximum of one foot, except for lots where minimum setbacks required from side streets or adjoining lots in other zoning districts necessitate the remaining side yard to be a minimum of five feet, as long as the minimum setback on the remaining side is ten feet. In no case shall the separation between two zero lot line patio home dwellings, or any other dwelling, fence or accessory structure, be less than ten feet. 
(2)  Any side yard abutting a street right-of-way must be a minimum of ten feet. 
(3)  Any side yard abutting a lot in a different zoning district must be a minimum of five feet. 
(4)  A maximum two-foot eave overhang is allowed within the required side yards of a zero lot line patio home dwelling only; otherwise, no eave overhang within the side yard setback lines is allowed. 
(c)  For a zero lot line patio home dwelling, a perpetual easement, with a minimum width of four feet, shall be provided on the adjacent lot for the maintenance of the wall of the dwelling with the zero lot line. Such required easement shall be in favor of the lot on which a zero lot line patio home dwelling is planned at or near the boundary to which this easement is adjacent. The required easement shall extend along the entire length of the side boundary to which the easement is adjacent. No fence or any other structure shall be constructed within the portion of the perpetual easement that runs parallel to the zero lot line patio home dwelling. 
(d)  No doors, windows, air conditioning units, utility meters, electric panel boxes or openings of any kind shall be allowed on the wall of a dwelling or accessory building that lies on a zero lot line, with the exception of one or more translucent windows approved by the building official, the cumulative area of which shall not be greater than 16 square feet in size. 
(1)  For zero lot line patio home dwellings, any portion of an exterior wall which lies less than ten feet from and substantially parallel to a side boundary shall be considered on the zero lot line. 
(2)  For zero lot line patio home dwellings, any portion of an exterior wall which lies substantially perpendicular to a side boundary shall not be considered on the zero lot line. 
(3)  Any portion of an exterior wall which faces the zero lot line of the lot on which such building is situated, and which lies at least ten feet from the zero lot line, shall be allowed door and window openings, as long as the portion of the exterior wall lies within the front 20 percent of the total length of the building. Other portions of any such wall shall be considered to be on the zero lot line. 

Zero Lot Line Dwelling 
(e)  The roof of each patio home dwelling unit must be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from draining into the adjacent lot. 
(f)  Required easements shall be shown on the final plat. If required easements are not shown on the final plat of lots for zero lot line patio home dwellings, then such easements shall be created by means of a replat or by a separate legal instrument, in a form agreed to by the city, before a building permit will be granted by the city. 
(g)  In no case shall the owner of any zero lot line patio home dwelling be granted an easement on the adjoining property for the use or enjoyment of any portion of such property, except for a four-foot maintenance easement as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(h)  A site plan shall be submitted with a final plat designating which lots are to be patio homes or twin homes with required side yards and four-foot maintenance easements shown. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45; Ord. No. 00-45, § III(F), 12-19-2000) 
Sec. 98-637. - Additional twinhome dwelling standards. 
(a)  Development of a twinhome dwelling shall occur only on a lot that has been specifically platted in accordance with chapter 94 to accommodate such use. 
(b)  Only one twinhome dwelling shall be allowed on a single lot. 
(c)  Any lot occupied by a twinhome dwelling shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet along any side boundary not adjacent to another twinhome structure. 
(Code 1995, § 158.45; Ord. No. 00-45, § III(G), 12-19-2000) 
Secs. 98-638-98-670. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television service committee, § 2-161 et seq.; businesses and business regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-671. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a communications tower, building or other antenna support structure, and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals or other communication signals. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include antennas expressly exempt from this article as provided in section 98-673(b). 
    Antenna support structure means any existing building or other existing structure, other than a tower or micropole, which can be used for location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Collocation means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications provider. 
    Engineer means an engineer duly licensed by the state. 
    Equipment shelter means the structure in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility is housed. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
    Height means the vertical distance of a structure measured from the average grade as measured at the corners of the structure to the highest point of the structure, including the height of the antenna. 
    Micropole means a freestanding pole or mast upon which a noncommercial antenna is located that is less than six inches in diameter and subject to the maximum height restrictions contained in this article. 
    Monopole means a support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting, hollow, metal tube which is securely anchored to a foundation. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or other legal entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. 
    Tower means a self-supporting, lattice, guyed or monopole structure, constructed from grade, which supports wireless telecommunications facilities. For the purposes of this article, the term "tower" does not include a micropole. 
    Viewshed means the area surrounding wireless telecommunications facilities, towers or antenna support structures, within which the facility or structure is visible from the street level. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities or WTF(s) means any unstaffed facility, or component thereof, for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals or other communication signals, which enable the provision of cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, wireless digital data transmission and other similar services that currently exist or may in the future be developed. Wireless telecommunications facilities include towers, monopoles, micropoles, equipment shelters, communication node cabinets, aboveground pedestal cabinets, antennas, relay station facilities, cables and other associated and related equipment. For the purposes of this article, the term "wireless telecommunications facilities" does not include any device or equipment expressly exempt from this article as provided in section 98-673(b). 
    Zoning administrator means the person designated by the city to be responsible for the issuance of building permits and any and all other issues related to zoning. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § III, 6-27-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-672. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs) in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. Specifically, the purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Direct the location of towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs in the city. 
(2)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs. 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(4)  Promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers, antennas and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers. 
(5)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties caused by towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed. 
(6)  Ensure, to the greatest extent feasible, that towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(7)  Ensure, to the greatest extent feasible, that proposed towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other WTFs are designed in harmony with natural settings and in a manner consistent with current development patterns. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § I, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-673. - Applicability. 
(a)  All towers, antennas, antenna support structures and other wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs), any portion of which are located within the city, are subject to the provisions of this article, unless exempted by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Direct broadcast satellite reception, multichannel multipoint distribution (as defined by the FCC), television reception antennas and amateur radio antennas, meeting the following requirements, do not require a permit from the city in any district unless mounted on a freestanding pole, mast or other similar support structure that is 30 feet or more in height, or mounted on a pole, mast or other similar support structure that extends more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure that the antenna is mounted upon, whichever is applicable: 
(1)  Antennas that are one meter (39 inches) or less in diameter; 
(2)  Antennas designed to receive television broadcasts; 
(3)  Amateur radio antennas concealed behind, on or within attics, eaves, gutters or roofing; and 
(4)  Amateur radio ground mounted whips and wire antennas, unless mounted on a freestanding pole, mast or similar structure over 30 feet in height, or mounted on a pole, mast or similar structure that extends more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure that the antenna is mounted upon. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, such devices must be constructed in accordance with all applicable state and federal requirements, building codes and safety standards. 
(d)  In addition, this article shall not apply to any satellite earth station antenna, two meters in diameter or less, located in any commercial or manufacturing zoning district, and any satellite earth station antenna, one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning district in which it is located. 
(e)  Except as provided in this article, any legal use being made of an existing tower, antenna, antenna support structure or WTF on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived (6-27-2000) shall be allowed to continue, even if it is in conflict with the terms of this article, provided that the WTF meets all applicable state and federal requirements, building codes and safety standards. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § II, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-674. - Nonwaiver. 
    Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from exercising any right or remedy it may have in law or equity to enforce the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § X(A), 6-27-2000) 
Secs. 98-675-98-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Secs. 98-701-98-720. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 98-721. - Permit approval required for construction of wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs); when permitted as a right of use; exceptions. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs) shall not be constructed within the city without all approvals and building permits first having been secured, except as expressly provided to the contrary in this division. WTFs are either permitted as a right of use, subject to the conditions set forth in this division, or permitted as a special exception pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 98-63. WTFs shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: 
(1)  WTFs located on towers shall be permitted as a right of use in the M-1 restricted industrial district and the M-2 industrial district, subject to the conditions and restrictions contained in this division, and as a permitted use by special exception in the CN commercial neighborhood district, C-U college/university district, C-1 local business district, C-2 general business district and C-2A downtown business district. 
(2)  WTFs, for commercial use, not attached to towers and attached to an antenna support structure, shall be permitted as a right of use in the M-1 restricted industrial district, M-2 industrial district, CN commercial neighborhood district, C-U college/university district, C-1 local business district, C-2 general business district and C-2A downtown business district, subject to the conditions and restrictions contained in this article, and a permitted use by special exception in any residential district, provided that the WTF and antenna support structure is not located on property used as a residence, but instead is located on property used for a legally permitted nonresidential use, such as a church or school. For purposes of this article, the term "commercial use," with regard to WTFs, means the use of WTFs for direct financial gain and/or for the use and benefit of more than one customer. 
(3)  WTFs, for noncommercial use, not attached to towers and attached to an antenna support structure or micropole, shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts, without having to obtain any prior authorization from the city, provided that the WTF complies with all the conditions and restrictions contained in this article. For purposes of this article, the term "noncommercial use," with regard to WTFs, means the use of WTFs for the personal use and benefit of one customer and not used for direct financial gain. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived (6-27-2000), WTFs attached to towers are prohibited from being constructed in R-1 single-family residential districts, R-1A single-family residential districts, R-2 two-family residential districts, R-3 multifamily residential districts and MH manufactured home/mobile home districts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any person desires to construct or utilize WTFs that would be prohibited by this subsection or any other provision of this article, such person may apply for such use under this subsection, and the board of adjustment shall, upon a showing that strict application of the regulation would prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, personal wireless service as defined by applicable federal law, vary the subject regulation, by variance or special exception, as though such use was a permitted use under this subsection, whichever is appropriate, consistent with the spirit and intent of this section, to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § IV(A, C), 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-722. - Location preferences for wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs). 
    The following locations for siting wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs) are listed in order of decreasing preference: 
(1)  Approved city owned or other local government owned land (list of approved and available land to be made available through the zoning administrator). 
(2)  Existing towers. 
(3)  Existing antenna support structures in allowed zoning districts. 
(4)  Manufacturing zoning districts. 
(5)  Commercial zoning districts. 
(6)  Other approved zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § IV(D), 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-723. - Application procedures; approval; appeal of denial. 
    The following application procedures shall apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs), regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located: 
(1)  Any person wishing to construct WTFs shall make application to the zoning administrator for a building permit and/or special exception pursuant to the procedures specified in section 98-63; provided, however, that persons wishing to construct WTFs for noncommercial use, not attached to towers and attached to an antenna support structure in accordance with the conditions provided in section 98-741(c), shall not be required to obtain a building permit or special exception, unless otherwise provided in this article. A written application shall be submitted by the applicant for the construction of the WTF, and shall contain the following: 
a.  A detailed site plan. When the proposed WTF or antenna support structure is to include a new tower, a plot plan, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, shall be submitted. The plot plan shall indicate the zoning of adjacent property within 200 feet of the proposed facility. Aerial photographs and/or renderings may augment the plot plan. 
b.  A diagram or map showing the viewshed of the proposed WTF, tower, antenna or antenna support structure. The applicant shall present a site/landscaping plan showing the: 
1.  Specific placement of the WTF on the site; 
2.  Location of existing structures, trees and other significant site features; 
3.  Types and locations of plant materials used to screen the facilities; and 
4.  Proposed color of the facilities. 
c.  Photo or architectural simulations of the proposed facility from effected residential properties and public rights-of-way, at varying distances. 
d.  All significant structures within one-half mile of the proposed site location. Significant structures include all publicly or privately owned buildings or structures (excluding utility poles) or street or traffic light standards that are over 75 feet in height. The information will be used to determine whether possible collocation sites and/or antenna support structures exist in lieu of the construction of new towers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may, if it can establish that the collocation survey is too broad for its system design, submit a collocation survey that is appropriate for its radius of coverage, as determined by its system design. The collocation survey shall be based upon a percentage of the radius of coverage, as determined by system design, and shall cover a radius from the proposed site of not less than ten percent of the basic radius of coverage for the system. 
e.  A demonstration that the tower must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area. WTFs shall be located in the highest listed preferential siting location, as indicated in section 98-722, as technologically, legally and economically feasible. There shall be an explanation of why a tower and the proposed site is technically, legally and economically necessary and, if applicable, why the WTF is not located in a higher preference zone. Radio frequency (RF) signal propagation maps, or other appropriate signal propagation maps, will be made available to the city. 
f.  A detailed landscape/screening plan. 
g.  Name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for removal of the WTF in the event of an abandonment as provided in this article. If any of the information should change after the permit and/or special exception has been approved, such updated information shall be provided to the zoning administrator within ten business days. 
h.  Copies of the FAA application and/or approval, if the applicant is required by applicable law and/or regulations to seek such approval. 
i.  Explanation justifying the requested height of the WTF. 
j.  Written certification from the owner or the owner's authorized agent that the WTF cannot be collocated on another tower or antenna support structure. When making such certification, the applicant shall certify that the existing structure does not meet the applicant's structural specifications or technical requirements, or that a collocation agreement could not be obtained at commercially reasonable terms and conditions, including, without limitation, the price. If the applicant can show, by appropriate documentation, that the reasonable and necessary costs to collocate are in excess of costs to construct a new tower, the costs to collocate are presumed to be unreasonable. 
k.  A signed statement, indicating that the: 
1.  Applicant agrees to allow for the potential collocation of additional WTFs by other providers on the applicant's structure or within the same site location, if an additional user agrees, in writing, to meet commercially reasonable terms and conditions for shared use; 
2.  Applicant agrees to remove the facility within 180 days after the site's use is discontinued; and 
3.  WTF will be maintained in good condition, order and repair so as not to endanger the life or property of any person. 
l.  Engineering statements and drawings from a duly licensed engineer in the state, describing the tower's antenna capacity/wind load, description of measures taken to allow the possible collocation of other antennas and a certification that the WTF will be constructed in compliance with the current version of electronic industries association/telecommunications industries standards, as may be amended from time to time, and all other applicable laws, regulations and standards. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall approve or reject the applicant's request within 30 days after the filing of the completed application in the planning and zoning department. If the application is not denied within such 30-day period, then the application shall be deemed to be approved. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, when the filing and application is deemed complete. Any decision by the zoning administrator to deny an application for a building permit for WTFs shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. Any decision by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall approve or deny the application for construction of a WTF no later than 60 days after the original filing with the zoning administrator is complete in accordance with the requirements of this article. If the application is not denied within such 60-day period, then the application shall be deemed to approved. Any decision by the board of adjustment to deny an application for a building permit or special exception for WTFs shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § V, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-724. - Variances and special exceptions. 
    Any request to device from any of the requirements of this article shall require variance approval in conformance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § IX, 6-27-2000) 
Secs. 98-725-98-740. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-741. - General requirements. 
(a)  The following requirements shall apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs), regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located, and such requirements must be complied with by the applicant for the permit and/or special exception: 
(1)  The height of WTFs cannot exceed 200 feet, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  If the applicant desires to increase the height of an existing WTF, permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article, the applicant may file an application in accordance with the requirements of section 98-723. Even if the existing WTF was permitted by special exception, the zoning administrator may grant the applicant a building permit to extend the height of the WTF without requiring the applicant to obtain permission from the board of adjustment, provided that the height increase is not greater than 50 feet. Any requested increase greater than 50 feet in height will require the approval of the board of adjustment. If the height increase will support collocation instead of additional tower construction, the zoning administrator and/or board of adjustment shall take such fact into consideration when considering the application. Any WTF height increase shall be subject to the setback requirements for any residential district described in subsection (a)(14) of this section. 
b.  The height of a modified WTF cannot exceed 250 feet. The height of the WTF shall include the tower and/or antenna support structure, plus the height of the antenna. Towers and/or antenna support structures located on city approved, publicly owned property shall not be subject to the maximum height requirements. 
(2)  Security fencing shall surround the tower, equipment shelter and any guy wires, either completely or individually, as determined by the zoning administrator and/or board of adjustment. The city and collocators shall have reasonable access to the tower and other WTFs. No fence shall be required on top of a building or other structure if access to the roof or top of the structure or building is secure. 
(3)  Reasonable buffer plantings may be located around the perimeter of the security fence, as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator and/or board of adjustment. Options include the planting of an evergreen screen that consists of either a hedge planted a maximum of three feet on center, a row of evergreen trees planted a maximum of five feet on center or other screens determined to be appropriate by the zoning administrator and/or board of adjustment. 
(4)  Reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) located at the site. 
(5)  Compliance shall be required with collocation requirements as described in section 98-742. 
(6)  Any application to locate WTFs on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is in an historic district shall be subject to review by a committee appointed by the city council. 
(7)  The tower shall be painted a noncontrasting gray or similar color, minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Reasonable efforts must be made by applicant so that WTFs shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment. 
(8)  No advertising is permitted anywhere on WTFs, with the exception of identification signage. 
(9)  No tower shall be artificially lighted, except to assure safety or as required by the FAA. 
(10)  "No trespassing" signs shall be posted around the WTF, with a telephone number of the person to contact in the event of an emergency. 
(11)  Equipment shelters must meet the following requirements: 
a.  All applicable front, side and rear yard setback requirements shall be met; and 
b.  Such shelters shall be of a neutral color, and exterior building materials that are compatible with surrounding structures shall be used. 
(12)  Towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the applicable building codes and standards, including, without limitation, the electronic industries association/telecommunication industries standards, which may be amended from time to time. 
(13)  WTFs shall meet all existing noise standards of this Code. In addition, noise levels shall not exceed ambient noise levels, when measured at the property boundaries, except in designated emergencies or for emergency generator testing. During generator testing, noise levels shall not exceed 5 dBA above ambient noise levels, when measured at the property boundaries. 
(14)  All WTFs and equipment shelters shall comply with the building setback requirements for the specific zoning district in which they are located. A minimum setback for WTFs equal to the height of the WTF shall be required from any residential zoning district line. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a WTF complies with the zoning district's development regulations, setback requirements and other zoning regulations, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the WTF may be located on a portion of such lot. 
(b)  The following requirements shall also apply to all WTFs for commercial use, not attached to towers, and must be complied with by the applicant for the permit and/or special exception: 
(1)  A building permit and/or special exception shall be required for an antenna for commercial use, not attached to a tower, in all allowed zoning districts. 
(2)  Antennas for commercial use, not attached to a tower, are prohibited in all residential districts, unless attached to an antenna support structure located on property that is legally developed with a nonresidential use, such as a church, school or other nonresidential use, after obtaining a special exception. 
(3)  Antennas for commercial use, not attached to a tower, are allowed in commercial districts by special exception, and permitted as a right of use in manufacturing districts, subject to the conditions contained in this article. 
(4)  New antennas shall be located in the highest listed preferential siting location as indicated in section 98-722, as technologically, legally and economically feasible. Applicants will be required to submit, in writing, technical, legal and/or economic reasons for not locating in a higher preference zone. 
(5)  An antenna for commercial use, not attached to a tower, shall not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the antenna support structure in residential Districts, and 50 feet above the highest point of the antenna support structure in commercial and manufacturing districts, subject to the maximum height restrictions applicable to WTFs contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(6)  Equipment shelters for an antenna for commercial use, not attached to a tower, must comply with the same requirements as stated in this section, unless the equipment is attached to the antenna support structure or enclosed within another structure on the property. 
(7)  Antennas for commercial use, not attached to a tower, shall utilize reasonable camouflaging techniques or, if reasonably feasible, shall be side mounted to an antenna support structure in order for the WTFs to harmonize with the character and environment of the area in which they are located. 
(c)  The following requirements shall apply to all WTFs and antennas for noncommercial use, not attached to towers, and attached to antenna support structures and/or micropoles, and such requirements must be complied with by the applicant: 
(1)  A building permit and/or special exception shall not be required for an antenna for noncommercial use, not attached to a tower, provided that, in residential districts, the antenna does not exceed 30 feet in height if mounted on a micropole, or more than 30 feet above the highest point of the antenna support structure, and in commercial and manufacturing districts, the antenna does not exceed 50 feet in height if mounted on a micropole, or more than 50 feet above the highest point of the antenna support structure. 
(2)  If the height restrictions set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section will be exceeded, a building permit will have to be obtained from the zoning administrator. In no event shall the height of the antenna exceed 50 feet in residential districts. 
(3)  No micropole upon which an antenna for noncommercial use is attached shall be allowed in the front yard of the property located in a residential district. 
(4)  Antennas for noncommercial use, not attached to a tower, shall utilize reasonable camouflaging techniques or, if reasonably feasible, shall be side mounted to an antenna support structure in order for the WTFs to harmonize with the character and environment of the area in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § VI, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-742. - Collocation requirements. 
(a)  Public property. 
(1)  In order to encourage the location of wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs) on publicly owned property, the city shall undertake an identification of publicly owned properties that the city determines are suitable for such use. The city shall regularly update such identification and make the results of such identification available to the public. 
(2)  Persons locating WTFs upon such identified publicly owned properties shall be exempt from the requirements stated in this article; provided, however, a license or lease authorizing such WTFs has been approved by the city council. 
(b)  New towers. No new tower shall be constructed in the city unless such tower is capable of accommodating at least two antennas. 
(c)  Issuance of building permit and/or special exception. A building permit and/or special exception shall be issued only if there is no technically suitable space reasonably available on an existing tower or antenna support structure within the geographic area to be served. In accordance with the collocation survey that must be performed by the applicant in accordance with section 98-723(1)d., the applicant shall list the location of every tower, building or structure within such area that could support the proposed antenna. The applicant must demonstrate that a technically suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing tower or antenna support structure. When making such demonstration, the applicant shall certify that the existing structure does not meet the applicant's structural specifications or technical requirements, or that a collocation agreement could not be obtained at commercially reasonable terms and conditions, including, without limitation, the price. If the applicant can demonstrate that the reasonable and necessary costs to collocate are in excess of costs to construct a new tower, the costs to collocate shall be presumed to be unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § VIII, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 98-743. - Tower abandonment; procedure. 
(a)  All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the zoning administrator notifying the zoning administrator of any tower facility located in the city the use of which will be discontinued and the date the use will cease. If, at any time, the use of the facility is discontinued for 180 days, a designated local official may declare the facility to be abandoned, not including any dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the facility. The facility's owner/operator will receive written notice from the city and be instructed to either reactivate the facility's use within 180 days, or dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling of the facility does not occur, the city will remove, or contract to have removed, the facility and assess the owner/operator the costs of such removal. 
(b)  The city must provide the owner of the tower with three months notice, and an opportunity to be heard before the city council, before initiating such action. After such notice has been provided, the city shall have the authority to initiate proceedings to either acquire the tower and any appurtenances attached thereto at the then fair market value, or in the alternative, order the demolition of the tower and all appurtenances and assess the owner/operator the costs of such demolition. 
(c)  The city shall provide the owner of the tower with the right to a public hearing before the city council, which public hearing shall follow the three-month notice required in subsection (b) of this section. All interested parties shall be allowed an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. 
(d)  After a public hearing is held pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the city council may order the acquisition or demolition of the tower. The city may require the licensee to pay for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish the tower. 
(Ord. No. 00-22, § VIII, 6-27-2000) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1995 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1995 Code, as updated through December 28, 1999, which are included herein. Sections of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1995 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 10.01 1-1 10.04 1-3 10.05-10.07 1-2 10.07 1-11 10.09-10.12 1-2 10.17 1-12 10.18(A) 1-4 11.04 10-33 30.01(A)-30.01(C) 2-351-2-353 30.10 2-31 30.30-30.42 2-371-2-383 30.43 2-401 31.01-31.12 2-81-2-92 31.25-31.29 2-111-2-115 31.40-31.42 2-141-2-143 31.42 98-61 31.52 98-61 32.01 2-211 32.03 2-212 32.04 2-211 32.15(B) 2-231 32.16(A)-32.16(N) 2-246-2-259 32.16(Q)-32.16(U) 2-260-2-264 32.17(A)-32.17(G) 2-481-2-487 32.25, 32.26 2-301, 2-302 32.28 2-303 33.10 70-283 34.02 62-31 34.20 62-61 34.30-34.32 62-91 34.45 62-121 34.46(A) 62-122 34.46(B), (C) 62-123 34.47-34.49 62-125-62-127 35.01 2-551 36.01-36.14 2-451-2-464 37.01 2-601 37.03 2-521 37.06 2-622 50.01-50.04 54-1-54-4 50.15-50.23 54-31-54-39 50.35, 50.36 54-71, 54-72 51.01-51.03 70-1-70-3 52.01 70-31 52.02 70-2 52.15, 52.16 70-51, 70-52 52.18(D) 70-53 52.19 70-54 53.05 70-282 53.15-53.17 70-274-70-276 53.30 70-277 53.30(C) 70-278 53.31-53.33 70-279-70-281 53.34 70-271 53.45, 53.46 70-272, 70-273 71.02-71.04 66-1-66-3 71.08-71.10 66-4-66-6 72.01-72.07 66-41-66-47 72.09, 72.10 66-50, 66-51 90.01-90.05 30-31-30-35 90.15-90.18 30-61-30-64 90.30 30-91 90.31-90.36 30-93-30-98 90.37(A) 30-99, 30-100 90.37(B) 30-101 90.37(C), (D) 30-102 90.37(E) 30-103 90.38 30-92 91.01 14-1 91.02 14-44 91.03 14-43 91.04 14-2 91.05 14-4 91.06 14-3 91.15, 91.16 14-221, 14-222 91.17 14-225 91.18 14-224 91.19 14-223 91.30 14-81 91.31 14-83 91.32 14-102 91.33-91.37 14-121-14-125 91.39 14-82 14-126 91.40(A) 14-1 91.40(B)-91.40(E) 14-151-14-154 91.41(A)-91.41(E) 14-181-14-185 91.50 14-101 91.65, 91.66 14-41, 14-42 91.67 14-45 91.68 14-187 91.70 14-186 92.08 66-48 92.20 2-161 93.01(A) 38-31 93.01(D) 38-32 93.02 38-1 93.03 38-101-38-103 93.04, 93.05 38-2, 38-3 93.06-93.08 38-131-38-133 93.20-93.22 38-61-38-63 93.53-93.57 38-64-38-68 94.01 18-32, 18-33 94.10-94.20 18-81-18-91 94.30-94.35 18-51-18-56 95.01-95.07 34-141-34-147 95.10 34-171 34-201 95.11 34-173 95.12 34-172 95.13-95.18 34-174-34-179 95.30, 95.31 34-202, 34-203 95.32(A), 95.32(B) 34-204, 34-205 95.33-95.40 34-206-34-213 96.01-96.06 34-241-34-246 96.20-96.22 34-247-34-249 96.99 34-250 97.01-97.04 34-31-34-34 97.06(A)-97.06(C) 34-35-34-37 97.07-97.13 34-38-34-44 98.002-98.004 58-1-58-3 98.020, 98.021 58-31, 58-32 98.040-98.044 58-81-58-85 98.065 58-4 98.066(A), 98.066(B) 58-122, 58-123 98.066(C), (D) 58-124 98.066(E) 58-121 98.066(F) 58-125 98.066(G) 58-124 98.066(H), (I) 58-126 98.080-98.087 58-161-58-168 98.115-98.118 58-201-58-204 99.01-99.05 34-81-34-85 99.05 34-86 100.01, 100.02 50-2, 50-3 100.03 50-1 100.04(B) 50-62 100.04(F) 50-64 100.05 50-67 100.06, 100.07 50-65, 50-66 100.08 50-31 100.10, 100.11 50-32, 50-33 110.01 6-1 110.02 6-31 110.04(A) 50-61 110.04(E) 50-63 110.05, 110.06 6-61, 6-62 111.01 10-16 62-181 111.02, 111.03 10-31, 10-32 111.06 10-61 111.07 10-34 111.08 10-63 111.09 10-62 112.01 18-121 112.02-112.07 18-141-18-146 112.20-112.23 18-171-18-174 113.01, 113.02 74-31, 74-32 113.03(A)-113.03(F) 74-51-74-56 113.04-113.06 74-57-74-59 113.07, 113.08 74-81, 74-82 113.09, 113.10 74-82, 74-83 113.20, 113.21 74-121, 74-122 113.22(A)-113.22(F) 74-141-74-146 113.22(G), (H) 74-147 113.23(A)-113.23(L) 74-171-74-182 113.24(A)-113.24(J) 74-201-74-210 113.24(J) 74-210 113.25 74-123 114.01 46-32 114.02 46-31 114.03 46-61 114.04 46-33 114.05 46-94 114.06-114.18 46-121-46-133 114.19 46-34 114.20 46-63 114.21 46-134 114.22 46-62 46-135 114.23 46-64 114.24 46-95 114.25 46-65 114.26 46-35 114.40-114.42 46-91-46-93 114.43, 114.44 46-96, 46-97 114.45 46-136 114.99 46-36 115.01 18-202 115.02 18-201 115.03-115.09 18-206-18-212 115.10 18-204 115.20 18-205 115.21 18-203 130.02 42-1 130.03 42-3 131.423 26-234 131.001 26-2 131.002(A) 26-41 131.002(B) 42-2 131.003 26-1 131.005 26-91 131.007, 131.008 26-3, 26-4 131.009-131.015 26-181-26-187 131.016 26-189 131.201, 131.202 26-61, 26-62 131.203, 131.204 26-64, 26-65 131.205 26-63 131.301 78-31 78-51 78-71 78-101 131.401-131.409 26-201-26-209 131.420-131.427 26-231-26-238 131.440, 131.441 26-271, 26-272 131.443-131.448 26-273-26-278 131.501 26-5 131.502-131.504 26-311-26-313 131.601 26-341 131.602 26-1 131.602-131.607 26-342-26-347 131.701-131.704 26-111-26-114 150.01 78-31 150.02 78-51 150.03 78-101 150.04 78-121 150.05 78-151 150.06 78-1 150.15 78-2 150.16(A) 78-481 150.16(B), (C) 78-501 150.16(D)-150.16(J) 78-502-78-508 150.16(K) 78-531 150.16(L) 78-509 150.17(A), 150.17(B) 78-564, 78-565 150.17(C) 78-563 150.17(D) 78-566 150.17(E), 150.17(F) 78-561, 78-562 150.17(G) 78-567 151.01 78-332 151.02 78-331 151.03-151.05 78-333-78-335 151.06 78-392 151.07 78-336 151.20 78-391 151.21-151.26 78-393-78-398 151.35-151.42 78-421-78-428 151.43 78-400 151.44(A) 78-399 151.44(B)-(F) 78-367 151.55, 151.56 78-451, 78-452 151.58 78-453 151.70 78-362 151.71-151.73 78-364-78-366 151.74 78-363 151.75 78-361 152.01, 152.02 82-32, 82-33 152.03 82-31 152.04-152.09 82-34-82-39 152.20 82-81 152.21(A)-152.21(C) 82-82-82-84 152.30-152.34 82-111-82-115 152.45, 152.46 82-61, 82-62 152.47(A)(1)-(6), (B) 82-63 152.47(A)(7) 82-85 152.98 82-40 154.01 90-1 154.02 90-3 154.03 90-5 154.04 90-2 154.15-154.17 90-71-90-73 154.30 90-101 154.31 90-131 154.31(A)-154.31(J) 90-132-90-141 154.32 90-161 154.32(A)-154.32(N) 90-162-90-175 154.33, 154.34 90-102, 90-103 154.35 90-6 154.36(A) 90-104 154.36(B) 90-42 154.45 90-41 154.46 90-43 155.01, 155.02 86-31, 86-32 155.03, 155.04 86-71, 86-72 155.05, 155.06 86-51, 86-52 155.15-155.30 86-91-86-106 155.40, 155.41 86-131, 86-132 ch. 156, app. A, § 1- 
ch. 156, app. A, § 6 1-6 ch. 156, app. B, § 1- 
ch. 156, app. B, § 4 1-4 156.02-156.05 94-2-94-5 156.06 94-1 156.07 94-45 156.08-156.11 94-41-94-44 156.12, 156.13 94-46, 94-47 156.30-156.34 94-81-94-85 156.50-156.56 94-121-94-127 156.70-156.74 94-161-94-165 157.01-157.08 94-221-94-228 157.20, 157.21 94-251, 94-252 157.22-157.24 94-255-94-257 157.26, 157.27 94-258, 94-259 157.28 94-253 157.29 94-260 157.30 94-254 157.31-157.36 94-261-94-266 157.37, 157.38 94-269, 94-270 157.39, 157.40 94-267, 94-268 157.98 94-271 158.01 98-2 158.02 98-1 158.03 98-5 158.15, 158.16 98-222, 98-223 158.17 98-221 158.20 10-181 158.30 98-251 158.31 98-271 158.32 98-311 158.33 98-331 158.34 98-351 158.35 98-371 158.36 98-391 158.37 98-411 158.38 98-451 158.39 98-471 158.40 98-491 158.41(B) 98-561 158.42(A)-158.42(F) 98-581-98-586 158.42(G)-158.42(J) 98-588, 98-591 158.43, 158.44 98-611, 98-612 158.45 98-636, 98-637 158.45(A)-158.45(E) 98-631-98-635 158.46(D), 158.46(E) 98-121, 98-122 158.47(A)-158.47(F) 98-181-98-186 158.55 98-61 158.70-158.73 98-141-98-144 158.74(A)-(C) 98-4 158.74(D) 98-224 158.75 98-145 158.76 98-91-98-97 158.77 98-3 158.78 98-6 158.98, 158.99 98-7, 98-8 158.501 10-92 158.502 10-91 158.503 10-94 158.504-158.506 10-141-10-143 158.507(A)-(C) 10-121 158.507(D) 10-176 158.508 10-144 158.509-158.511 10-146-10-148 158.512 10-145 158.513-158.515 10-173-10-175 158.516-158.519 10-177-10-180 158.521, 158.522 10-182, 10-183 158.523 10-172 158.524, 158.525 10-95, 10-96 158.526 10-171 158.527 10-93  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1995 Code, as updated through December 28, 1999, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1995 Code, as supplemented. This tables contains some ordinances which precede December 28, 1999, but which were never included in the 1995 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 28, 1999, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 86-49 10-28-1986       Added 66-8 97-20  5-14-1997 38-3 97-22  5-14-1997 31.03 2-83 97-30  7- 8-1997 2-162 99-19  9-14-1999 2-621 00-01  1-25-2000 31.02 2-82 31.06 2-86 00-07  2-22-2000 I 98-1 98-222 98-431 00-12  3-28-2000 158-44 98-612 00-14  3-28-2000 pt. 1 66-49 00-22  6-27-2000 I, II 98-672, 98-673 III 98-671 IV(A 98-721 IV(B) 98-561 IV(C), IV(D) 98-721, 98-722 V 98-723 VI 98-741 VIII 98-742, 98-743 IX 98-724 X(A) 98-674 00-28  9-12-2000 pt. 1(A)- 38-101-38-103 pt. 1(C) 00-34 10-10-2000 153.01 78-211, 78-212 153.02, 153.03 78-215, 78-216 02-55 11-12-2000 I, II 42-1 00-42 11-28-2000 153.01.01(A)-153.01.01(G) 78-281-78-287 153.01.01(H)(1), (2) 78-261 153.01.01(H)(3) 78-262 153.01.01(H)(4)-(6) 78-241 153.01.01(I)-153.01.01(M) 78-288-78-292 153.01.01(N) 78-287 153.01.01(O)-153.01.01(R) 78-293-78-296 00-45 12-19-2000 I 98-1 II 98-222 III 98-291 98-311 98-351 98-561 98-611 98-635 III(F), III(G) 98-636, 98-637 01-05  2-27-2001 1 2-384 01-07  3-13-2001 I 78-214 II 78-212 01-12  6-26-2001 1 74-241 2-6 74-281-74-285 7-11 74-312-74-316 12(a), (b) 74-262 12(intro. ¶) 74-261 13 74-311 14, 15 74-242, 74-243 01-19  8-28-2001 110.06 6-62 01-32 10-23-2001 I 98-1 II 98-222 III 98-511 98-561 98-583, 98-584 IV 98-224 V(A)-V(G) 98-91-98-97 VI 1-11 01-33 10-23-2001 (E) 78-213 01-38 11-27-2001 I 98-1 II 98-561 98-585 98-588 IIB(158.42) 98-582 02-03  1- 8-2002 pt. 1 34-35, 34-36 pt. 2 34-81 02-08  2-12-2002 I, II 18-31, 18-32 02-15  3-26-2002 Pt. 1 2-143 02-21  5-14-2002 IA 98-561 IB(1)(A), IB(1)(B) 98-121, 98-122 IIA 98-61 IIB(158.55), IIB(158.56) 98-61, 98-62 IIB(158.56.1)-IIB(158.56.9) 98-63-98-71 02-22  5-14-2002 1 14-1 2 14-4 02-31  7- 9-2002 1(154.021) 90-4 2 90-5 3 90-2 4-6 90-71-90-73 7(154.31(K))-7(154.31(P)) 90-142-90-147 7(B) 90-133 7(G) 90-138 7(J) 90-141 8 90-164 10(154.47) 90-44 11 90-43 02-38  8-27-2002 1 58-124 02-41  8-27-2002 1 78-331 2, 3 78-393, 78-394 02-44  9-24-2002 1(a) 2-382 02-45  9-24-2002 1(a) 2-382 02-46  9-24-2002 1(a) 2-382 02-47  9-24-2002 1 2-385 02-61 12-10-2002 1 98-583 03-13  4-22-2003 I(100.61) 50-68 03-14  4-22-2003 1-8 22-31-22-38 10 22-39 03-20  5-27-2003 1 82-112 03-30  7-22-2003 52.30-52.60 70-90-70-120 03-29  8- 7-2003 I-IV 42-4 03-42 10-28-2003 1-7 2-401 03-43 11-11-2003 I 98-582 03-44 11-11-2003 I, II 90-146, 90-147 III 90-164 03-45 11-11-2003 I 98-1 II 98-222 III 98-561 98-611 III(158.34.01) 98-521 III(158.42(F.1)) 98-587 03-51 12- 9-2003 1-3 2-581 04-06  2-24-2004 I(30.03(A)) 2-361 II(30.03(B)) 2-362 III(30.03(C)) 2-363 IV(30.03(D)) 2-364 V(30.03(E)) 2-365 04-10  3- 9-2004 I 90-2 II 90-101 III 90-103 04-12  4-13-2004 I 98-1 II 98-561 98-588 04-20  5-11-2004 I 98-588 04-22  5-25-2004 I(71.11) 66-7 04-23  6- 8-2004 1 74-311 04-27  9-14-2004 I 90-142 06-02  1-10-2005 I 74-123 05-10  3-22-2005 1(I) 78-121 1(A) 78-31 1(B) 78-51 1(C) 78-211 1(D) 78-101 1(E) 38-31 1(F) 78-181 1(G) 78-71 1(H) 78-151 2(A) 78-32 2(B) 78-52 2(D) 78-102 2(E) 38-32 2(F) 78-182 2(G) 78-72 2(H) 78-152 2(I) 78-122 05-13  3-22-2005 2-454 05-11  5-22-2005 I 6-61 05-22  8- 9-2005 2-621 05-23  8-23-2005 1, 2 2-171, 2-172 06-07  2-28-2006 1 78-102 2 38-32 06-19  5-23-2006 I 98-582-98-584 98-588-98-591 07-07  3-13-2007 1.A. 18-31 1.B. 18-32 2.A., B. 18-81 3.A.-C. 18-82 4.A., B. 18-51 5.A., B. 18-83 6.A., B. 18-84 7.A., B. 18-52 8. 18.85 07-09  3-13-2007 78-212 07-19  7-24-2007 1.A. 78-31 1.B. 78-51 1.C. 78-211 1.D. 78-101 1.E. 38-31 1.F. 78-181 1.G. 78-71 1.H. 78-151 1.I. 78-121 2.A. 78-32 2.B. 78-52 2.C. 78-212 2.D. 78-102 2.E. 38-32 2.F. 78-182 2.G. 78-72 2.H. 78-152 2.I. 78-122 07-13  8-28-2007 Adopt. Ord. 07-22  8-28-2007 1 78-333 07-31 12-11-2007 1-7       Added 2-181-2-186 08-13 6-10-2008 I 6-62(a)       Added 6-62(c) II 50-32 III 58-3       Added 58-5 08-15 6-10-2008 I 90-168(2) 08-22 7-22-2008 1       Added 14-103 08-31 10-14-2008       Added 2-191-2-196 08-33 10-14-2008 1, 3 78-333 08-36 10-14-2008 I 90-2 II       Added 90-45 III       Added 90-101(1)(k), (l)       Added 90-102(6) IV 90-136 V       Added 90-164(f)       Added 90-176 08-38 10-28-2008 I 50-1 08-42 12-9-2008 1l       Added 70-130-70-134 2       Rpld 78-212(8)c.4., d.4., e.4. 09-15 7-14-2009       Added 82-30 82-31 82-61 82-62(6)a.       Added 82-112(5) 09-29 12-8-2009       Added 50-69 10-06 4-27-2010 26-62 10-13 7-13-2010 14-223 10-15 7-27-2010 98-583(b)(2) 10-29 11-9-2010 2       Added 42-41-42-47 10-31 11-23-2010 26-62 11-02 2-22-2011 78-212(8)a. 11-12 6-14-2011 50-68 11-16  9- 6-2011 2 74-31 2       Added 74-32(5) 11-26 11-22-2011 2-83 2-181(b) 11-30 12-13-2011 1.A 78-31, 78-32 1.B 78-51, 78-52 1.C 78-71, 78-72 1.D 78-101, 78-102 1.E 78-121, 78-122 1.F 78-151, 78-152 1.G 78-181, 78-182 1.H 78-211, 78-212 1.I 38-31, 38-32 1.J 78-333, 78-334 2       Added 78-32(b) 
78-52(b), 78-152(b) 3       Added 78-581-78-586 4.B 34-39 4.C 38-31, 38-32 4.D.a-g Ch. 78, 
Arts. II-VIII, 
tit. ch. 4.D.h Ch. 78, 
Art. IX, tit. ch.       Dltd 78-212(8)       Dltd 78-213, 78-214 78-296, app. C 4.D.i Ch. 78, 
Art. X, tit. ch.       Dltd 78-361-78-367       Dltd 78-391-78-400 78-451 78-453(d)       Dltd 78-425 78-426       Dltd 78-427 4.E 98-612(b)(6) 12-06  4-10-2012 1 26-41 26-112 12-07  4-24-2012 2 78-212 12-10  6-12-2012 2, 3 70-283 12-18 10- 9-2012 I 90-43(c) 12-19 10- 9-2012 1 98-2 2 98-583(b) 98-561 12-27 10-23-2012 I 98-2 II 98-222(a) III       Added 98-332 98-561 98-611 12-28 10-23-2012 I-III 2-361-2-363 13-10  3-12-2013 1 94-84       Added 94-86 13-25  8-13-2013 2, 3 70-283 13-30  9-24-2013 1 74-311 13-31  9-24-2013 1       Added 70-273(b) 14-05  3-10-2014 1.0 98-2 98-561 98-582(a) 15-04  2-10-2015       Added 62-32 16-01  1-12-2016 2 74-32(6) 16-20 11-22-2016 1       Added 18-175-18-177 17-02  1-10-2017 I 50-68 17-03  3-14-2017 1 78-451(7), (9) 18-04  2-27-2018 I 90-168 18-12  5-22-2018 1 50-1 50-67 18-14  7-10-2018 3 70-283  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article Section 
this Code 1396-1.01 et seq. 98-582  
V.A.T.S. Insurance Code 
Article  Section 
this Code 5.43-2 Ch. 30, Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Administrative Code 
Section  Section 
this Code tit. 25, ch. 229, §§ 161-171, 173-175 70-131 tit. 30, § 312.142 70-131 tit. 30, § 312.143 70-132 tit. 30, § 319.11 70-132  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 142.001 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. 6-1 10-31 11.38 6-31 61.36 6-31 109.33 6-61  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 16.003 Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 2 ch. 101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 2  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.003 62-121  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 41.001 2-551 Char. § 94 141.001 Char. § 15  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code tit. 8 2-401 tit. 8, subtit. G 2-383 29.001 et seq. Char. Art. V 29.003 1-14 29.004 Char. § 52 29.010 Char. § 53 212.0065 94-86 212.009 94-86 212.0145 94-86 212.016 94-86 241.001 et seq. 2-171 241.014 2-171 311.005 1-2 311.016 1-2 311.021 1-11 311.024 1-3 311.027 1-5 311.030 1-8 1-10 311.032 1-11 312.007 1-7, 1-8 1-10 312.011 1-2 312.016 1-2 417.007 38-62-38-64 417.007, 417.008 38-67 417.008 38-68 417.009 Ch. 38, Art. III 418.001 et seq. Ch. 22 22-32 ch. 552 2-451 551.001 et seq. 2-183 2-193 552.001 et seq. 2-86 Char. § 77 98-61 Char. § 127 573.001 et seq. Char. § 26 615.001 et seq. 2-364 851.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4 2-371 2-374 2-378, 2-379 851.001(8) 2-372 852.105 2-382 852.107 2-379 853.003 2-379 2-384 853.302 2-379 853.305 2-383 853.401(d) 2-381 853.401-853.403 2-381 853.402(c), 853.402(d) 2-381 853.601 2-381 854.102(e) 2-382 854.202 2-382 854.202(c) 2-382 854.202(g) 2-382 854.203 2-380 855.401 et seq. 2-382 855.407(g) 2-385 ch. 1331 et seq. Char. § 88 1431.001 et seq. Char. § 89 2009.054(c) 2-451  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 247 98-582 342.004 Ch. 34, Art. III 342.005 34-86 342.006, 342.007 34-82 342.007 34-86 342.008 Ch. 34, Art. III 356.001 et seq. 50-62 ch. 365 34-174 365.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV 34-178 431.081-431.084 Ch. 18, Art. II 437.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 534.001-534.040 98-582 752.004 90-133 752.006 90-133 753.001 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. V 38-132 753.002 38-133 756.021 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. III 773.001 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. II 773.003 74-31 821.001 et seq. Ch. 14 822.041 14-1 822.041-822.047 Ch. 14, Art. III, Div. 4 822.042-822.044 14-151-14-153 822.046 14-154 822.101 14-1 822.0421 14-151 ch 826 14-103 826.001 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III, Div. 2 826.013 14-101 826.045 14-103  
V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 123.004 98-582  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 9.001 et seq. Char. Pt. I Char. § 134 26.001 et seq. Char. § 3 ch. 41 et seq. Char. § 2 43.021 et seq. Char. § 8 51.001 Char. § 13 51.072 Char. § 13 18-121 51.072 et seq. Char. § 4 ch. 54 26-61, 26-62 54.001 1-14 54.001 et seq. Ch. 26 54.017 26-272 54.031-54.044 26-61 54.032 26-64 54.033 26-62 26-183 54.044 Ch. 26, Art. III, Div. 2 102.001 et seq. Char. § 68 102.006 Char. § 73 102.009 Char. § 81 102.0065 Char. § 72 103.001 et seq. Char. § 36 143.001 et seq. 2-211 2-364 ch. 171 Char. § 41 78-586 171.001 et seq. Char. § 41 201.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 2-453 2-457 2-487 201.003 2-451 2-481 201.005 2-452 202.008, 202.009 Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 203.023 2-457 203.041 2-461 203.045 2-463 204.001 et seq. 2-464 211.001 et seq. 2-81 Ch. 98 211.007 2-82 211.008 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. II, Div. 2 212.001 et seq. Char. § 9 Ch. 94 94-3 212.004 Ch. 94, Art. III 94-83 214.191-214.197 Ch. 30, Art. II 214.197 30-99 214.211 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. II 214.214 Ch. 78, Art. X 215.001 42-2 215.004 Ch. 74, Art. III 215.073 Ch. 74 215.074 Ch. 10 243.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III 10-92 243.008 10-121 243.010 10-95 251.001 et seq. Char. § 10 306.001 et seq. Ch. 50 341.003 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2, Subdiv. II 341.012 2-246 341.903 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2, Subdiv. II 342.011 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2, Subdiv. IV  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 52.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1201 Ch. 86 98-5 1201.003 98-1 1702.001 et seq. 14-154 2153.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II Ch. 62, Art. VI, Div. 2 2153.002 62-181 2153.004-2153.008 62-183-62-187 2153.401 62-182 2153.401(b) 62-182 2153.451 Ch. 62, Art. VI 2153.453 62-188 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 9.51 2-259 ch. 21 10-142 21.01 10-147 ch. 22 10-142 ch. 25 10-142 28.02 38-1 28.03 42-3 50-62 28.04 42-3 28.08 42-3 50-62 31.04 70-276 38.15 2-302 39.02 Char. § 123 42.01 Ch. 34, Art. V 50-65 66-48 42.06 38-2 ch. 43 10-142 43.24 10-172  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 11.01, 11.02 62-31 11.13 62-31 11.13(m)(1) 62-32 11.13(j)(1) 62-32 11.43 62-31 11.261 62-32 31.01, 31.02 Char. § 86 32.01 et seq. Char. § 87 ch. 33, subch. E 34-86 33.91 et seq. 34-86 56.103(c) 62-123 156.103(a), 156.103(b) 62-123 156.103(d) 62-123 182.025 Ch. 58, Art. V 191.082 et seq. 62-61 191.141 62-61 302.001 et seq. Ch. 62 302.011 Ch. 62, Art. II 302.101 62-61 302.102 Ch. 62, Art. VI 321.001 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. IV 321.210(a), (b) 62-91 321.210(b) 62-91 ch. 351 62-125 351.001 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. V 62-122 62-125 351.002 62-123 351.004 62-125 351.006 62-123 351.101 et seq. 62-126  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 311.001 et seq. Ch. 58 313.001 et seq. Char. § 12 ch. 501 34-171 chs. 541-600 Ch. 66 542.302 66-42 542.401 Ch. 66 545.407, 545.408 2-302 552.0071 18-177 601.072 74-144 74-282 643.201 Ch. 74, Art. IV ch. 683 34-172 683.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV, Div. 3 683.002 34-171 683.011 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV 34-172 683.071 34-201 683.071 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV, Div. 4 683.073 34-213 683.074(b)(3) 34-210 683.075 34-205 683.076 34-207 683.077 34-212 683.078 34-211  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 16.311 et seq. Ch. 82 16.315 82-30 26.001 et seq. Ch. 70  
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
Article  Section 
this Code 14.01-14.06 2-259 15.24, 15.25 2-259 18.05 26-91 18.17 Ch. 34, Art. IV, Div. 2 102.017 2-622 102.0172 2-621  
